CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MADISON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1999 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: May 10, 1999 
Effective: May 10, 1999 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MADISON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Bruce E. Gilbert 
Mayor 
____________ 
Lyn Hunt 
Barry N. Lurey 
Fred Perriman 
Clyde Sims  Roy C. Womack 
City Council 
____________ 
Charles Young 
City Manager 
____________ 
Marvin J. Reitman, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Wm. David Nunn 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Madison, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1991 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1991 Code, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and John Welch, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. David Nunn, City Clerk, Mr. Charles Young, City Manager, and Mr. Marvin J. Reitman, Jr., City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Madison, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Madison, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Madison, Georgia. 1999. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 99-05-01 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Madison, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Whereas, the Mayor and Council of Madison Find that the Adoption of a new Code of Ordinances Promotes the Health, Safety, Prosperity, and General Welefare of Madison; 
Be It Ordained by the Mayor and City Council of Madison: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Madison, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 14, 1998, and not included in the Code, or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. However, nothing herein shall be construed to limit the powers of the courts of the City to enforce any provision of the City Charter or amendments thereto. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period not more than six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offence. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies, such as abatement of nuisances, injuntive [injunctive] relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 14, 1998, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Code of Ordinances ordinance shall become effective upon passage. If any part of the Code of Ordinances is found invalid or unconstitutional, such finding shall not effect the remaining portions of the new Code of Ordinances. 
Passed and Adopted by the mayor of the city council this 10th day of May, 1999, after a first reading on the 26th day of April, 1999, and a second reading on this date. 



ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what amendments/ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Amendments/ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Amendments/ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— 2006 Ga. Laws, page 4137, repealed the former City Charter, and enacted a new Charter. The former Charter was derived from 1900 Ga. Laws, page 343; 1910 Ga. Laws, page 931; 1920 Ga. Laws, page 1162; 1921 Ga. Laws, page 1003; 1922 Ga. Laws, page 907; 1960 Ga. Laws, page 3165; 1962 Ga. Laws, page 2308; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 2500; 1974 Ga. Laws, page 2182; 1975 Ga. Laws, page 2679; 1976 Ga. Laws, page 2504; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 4018; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 4296; 1990 Ga. Laws, page 5132; 1993 Ga. Laws, page 3748; 2002 Ga. Laws, page 5496; Ord. of March 10, 2003, § 1. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

Sec. I-A. - Name. 
The city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Madison, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. I-B. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of the city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in City Hall and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Madison, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. The council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. The specific boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of this charter and as now or hereafter provided by law, with such future alterations as are made in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. I-C. - Municipal powers and construction. 
(a)  General Provisions. The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. The city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention a particular power shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. The term "Mayor and Council" means the mayor and five councilmembers as specified in Section III of the charter. The term "City Council" or "Council" or "Councilmembers" when used alone means the councilmembers (not the mayor) unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning and except in cases of a tie vote, in which instance the mayor shall vote. 
(b)  Certain powers. The powers of the city shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages. The keeping for sale, selling, or offering for sale of any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented wines or liquors within the corporate limits of said city shall be regulated by the city as provided by law. The council of the city shall have power or authority to license the sale thereof, consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia, and it shall be their duty to enforce this by the enactment of necessary ordinances with suitable penalties for violation; 
(3)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(4)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(5)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all building and housing trades; 
(6)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city fees or taxes; 
(7)  Cemeteries. The council shall have jurisdiction over all cemeteries belonging to or located in said city, and may provide by ordinance for a public cemetery. It may appoint such employees to superintend the care thereof as it deems proper. It may enact ordinances to prevent trespass therein and to prevent any person from defacing any work therein. It may regulate the charges for grave digging, hearse fees, and any and every thing pertaining to the care and operation of such cemeteries; 
(8)  Construction. The council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, correctional, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city and to regulate the use thereof; 
(9)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(10)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(11)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(12)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits inside and outside the city, and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(13)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in said city or doing business therein and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collection; 
(14)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(16)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(17)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(18)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(19)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city; and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(20)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(21)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(22)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(23)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(24)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(25)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(26)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation, land use, and development regulations as the council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(27)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers; and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency, including the establishment of a combined public safety department for both police and fire protection; 
(28)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the repair or destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is, or may become, dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(29)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, correctional, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; (30) Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of intoxication, riots, and public disturbances; 
(31)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed appropriate and necessary for the public health, safety and welfare; 
(32)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, standards, and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(33)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(34)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(35)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right of way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; 
(36)  Sewer and Water fees. To levy a fee, charge, or tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and a waterworks system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage and water systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer or water connection fee or fees (including a capacity recovery fee or fees) from those connected with the system; 
(37)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials; 
(38)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, title loans, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors and drugs, and the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and flammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(39)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(40)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(41)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(42)  Trees. To adopt and enforce ordinances for the protection and preservation of trees on the streets, public places, cemeteries, new developments, and parks in said city and to prevent the cutting, impairing, or mutilations thereof by telephone, cable, or electric light linemen or employees or any other person unless the same is done under and with the express and formal consent of the council or some officer appointed by the council to direct the same and then only when absolutely necessary for the public service or safety; 
(43)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(44)  Vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; and 
(45)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. I-D. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. II. - Vacancy; suspensions; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancy. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment of the council as set forth below in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of the mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the council, or those councilmembers remaining, shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
(c)  Filling vacancy. In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember prior to the expiration of a regular term of office, such vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term or, if any, by appointment by the council if less than six months remains in the unexpired term, or otherwise by an election, as provided for in Section IV of this charter and in accordance with Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A., or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. III. - Municipal government established; powers. 
The corporate powers and municipal government of said city shall vest in and consist of the mayor and city council who are hereby constituted a body corporate and politic under the name and style of the City Council of Madison, and by that name shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities of the corporation of the City of Madison, as heretofore existing; that said municipal government shall have perpetual succession; and shall have power and authority to make, ordain, and establish, from time to time, such bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations as shall appear to them necessary and proper for the good government, security, and interest of said city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, morals, peace, and good order of the same, not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state or of the United States, and shall have power and authority, in and by said corporate name, to borrow money for city improvements and repairs, and to contract and be contracted with; to sue and be sued; plead and be impleaded in any of the courts of this state; to have and use a common seal; to hold all property, real and personal, now belonging to the City of Madison to the use of said city for the purposes and interest for which the same were granted or dedicated; to acquire by gift or purchase, or otherwise, and to retain to them and their successors for the use of said City of Madison any other real or personal property within or without the territorial and jurisdictional limits of said city as may by them be deemed necessary or proper for corporate purposes; and to use, manage, improve, sell, convey, rent, or lease any or all of said property as may be deemed advisable for corporate interest. 
Sec. III-A. - Appointment of city manager. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his or her compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. III-B. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city council may remove the manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  If the manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its councilmembers at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)  The manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Sec. III-C. - Absence or disability of city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or his or her disability shall cease. 
Sec. III-D. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city. He or she shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this charter. He or she shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  He or she shall appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he or she appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. He or she may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  He or she shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  He or she shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but he or she may not vote; 
(4)  He or she shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council subject to enforcement by him or her or by officers subject to his or her direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
(5)  He or she shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  He or she shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  He or she shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his or her direction and supervision; 
(8)  He or she shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable; and 
(9)  He or she shall perform other such duties as are specified in this charter and as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. III-E. - Elected officials to deal with city officers solely through city manager. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section VI, the mayor and city councilmembers shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the mayor and council nor the council's individual members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. III-F. - Mayor's duties. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Debate all questions before the mayor and council, and in all matters (except as to appointment of mayor pro tempore) only vote in the instance of a tie, but the mayor shall not make motions; and 
(6)  Fulfill such other duties as may be established by ordinance. 
The presiding officer (mayor or mayor pro tempore when acting as mayor, in which case the mayor pro tempore shall not be deemed acting as a councilmember) and three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the council. The affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. After a motion has been made no other motion is in order until a vote on the motion, or withdrawal of the motion, or until the mayor has declared, after a reasonable opportunity has been given for a second, that the motion has not been seconded. When a motion has been made and seconded, the mayor shall state the question coming before the mayor and council. After a question has been stated by the mayor, it is before the mayor and council for consideration and before the council for action. All resolutions, reports of committees, communications to the mayor and council, and all amendments proposed to them, and all motions may be debated before voting on them. Debate should be limited to the merits of the immediately pending question. Speakers should address their remarks to the presiding officer, be courteous in their language and deportment, and avoid all personalities, never alluding to the motives of members. When the debate appears to have closed, the mayor shall ask, "Are you ready for the question?" If no one disagrees, he or she shall restate the question, then proceed to take the vote on the question, first calling for the affirmative by show of hands, and then for the negative vote by show of hands. The vote should always be announced. If the vote passes but there were any negative votes or abstentions, the negative voters and abstainers should be identified. An abstention, meaning a decision (by the individual entitled to vote) to voluntarily refrain from the vote, shall be treated as if the person was absent, and shall not be construed as either a positive or a negative vote. The basis for abstention is a firm moral or ethical conviction. As soon as the result of the vote is announced the mayor should state the next business in order. The mayor shall announce the decision of the council on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the council, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. The most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised, may be used by the mayor and council at their discretion as a guide, but shall not govern the conduct of council meetings. 
(Amd. of 2-11-2013(1), § 1) 
Sec. III-G. - Mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in his or her absence or disability, for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by the mayor, shall be clothed with all rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. In such instance the mayor pro tempore shall only vote as mayor, in the case of a tie or in the selection of mayor pro tempore, not as a councilmember. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
Sec. IV. - Election districts; elections. 
(a)  (1)  For the purpose of electing members of the city council, the City of Madison is divided into five election districts. One member of the city council shall be elected from each such district. The five city council districts shall be and correspond to those numbered districts described in and attached to this ordinance and further identified as map D. 
(2)  When used in such attachment, the terms "Tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a "BG" heading shall mean and describe individual blocks within a block group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Madison which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Madison which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Regular general municipal elections for the City of Madison shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2007, and on such day biennially thereafter. Persons elected to the office of mayor or councilman in such municipal elections shall take office at the first meeting in January following their election and shall serve for terms of office of four years each and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. The mayor and councilmembers shall each be elected by majority vote of the qualified electors voting in their respective elections. If no candidate for a particular office receives a majority of the votes cast for all candidates for such office, a run-off election shall be held as provided in O.C.G.A. Ch. 21-2, the "Georgia Election Code," as amended. At the first meeting of the mayor and council of said city after each election and after the swearing in of newly elected mayor and councilmembers, or as soon as practicable thereafter, one of such councilmembers shall be elected by the mayor and council to serve as mayor pro tempore for a term of office of two years and until his or her successor is duly elected and qualified. Nominations for said office shall be made from the floor, with no need for a second. No one may nominate more than one person for the office. The mayor may nominate and vote in the election of Mayor Pro Tempore. 
(c)  At the regularly scheduled general municipal election in 2007 there shall be elected three councilmembers. One such councilmember shall be elected from District 1 by the qualified electors residing in such district; one such councilmember shall be elected from District 3 by the qualified electors residing in such district; and one such councilmember shall be elected from District 4 by the qualified electors residing in such district. 
(d)  At the regularly scheduled general municipal election in 2009 there shall be elected a mayor and two councilmembers. One such councilmember shall be elected from District 2 by the qualified electors residing in such district; one such councilmember shall be elected from District 5 by the qualified electors residing in such district; and the mayor shall be elected from the city at large by the qualified electors of the entire city. 
(e)  The mayor must reside within the city and the councilmembers must reside within the election district from which they are elected. Candidates for the office of councilmember shall certify at the time of their qualification as candidates that they are residents of the election district from which they seek election. Successors to the mayor and councilmembers elected as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be elected in the general municipal election immediately preceding the expiration of the respective terms of office. 
(f)  In the event that the mayor moves outside the city or a member of the city council moves his or her residence from the district from which such person was elected during such person's term of office, such office shall immediately become vacant, and such vacancy shall be filled as otherwise provided by this charter for the filling of a vacancy. 
(g)  Districts 1 through 5 as they exist immediately prior to January 1, 2006, shall continue to be designated as Districts 1 through 5, respectively, as described under subsection (a) of this section; and on and after January 1, 2006, such members of the city council serving from those districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing districts as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Amd. of 2-27-2012(1)) 
Editor's note— Map D is not set out herein, but is on file with the city. 
Sec. V. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Officers as trustees. Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. The term "substantial interest" as used in this section is defined as set forth in the City Code of Ordinances, Section 2-1(c)(8). 
(b)  Conflict of interest. No elected official (mayor and members of city council), city manager, assistant city managers, city clerk, deputy city clerks, city attorney; appointed officers, including members of the planning commission (City of Madison appointees only), and all boards, authorities, commissions, and committees listed in Exhibit (A)(c)(1) of Section 2-1 of the Madison Code of Ordinances which may be amended from time to time, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity (board, authority, commission or committee) to which this Charter may apply shall knowingly: 
(1)  Vote or otherwise participate in any decision on a matter affecting any person, entity, or property in which the official, officer, or employee has a substantial interest; such nonparticipation shall be evidenced by a recusal from any discussion or action, and be evidenced by written disclosure of such substantial interest; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent private interests in any legal action or proceeding against the city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in any matter before the mayor and council involving any business or entity in which he or she has a substantial interest; such nonparticipation shall be evidenced by a recusal from any discussion or action, and be evidenced by written disclosure of said substantial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any substantial interest in any contract or matter before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the mayor and council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a substantial interest in the matter before mayor and council shall at the first practical opportunity disclose such substantial interest verbally at a public meeting thereof or in writing and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the mayor and council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any substantial interest in any contract or matter before or within such entity shall at the first practical opportunity disclose such private interest verbally at a public meeting thereof or in writing to the governing body of such agency or entity. If the elected official, appointed officer, or employee participated in any decision or vote relating thereto, then thereafter realizes they may have had a substantial interest in the contract or matter, then said person shall at the first practical opportunity disclose such private interest verbally at a public meeting thereof or in writing to the governing body of such agency or entity. The matter shall be referred to the ethics committee, as applicable, for reasonable disposition consistent with the City Code provisions on ethics at 2-1 thereof. In such case where it is determined that they had a substantial interest in the contract or matter, that individual's vote or decision shall be negated retroactive to the date of the decision. 
(d)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in city government during the term for which he or she was elected. 
(g)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city official, officer, or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be punished as set forth in City Code Section 2-1(L). 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his or her office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2013, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. VI. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The mayor and council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by mayor and council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. VII. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  Special meetings of the mayor and council may be held on call of the mayor or a minimum of two members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally or email, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, unless the council unanimously votes to add an item to the agenda and the prior absence from the agenda was unintentional and the addition will not prejudice the public. 
(c)  All meetings of the mayor and council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as required by law prior to such meetings. Any meeting of the mayor and council (including any committee meeting) for which legal notice has been provided may be conducted by conference call using a speaker telephone capable of allowing all members to hear all the discussion of the meeting. At least one member must be physically present at the designated meeting site. 
Sec. VIII. - Committees. 
All committees, boards, and commissions of citizens shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at its pleasure. The council shall have the power to remove and appoint members to any committee at any time; each committee may appoint its own chairperson, if said chairperson has not been specially appointed by the council. 
Sec. IX. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. An ordinance may be recommended by the city manager or city attorney or introduced by the mayor or any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the council may designate. 
Sec. X. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the mayor and council may convene on call of the mayor or a councilmember and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing such emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. XI. - City Code. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council. 
(b)  The council shall provide for the preparation of a general compilation or codification of ordinances, as required under Georgia law, of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general compilation or codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the council may specify. This compilation or codification shall be known and cited officially as "City Code of Madison, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the council. 
(c)  The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first compilation or codification under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as said first compilation and shall be suitable for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable for the reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. XII. - Taxation and Fees. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the council shall levy such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Sec. XII-A. - Property tax. 
The council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. 
Sec. XII-B. - Millage rate; due date; payment methods. 
The council may establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The council may provide for the payment of these taxes by voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. XII-C. - Occupation taxes and business taxes. 
The council by resolution shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes allowed by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to the city to be so taxed. The council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in this charter. 
Sec. XII-D. - Regulatory licenses, fees, permits. 
The council by resolution shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in this charter. The council by resolution may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. XII-E. - Franchises. 
The council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The council may provide by resolution for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. If no franchise agreement is in effect, the council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. 
Sec. XII-F. - Service charges. 
The council by resolution shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer, water, sanitary and health services, fire services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such fees, charges, and tolls shall be collected as provided in this charter. 
Sec. XII-G. - Special assessments. 
The council, by resolution, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutter, sewer, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in this charter. 
Sec. XII-H. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
The council shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. XII-I. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The council by resolution may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. XIII-A. - General obligation bonds. 
The city shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. XIII-B. - Revenue bonds. 
The city may issue revenue bonds as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. XIII-C. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. XIII-D. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Georgia Code Section 36-60-13 or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. The council may further enter into lease, purchase, and lease-purchase contracts for its property as is permitted by law. 
Sec. XIV. - Qualifications for office of mayor and city council. 
No person shall be eligible for the offices of mayor or city councilmember unless he or she is a qualified voter, over 25 years of age, and, at the time he or she qualifies as a candidate for election, a resident of the city and election district, if applicable, for six months previous to the election. 
Sec. XV. - Mayor and city council compensation. 
Each councilmember of the City of Madison shall receive a salary of $5,400.00 per annum, payable in monthly installments on the first day of each month. The mayor of the City of Madison shall receive a salary of $8,400.00 per annum, payable in monthly installments on the first day of each month. The mayor pro tempore of the City of Madison shall receive a salary of $6,000.00 per annum, payable in monthly installments on the first day of each month. 
Sec. XVI. - Reserved. 
Sec. XVII. - Annual Appointments. 
(a)  The council shall appoint an auditor after the first scheduled meeting of the calendar year, preferably during the second calendar quarter, and annually thereafter, who shall be a CPA qualified to perform the duties of an auditor and have all the powers and duties usual and incident to such office. The council shall have the power to specify such powers through resolution as it sees fit. This appointment is terminable at will by the council. Before assuming office, the auditor shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. 
(b)  The council shall appoint a city attorney after the first scheduled meeting of the calendar year, preferably during the second calendar quarter, and annually thereafter, who shall be an attorney in good standing with the Georgia Bar qualified to perform the duties of a city attorney and have all the powers and duties usual and incident to such office. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be a solicitor in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. This appointment is terminable at will by the council. Before assuming office, the attorney shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. 
Sec. XVIII-A. - Municipal court judge. 
The council shall appoint a municipal court judge after the first scheduled meeting of the calendar year, preferably during the second calendar quarter, and annually thereafter, who shall be qualified to perform the duties of a municipal court judge and have all the powers and duties usual and incident to such office. The judge shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The council shall fix the salary of the judge which shall be paid from the funds of the City of Madison. No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 25 years and shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. Before assuming office, and annually thereafter, the judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered into the minutes of the mayor and council required in this charter. The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals and as necessary to handle the caseload of the court. 
Sec. XVIII-B. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of its charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $500.00 or 60 days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement for transportation of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge, declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposition of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of the city granted by law to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. XVIII-C. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violations cases and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Morgan County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. XVIII-D. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 24 hours prior to said proceedings. 
Sec. XIX-A. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and under such terms and conditions as the council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. XIX-B. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations that are now in force in the city and are not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the council. 
Sec. XIX-C. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue, and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the council. 
Sec. XIX-D. - Definitions and construction. 
Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. The word "shall" is mandatory and the words "should" and "may" are permissive. The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. XIX-E. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, or part thereof be enacted separately and independently of each other. 
Sec. XIX-F. - Specific repealer. 
The 1891 Act providing a new charter for the city, and the charter and amendments approved previously, are amended in their entirety hereby. 
Sec. XIX-G. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on July 1, 2006. 
Sec. XIX-H. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Charter. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE  AMENDMENTS 
This table shows the location of the amendments cited in the Charter. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Madison, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1991, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and city council: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed to the bond, they shall be bound by the bond. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Madison, Georgia. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Madison, Georgia. 
City manager. The term "city manager" means the city manager of the City of Madison, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, City of Madison, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Madison. 
County. Whenever the term "county," "the county" or "this county" is used, it refers to Morgan County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Mayor and city council. The term "mayor and city council" means the mayor and five councilmen as specified in section III of the Charter. The term "city council" when used alone means the mayor and city council unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Municipal court. The term "municipal court" means the Municipal Court of the City of Madison. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the term "of the City of Madison" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in the trade or with reference to the subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number each includes the other unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, in any combination, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city, which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Seating, minimum. Where this Code requires seating for a minimum number of persons, only chairs, stools and booths shall be provided as the required seating. The capacity of seats without dividing arms shall be determined by allotting 18 inches per occupant. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the term "state," "the state" or "this state" is used, it refers to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory of this Code, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1991, §§ 1-102, 1-103) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations of the Code and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1991, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1991, § 1-108) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the provision would have been enacted by the city council without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1991, § 1-109) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance that, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(16)  Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected by such repeal. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Madison, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Madison, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section (division, article or chapter) shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1991, § 1-111) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations; other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in such person or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by a combination of such punishments. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1991, § 1-107) 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(13); civic and cultural affairs, ch. 26; civil emergencies, ch. 30; courts, ch. 34; planning, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Code of ethics and conduct. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the government structure; that public office not be used for personal gain or harm to others; that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government and that public servants/officials are provided the information necessary to comply with these requirements. In recognition of these goals in this section and in the City Charter ethics requirements, this code of ethics and conduct for all persons serving or acting on behalf of the city as defined below (covered persons) is readopted with updates. 
This section has the following purposes: (1) to encourage high ethical standards in conduct by covered persons in compliance with state Law, OCGA Sections 45-10-1, 45-10-3; (2) to establish standards of conduct for all such covered persons by setting forth those acts or actions that are expected of all such persons and those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; (3) to require disclosure by such covered persons of substantial private financial or other substantial interests in matters known to the covered person that affect the city; and (4) to serve as a basis for fairly and reasonably determining whether violations to this section have occurred and, if so, disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(b)  Scope of persons covered. This code of ethics and conduct supersedes all prior City of Madison ethics regulations (except the City Charter) and shall be applicable to: the Mayor and Council, Municipal Court Judge (prohibitions but not procedures in event of an alleged violation) and all City Officials as defined below (all the foregoing collectively referred to as "Covered Persons"). Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics and conduct. This section shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(c)  Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
(1)  City official or covered person means the mayor, members of the council, city manager, assistant city managers, city clerk, deputy city clerks, municipal court judge, city attorney (whether such persons are salaried, hired or elected) and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as it may be amended from time to time and all appointed officers, including all non-ad hoc officials, boards, authorities, commissions, and committees listed hereinbelow. Said list at this time includes without limitation (subject to future amendment) the following: 
Planning commission, historic preservation commission (HPC), downtown development authority (DDA), audit committee, airport authority, bi-racial committee, business advisory committee, cemetery stewardship committee, corridor design commission, ethics committee, greenspace commission/tree board a/k/a greenspace conservation commission, Main Street advisory board. 
(2)  Confidential information means non-public intellectual property and/or information including engineering and technical designs and drawings, information (including ideas and concepts), services, processes, methods, technology, ideas, data, strategies, structure, design, architecture, goodwill, rates, pricing, financial information, business and/or marketing plans, projections, hypertext (HTML, CFM, and other), plans, graphics, documents, wording, documentation, user manuals, guides, instructional materials, layout and architecture, images, names, logos, or standards of or related to the city, and other similar information and intellectual property produced as ancillary and extensions thereof, except such information and intellectual property as the parties agree in writing is not proprietary or confidential and except information that has properly been made available to the general public including in open meeting or by appropriate authority. 
(3)  Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, LLC, LLP, LLLP or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
(4)  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or any non-ad hoc board, authority, commission, or committee listed in (c) 1) above, as well as the discussions or deliberations of such council, board, authority, committee or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(5)  Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
(6)  Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any covered person related by blood, adoption, legal guardianship, or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
(7)  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a covered person, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a covered person in property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the covered person would be affected in common with the general public. 
(8)  Incidental interest means an interest in a person, Entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined below. 
(9)  Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: (1) the interest is ownership of $2,500.00 or more value of the voting stock, shares, market value or equity of the Entity; (2) funds received by the person from the other person or Entity either during the previous 12 months equaled or exceeded $2500; (3) the person serves as a salaried corporate officer or salaried member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity wherein the person's salary is $2500 or more per year; or (4) the person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $2,500.00 or more. Substantial interest in real property means any interest in real property with said interest having a market value of $2,500.00 or more. 
(10)  Board or commission means any standing authority, board, commission, committee, entity, foundation, advisory group, or other similar body created by the city council or to whom the city council appoints members to represent the city. 
(d)  Prohibition of conflict of interest. A covered person may not participate in or be present for discussion of or a decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which said person has a substantial interest; in addition, a covered person who serves as a salaried corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity, with salary of $2,500.00 or more per year, may not participate in or be present for discussion of or a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of said entity. Where the interest of a covered person in the subject matter of a decision is a remote or incidental interest, the person may participate in the decision and need not disclose the interest. At all times the covered person must uphold their oath of office, and support the City Charter, City Code and state and federal law. 
(e)  Standards of conduct. When serving or acting in an official capacity for the city: 
(1)  No covered person shall knowingly use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(2)  No covered person, in any matter before a council, board or commission, in which he/she knowingly has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any decision by the board, commission on which the covered person serves. 
(3)  No covered person shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the council or any board or commission with which the covered person is affiliated in any manner that would give rise to a conflict of interest as defined hereunder or under the City Charter or State law, including without limitation engaging in deliberation of the council or any board or commission with which the covered person is affiliated or the ex parte discussion of the client's matter with a member of the council or any board or commission with which the covered person is affiliated. It is permissible for the covered person to act only in a limited role, as an agent or attorney for another in a matter before the council or any board or commission with which the covered person is affiliated, for the limited purposes of providing factual information and raw data (not argument or advocacy) at the meeting and directly responding to questions from the council, board or commission. The preference is for such presentation to be primarily in written form. If questions are asked which elicit a verbal response, the covered person can present opinions and conclusions as long as all sides of the issue are fairly presented. Upon conclusion of the presentation and responses to questions, the covered person shall then recuse them self by leaving the room during the decision. 
(4)  No covered person shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. This is not intended to preclude the covered person from receiving lunch or dinner or gifts, such as Christmas, holiday or birthday gifts, which are a normal part of their non-official life with family, friends, and business relationships. 
(5)  No covered person shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by law. Any covered person who has a substantial interest in either: an entity doing business with the city or which may wish to do business with the city in the future, shall make known that interest in writing to the mayor and council via the city clerk who shall inform, as appropriate, the board or commission. 
(i)  This prohibition and requirement shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid relationship between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator, city judge, city attorney or chief of police). 
(ii)  Any official who has a substantial interest in an entity doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(iii)  If this written disclosure is made, the city, under its standard purchasing procedures, may procure goods or services from an entity in which a covered person has a substantial interest without the covered person having to make additional disclosures. 
(6)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(7)  Public property shall be disposed of per Georgia law. 
(8)  No covered person shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a covered person, if the employment or compensation could reasonably and objectively be expected to materially impair in judgment or performance of city duties. 
(9)  If a covered person accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which said covered person might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, said covered person shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall not participate in any action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(10)  No covered person shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(11)  No covered person shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(12)  No covered person shall disclose any confidential information concerning any person, potential actions, property or governmental affairs of the city, without prior written formal authorization of the mayor and city council, board or commission, or his or her supervisor. 
(13)  No covered person shall use or permit the use of confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of themselves or any other person or entity. 
(14)  No covered person shall appoint or vote for the appointment of any immediate family to fill an office, position, employment or duty when the salary, wages, pay or compensation is to be paid out of public funds. 
(15)  A covered person shall not use their position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to anyone within the covered person's immediate family, or anyone with whom the covered person has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(16)  A covered person shall not order any goods and services for the city, board or commission without prior official authorization for such expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(17)  No covered person shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events or other official functions and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor. 
(18)  No covered person shall attempt to influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court of the city except in open court nor engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge on any matter pending before the municipal court. 
(f)  Disclosure. 
(1)  Any covered person who becomes aware that they have any substantial interest in any contract or matter before or within such entity or within any department of the city shall at the first practical opportunity disclose such private interest in writing to the city clerk and to the governing body of such agency or entity verbally at a public meeting thereof or in writing and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of said body and the covered person shall disqualify them self from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. 
(2)  If the covered person participated in any decision or vote relating thereto, then thereafter realizes they may have had a substantial interest in the contract or matter, then said person shall disclose such private interest in writing to the city clerk and to the governing body of such agency or entity verbally at a public meeting thereof or in writing and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of said body. The matter shall be referred to the ethics committee. If it is determined that they had a substantial interest in the contract or matter, that individual's vote or decision shall be negated retroactive to the date of decision. 
(g)  Malfeasance, resources. Any covered person who knowingly conceals a substantial financial interest or knowingly in bad faith violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be punished as set forth below in section 2-1(n). To assist covered persons in meeting their responsibilities under this section, the city provides covered persons with a copy of this section and OCGA § 45-10-1 and OCGA § 45-10-3 and provides them with training and reasonable access to the city attorney, to guide them in the ethical and proper conduct of their meetings and official responsibilities. 
(h)  Exemptions. This code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(i)  Severability. The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. 
(j)  Ethics committee. 
(1)  The mayor and council shall appoint an ethics committee consisting of one person, the city municipal court judge, to serve without compensation. The judge, in his discretion, shall be entitled to ask the city court solicitor to assist him in the investigation of complaints. Said judge shall be an attorney in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia and 21 or older, and resident of and/or practicing law in the City of Madison and registered to vote in Morgan County, and shall serve a three-year term. No person shall serve who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member. If the judge is unable to serve due to conflict of interest or other cause, the mayor and council shall approve an alternative municipal court judge from another community. 
(2)  The member of the ethics committee must be approved by at least a four-fifths vote of the mayor and council. 
(3)  The position of the member shall be deemed vacated: 
a.  Upon the expiration of his or her term; 
b.  Upon the death of a member or the disability or incapacity of a member for more than 30 days; 
c.  Upon the written resignation of the member; 
d.  By the member ceasing to be a resident of Morgan County or a member of the Georgia Bar; or 
e.  Upon removal of the member for good cause by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(4)  The ethics committee member shall be prohibited from engaging in city election political activities and from making campaign contributions to candidates in city elections while a committee member. Violations of this subsection may be punished by removal by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(5)  The ethics committee member shall recuse them self if said member has a substantial interest, personal involvement, immediate family relationship, political relationship (e.g., political contribution, campaign involvement), or other conflict of interest with the Covered Person or matter being investigated. When the Ethics Committee Member recuses them self, the Mayor and Council shall appoint a qualified alternate member to hear the matter. 
(6)  If the ethics complaint is against the municipal court judge, the Georgia Judicial Qualifications Commission shall act as the ethics committee. 
(k)  Receipt of complaints and complaint process. 
(1)  All complaints shall be verified under oath in front of a notary public, and filed in writing with the city clerk and referred to the ethics committee. All written complaints shall contain a clear and concise statement of acts upon which the complaint is based along with an allegation that such facts constitute one or more violations of law, a reference to the statutory provision(s) allegedly violated, any further information which might support the allegations in the complaint including, but not limited to, name and address of all other persons who have first hand knowledge of the facts alleged in the complaint and any documentary evidence that supports the facts alleged in the complaint. 
(2)  The ethics committee may require that complaints illegibly or informally drawn be reduced to a complaint in proper form. The ethics committee shall in such instance advise the complainant of the defect in the complaint and that the complaint will not be considered unless the defect is corrected. 
(3)  Preliminary investigation. Upon receipt of a complaint, the ethics committee shall send a copy of the complaint to the accused affording an opportunity to respond to the complaint within seven days in writing, if desired. Responses or other documents submitted by the complainant or the accused after the seven-day period may be disregarded during the preliminary investigation. 
(4)  Preliminary investigation procedure. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form and notice to the accused and the passage of more than seven days, the ethics committee shall, within two weeks of receipt of the original complaint, follow the procedure below: 
a.  Review. Review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to show there may be "probable cause" (as defined by law) to invoke the disciplinary action, or is to be considered for further investigation. 
b.  Dismissal. Be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to show there may be "probable cause" (as defined by law) to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the mayor and council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he or she might otherwise have at law or in equity against the accused. 
c.  Filing. Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
d.  Hearings. Be empowered to hold hearings after at least seven days prior notice of the date, time and place thereof, personally hand delivered to the alleged violator. It shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The accused and the complainant shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, and any other instruments under these rules. 
e.  Recommendations. Make recommendations to the mayor and council (unless it is a city employee subject to the supervision and control of the city manager, in which case the recommendation will go directly to the city manager for disposition reasonably consistent herewith to the full extent permitted by the personnel policy), or to the State of Georgia if the allegations being investigated are against the mayor or council, including to discontinue further investigation if the complaint is unfounded (without "probable cause" as defined by law), or to effect remediation, and/or to invoke disciplinary action as described hereinafter. 
f.  Timeliness. All recommendations by the ethics committee shall be made to the mayor and council (or manager as described above) within 30 days of receipt of the complaint. 
(l)  Service of ethics committee recommendation; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
(1)  The recommendation by the ethics committee shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties in interest and to the city clerk and to the mayor and council (or manager as described above) within five days of reaching a recommendation. Service shall be by personal service. 
(2)  The mayor and council shall take action upon the recommendation of the ethics committee at the next regular meeting of mayor and council following receipt of the recommendation, by discussing the recommendation from the committee based on the evidence presented at the hearing, as summarized by the presiding officer of the committee. Notice thereof shall be personally served upon the complainant and the accused at least five days prior to the meeting of mayor and council. 
(3)  The mayor and council shall deliberate in public, and reach a majority decision by public vote. 
(4)  The decision of the mayor and council (or manager as described above) shall be tendered to the accused and to the complainant within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(5)  Failure to strictly comply with any of the time deadlines in this ordinance, if the ethics committee and the mayor and council have proceeded without unreasonable delay, shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the ethics committee or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(m)  Right to appeal. 
(1)  Any accused or complainant adversely affected by the mayor and council decision (or in the case of a city employee, the city manager's decision) may appeal by petitioning for judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. Such decisions shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Morgan County upon notice in writing via a petition for certiorari granted within 30 days of receipt of notice of said decision. The grant of such petition shall act as a supersedeas, staying the enforcement of the decision being appealed from. 
(2)  Review by the superior court shall, pursuant to Georgia Law, be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence which supported said decision. 
(3)  Provided, however, no good faith action of the mayor and council or city manager refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics and conduct shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(n)  Penalties. Any person found to have violated any provisions of this section may be subject to written and oral reprimand or public censure by the mayor and council and/or request for resignation by the mayor and council (or in the case of a city employee, the city manager would issue such reprimand or request, or take other disciplinary action up to and including termination as per the personnel policy). 
(o)  Indemnification. Within the parameters of O.C.G.A. § 51-1-20 (Liability of members, directors, trustees or officers of nonprofit hospitals or associations, nonprofit, charitable, or eleemosynary institutions or organizations, or local government entities), if any person who was or is a party to or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, seeks indemnification from the city against attorney's fees, which fees are reasonable in amount and were reasonably incurred by such person in connection with such action, suit or proceeding by reason of the fact that such person is or was a covered person and was acting in good faith within the scope of his or her official actions and duties, regardless of whether nature of person's actions at issue were ministerial or discretionary, and unless the damage or injury was caused by the willful or wanton misconduct of such person, then, unless such indemnification is ordered by a court, the city shall determine, or cause to be determined, in the specific manner provided under Georgia law whether indemnification is proper under the circumstances because the person claiming such indemnification has met the applicable standards of conduct set forth in the Georgia Code including without limitation OCGA § 45-10-3, and in the City Charter and the City Code of Ordinances. To the extent it is so determined that such indemnification is proper, the person claiming such indemnification shall be indemnified to the extent now or hereafter permitted by Georgia law. Attorney fee reasonableness shall be by the "lodestar" method approved by the Georgia Supreme Court or such other method approved by said court. The indemnification provided above shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those seeking indemnification may be entitled under the City Charter, ordinances and/or bylaws, or any agreement, or any vote of mayor and council or other disinterested body of which the covered person is not a member, or otherwise, as to action in the person's official capacity. To the extent permitted by Georgia law, the city may purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of covered persons. 
(p)  Downtown development authority specific provisions. 
(1)  The provisions of paragraph (9) of O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3 and of paragraph (1) of [OCGA § 36-62A-1(a)] shall be deemed to have been complied with and any such authority may purchase from, sell to, borrow from, loan to, contract with, or otherwise deal with any director or member or any organization or person with which any director or member of said authority is in any way interested or involved, provided (1) that any interest or involvement by such director or member is disclosed in advance to the directors or members of the authority and is recorded in the minutes of the authority, (2) that any interest or involvement by such director with a value in excess of $200.00 per calendar quarter is published by the authority one time in the legal organ in which notices of sheriffs' sales are published in each county affected by such interest, at least 30 days in advance of consummating such transaction, (3) that no director having a substantial interest or involvement may be present at that portion of an authority meeting during which discussion of any matter is conducted involving any such organization or person, and (4) that no director having a substantial interest or involvement may participate in any decision of the authority relating to any matter involving such organization or person. As used in this subsection, a "substantial interest or involvement" means any interest or involvement which reasonably may be expected to result in a direct financial benefit to such director or member as determined by the authority, which determination shall be final and not subject to review. 
(2)  Nothing contained in subsection (p)(1) of this Code section or in O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3 shall be deemed to prohibit any director who is present at any decision of the authority from providing legal services in connection with any of the undertakings of the authority or from being paid for such services. 
(q)  City zoning ordinance provisions which are state law driven, zoning specific, and impose state law criminal penalty for violation. 
Section 1150 Disclosure of Campaign Contributions and/or Gifts. 
When any applicant for any zoning action, or any supporter or opponent of any zoning action who has contacted the City to express an opinion or who wishes to speak at a public hearing or submit written opinion, has made within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of that application campaign contributions totaling two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) or more to an official of the City of Madison or to a member of the Planning Commission, it shall be the duty of said person to file a disclosure report with the City. In the case of the applicant, filing shall be within ten (10) days after the application is made, and in the case of a supporter or opponent, filing shall be at least five (5) days before the first public hearing. Such disclosure report shall include the name and official position of the official to whom the campaign contribution and/or gift was made, and the dollar amount, date, and description of each campaign contribution and/or gift made during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
Section 1160 Conflict of Interest In Zoning Decisions. 
Any City Official who has a property interest in any real property affected by a zoning action which the City will consider, or has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by a zoning action which the City will consider, or has a member of the family having any such interest, shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the Council. Such City Official shall disqualify himself from attending, participating in or voting on the zoning action. Disclosures made in accordance with this Section shall be public record and available for public inspection during normal business hours. Terms used herein are defined below. 
(1)  BUSINESS INTEREST: Any corporation, partnership, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, or trust. 
(2)  FINANCIAL INTEREST: All direct ownership interests of total assets or capital stock of a business entity of ten percent (10%) or more. 
(3)  CITY OFFICIAL. The Mayor, Council member, or any member of the Planning Commission. 
(4)  MEMBER OF THE FAMILY. The spouse, parent, sibling, or child of a City Official. 
(5)  PROPERTY INTEREST: The direct ownership of real property, including any percentage of ownership. 
(r)  City Zoning Ordinance provisions which are zoning specific. 
1125.1(5): Procedure Relative to Ex Parte Contact with Mayor and Council. The Planning Commission is not subject hereto. To maintain transparency and to avoid and appearance of impropriety in the decision making process, there shall be no unsolicited substantive ex parte (individual) communication with the Mayor or Council members by an applicant or his/her representative(s) or by supporters of or opposition to the rezoning, unless the Mayor or Councilperson agrees to such. Unsolicited Emails, letters and faxes to the Mayor and Council as a whole, copied to the City Planner and City Clerk, are permissible. They will be made a part of the record. The applicant and his/her representative(s) and supporters and opponents are to limit their unsolicited verbal contacts with City officials and employees to the City Planner, City Manager, and to the City Attorney if the proposed contact is from legal counsel. Mayor and Council members will accept verbal presentations in the advertised public hearings and meetings, and via express solicitation or agreement in other instances. If an individual Mayor or Council member received unsolicited, unwanted substantive verbal communication by an applicant or his/her representative(s) or by supporters or opposition, said Mayor or Council member shall direct that person to the City Planner, City Manager and City Attorney and advise the person of upcoming public hearings, and disclose such to the Mayor and Council at the public hearing. 
1155.1 Quasi-Judicial/Administrative Decisions - Conditional Use Applications & Variance Applications. To maintain transparency and to avoid the appearance of impropriety in the decision-making process, there shall be no substantive ex parte (individual) communication with the Commission, Mayor, or City Council members by an applicant or his/her representative(s) or by supporters of or opposition to a conditional use application or variance application. 
1155.2 Legislative Decisions - Zoning Ordinance, Text Amendments & Map Amendments. To maintain transparency and to avoid the appearance of impropriety in the decision-making process, there shall be no unsolicited substantive ex parte (individual) communication with the Commission, Mayor, or City Council members by an applicant or his/her representative(s) or by supporters of or opposition to the rezoning, unless the Mayor or Councilmember agrees to such. Unsolicited E-mails, letters, and faxes to the Mayor and Council as a whole, copied to the City Planner and City Clerk, are permissible. They will be made a part of the record. The applicant and his/her representative(s) and supporters and opponents are to limit their unsolicited verbal contacts with City officials and employees to the City Planner, City Manager, and to the City Attorney if the proposed contact is from legal counsel. Mayor and Council members will accept verbal presentations in the advertised public hearings and meetings, and via express solicitation or agreement in other instances. If an individual Mayor or Council member received unsolicited, unwanted substantive verbal communication by an applicant or his/her representative(s) or by supporters or opposition, said Mayor or Council member shall direct that person to the City Planner, City Manager and City Attorney and advise the person of upcoming public hearings, and disclose such to the Mayor and Council at the public hearing. 
(Code 1991, § 3-102; Amd. of 7-9-01, §§ 1, 2; Amd. of 2-14-2011, Exh. A; Amd. of 3-14-2011; Amd. of 9-10-2012(1); Amd. of 2-27-2015) 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 
Sec. 2-2. - Departments created; duties; responsibilities. 
(a)  Created. The following departments of the city are created: 
(1)  Administrative services. 
(2)  Water and wastewater. 
(3)  Public works. 
(4)  Natural gas. 
(5)  Police. 
(6)  Fire. 
(b)  Departments. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(c)  Department heads. All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned to their department; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and implement, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities by the city manager; 
(4)  Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(5)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(Code 1991, § 3-103(2), (3)) 
Sec. 2-3. - Operation of administrative services. 
All units in the administrative services shall: 
(1)  Office hours. Be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
(2)  Make daily deposit. Make a daily deposit with the city treasurer of any moneys received directly from the public. 
(3)  Payment of moneys. Pay out moneys belonging to the city in the manner prescribed in this Code. 
(Code 1991, § 3-103(5)) 
Sec. 2-4. - Oaths. 
All officers and employees required by the Charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: "I, ___________, do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States of America, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Madison; that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of ___________ during my continuance therein, so help me God." 
(Code 1991, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-5. - Open records. 
Open records shall be maintained per the state records retention act [Georgia Records Act], O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. See O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(a). Records must be produced within three business days of an open records request if possible. If not, the response must be made within three business days as to when the records will be produced [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(A)]. Requests can be made orally or in writing. [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(B)]. All written requests shall go to a records custodian [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(B)], the city clerk. This provision is the statutory designation in writing and the legal organ is notified of such, and the custodian is be posted on any city website [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(2)]. The three-day response period starts when the custodian gets the request. Charges for search, retrieval and production of copies is at the rate of the lowest paid full-time employee able to respond [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(1)], the first 15 minutes are free. The city charges for the cost of redacting records by a full-time employee [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(1)]. Fees for copying records are $0.10/page for letter or legal size documents. For odd-size printed documents, the actual cost of producing the documents is charged. For electronic records, the city charges the actual cost of the media on which the records or data are produced. [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(2)]. 
The city charges for requested records, even if not picked up [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(3)]. If estimated cost of producing records is over $25.00, the clerk shall notify the requestor within three business days of the request as to the estimated amount. The city can defer search and retrieval until the requestor agrees to pay the amount. If estimated cost of producing records is over $500.00, the city requires prepayment before the search, retrieval, review or production of records [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(d)]. If costs are not paid to the city for prior requests, it requires prepayment for all new requests, regardless of amount, until the previous charges are paid [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(d)]. 
If records are sought as part of ongoing litigation, the request must be in writing and copied to the city attorney simultaneously. The city will prepare a duplicate set of the requested documents produced that must be provided to the city attorney unless the city attorney elects not to receive them [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(e)]. Requests for emails shall contain information about the requested messages reasonably calculated to allow the clerk to locate the requested messages such as name, title, office or specific data base to be searched to assist the clerk in finding the emails [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(g)]. The city shall not prepare new reports, summaries, or compilations not in existence at the time of the request [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(j)]. Personal email addresses, unlisted phone numbers, cell phone numbers found in public records are exempted and will be redacted before the underlying document is released [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72(a)(20)(A)]. The exemption for personal information regarding public employees, such as home address, home telephone numbers, social security numbers, birthdates, credit card information, bank account information, and similar personal data is extended to former employees as well as current employees [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72(a)(21)]. 
(Code 1991, § 3-103(4); Amd. of 8-13-2012(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq.; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e). 
Sec. 2-6. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor and city council may require any department head, city official or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any reasonable amount decided by the mayor and city council. The bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of his duties and to secure gains to corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations or unlawful expenditures in office. These surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the mayor and city council. The premiums on the bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1991, § 3-105) 
Sec. 2-7. - Polling place. 
The polling place within the city shall be the city fire department, 160 North Main Street. 
(Code 1991, § 2-403; Amd. of 12-16-05(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Duty of municipal governing authority to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163. 
Sec. 2-8. - Sale of small tracts of real property. 
(a)  The mayor and council may sell and convey parcels of narrow strips of land, so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances, or as streets, whether owned in fee or used by easement, to abutting property owners where such sales and conveyances facilitate the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property, without first submitting the sale or conveyance to the process of an auction or the solicitation of sealed bids. The findings of the mayor and council that the property to be conveyed meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6(g), shall be memorialized by a resolution stating the same. 
(b)  Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and shall have the opportunity to purchase said property under the terms and conditions set out herein. Such property owners shall be offered an opportunity to purchase the property for either a fixed price or by exchanging land of equivalent or greater value, such value to be reasonably determined by the city, and said estimation being in the sole and absolute discretion of the city. 
(c)  There shall be no need for newspaper notices or posting the proposed conveyance of property at the courthouse or otherwise. Instead, the governing authority, by and through its designated agent, shall identify all abutting property owners to the subject property, and provide them with written notice of the proposed sale or conveyance of the real property. Said abutting property owners each shall be given no less than ten days to either decline making an offer to the city, or to make an offer to either purchase the property, or to offer an exchange of property of equal or greater value. The notice to the abutting property owners shall advise of the date, time and place of the decision of the city as to whom the property will be conveyed. Upon the running of the ten days, the governing authority may convey the property to the abutting property owner who has made the highest bid, whether by value of property acceptable to the city, or by dollar value for an outright purchase. The city retains the right to reject any and all offers. 
(d)  All conveyances shall be by quitclaim deed. The cost of deed preparation, surveying and plat preparation, transfer taxes, recording costs and all other fees shall all be borne by the purchaser, not the city. The quitclaim deed may be executed either solely by the mayor, as attested by the clerk, or by the entire mayor and council, as attested by the clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-8-1999, § 1) 
Secs. 2-9—2-40. - Reserved 
ARTICLE II. - THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal government vested in mayor and councilmen, § III; mayor's duties, § III-F; mayor pro tempore, § III-G; election districts, elections, § IV; qualifications for office of mayor and city council, § XIV; mayor and city council compensation, § XV. 
State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-41. - Meetings. 
(a)  Time of Meetings. Regular meetings of the council will be held on the second Monday of each month at 5:30 p.m. There may be called meetings as circumstances warrant, on the day and time designated by the council. The work session of the council will be held on the Friday prior to the first Monday of each month, at 8:30 a.m., at the Madison Fire Station or such other location as posted. All meetings shall be held in compliance with all legal requirements. 
(b)  Duty to attend. It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each meeting of the city council unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(c)  Location of meetings. Meetings of the city council shall be held at city hall, in the county courthouse, the county temporary court facility (formerly county senior center), 434 Hancock Street, or at such other locations as established by vote of the mayor and council, in compliance with the Georgia Open Meetings Laws, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
(d)  Zoning issues; work session. At the regular meeting at 5:30 p.m. on the second Monday of each month the council typically will address zoning issues. At the regular meeting at 5:30 p.m. on the fourth Monday of each month the council typically will utilize such meeting as a work session. Issues may be addressed at a called meeting as circumstances warrant, on the day and time designated. All meetings shall be held in compliance with all legal requirements. 
(Code 1991, § 3-204; Amd. of 4-8-02; Amd. of 12-16-05(2), § 1; Amd. of 1-13-2006, § 1; Amd. of 1-23-2007, §§ 1, 2; Amd. of 11-12-2012(1), §§ 1, 2; Amd. of 2-11-2013(2), § 1; Amd. of 3-10-2014(1)) 
State Law reference— Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-42. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
(a)  Robert's rules. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall generally govern the conduct of council meetings. 
(b)  Call to order. Unless an executive session is approved, all meetings of the city council shall be open to the public. The mayor, or in his absence the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special or called meeting, and shall immediately call the city council to order. 
(c)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the city council, the city clerk or his deputy may call the roll of the members; and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(d)  Quorum. A majority of all the members elected to the city council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the city council, and an affirmative vote of a majority of such number shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business except that for which a larger vote has been mandated by this Code. 
(e)  Orders of business. Unless otherwise decided by a vote of the mayor and council, the business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the order set forth under section 2-43, "agenda." 
(f)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a city council meeting is requested by a member of the city council, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy of the minutes. 
(g)  Reports by committees. 
(1)  Any business coming before the city council concerning the subject matter of which any standing or special committee has jurisdiction may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor or by the city council or any member of the city council, to examine any matter referred to such committee and make a prompt report or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. 
(2)  Each standing committee shall examine into the condition of the matters within its jurisdiction and make such reports and recommendations as may be necessary. 
(h)  Manner of addressing council. No speaker, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no one shall interrupt anyone who is speaking except to call him to order or for explanation. 
(i)  Limitations on addressing council. Any person not a member of the city council who desires to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so, and then shall step up in front of the council table, give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the city council as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to ten minutes unless additional time is granted by the city council. The council is willing to receive written comment in lieu of a personal appearance and verbal statement at the council meeting, upon certain conditions. First, any written submission must be received by the mayor and council no later than 3:00 p.m. on the date of the scheduled meeting. Secondly, the written comment must be properly authenticated: for example, written comments should be signed and dated by the author, and should also provide the author's home address and telephone number. If the comment is received via email, there must be sufficient independent verification of the identity of the author to insure reliability of the communication. Third, the specific agenda item to which the comment relates must be clearly delineated in the body of the written communication. Fourth, the written communication should be succinct, clear, and non-repetitive in nature. In other words, the main theme of the author's comments should be stated once, and not repeated within the body of the written message. Fifth, the comment should be directed towards the council, not to the citizenry at large or persons other then the mayor and council. Sixth, the comment should be appropriate speech, free of inflammatory rhetoric and inappropriate statements lacking civility. 
(j)  Recording vote. Whenever any member shall request it, the yeas and nays of the members present shall be recorded in the minutes on any questions taken. 
(k)  Questions of order. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any councilmember who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, for appealing from decisions of presiding officers. 
(l)  Executive session. When any meeting is closed to the public per Georgia Law, the specific reasons for such closure shall be entered upon the official minutes, the meeting shall not be closed to the public except by a majority vote of a quorum present for the meeting, the minutes shall reflect the names of the members present and the names of those voting for closure, and that part of the minutes shall be made available to the public as any other minutes. Where a meeting is devoted in part to matters within the exceptions provided by law, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exception, privilege, or confidentiality shall be open to the public, and the minutes of such portions not subject to any such exception shall be taken, recorded, and open to public inspection as provided in Georgia Law. Executive session minutes must be kept, but are confidential unless reviewed by a court in chambers. The executive session minutes will specify each issue. discussed in executive session. If matters are discussed subject to the attorney-client privilege, the fact that an attorney-client discussion occurred and the subject shall be identified, but the substance of the discussion need not be recorded or identified in the minutes [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(2)(C)]. If a non-exempt topic is brought up in executive session, the mayor must immediately rule the discussion out of order. If the non-exempt discussion continues, the mayor must adjourn the meeting. When any meeting is closed to the public, the mayor and council shall execute and file with the official minutes of the meeting a notarized affidavit stating under oath that the subject matter of the meeting or the closed portion thereof was devoted to matters within the exceptions provided by law and identifying the specific relevant exception. 
(Code 1991, § 3-206(1)—(8), (10)—(12); Ord. of 2-11-2002(1), § 1; Amd. of 12-11-06(2), § 1; Amd. of 8-13-2012(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 2-43. - Agenda. 
The city manager, after receiving input from council members, staff, the city attorney, and members of the public, shall set a proposed order of agenda items to be submitted for council approval at the beginning of each meeting of the mayor and council. Citizens desiring to bring business before the mayor and council shall notify the city clerk by 1:00 p.m. [formerly 5:00 p.m.] on the Monday preceding the upcoming meeting. The mayor or any member of council may suggest additions to, withdrawal from, or changes in the order of the agenda items prior to council's approval. The meeting agenda will generally be available to the general public a week in advance, and a notice containing such information will be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the public at the regular meeting place of the agency and on any city website. The agenda shall list all items to be considered at a particular meeting. Public requests to have an agenda item require clearly advising the clerk of the nature and details of the item, provision to the city clerk at time of request of all supporting documentation to be referenced in the meeting. To appear on a regular monthly meeting's agenda, the item must be submitted to the clerk by 1:00 p.m. on the Monday preceding the scheduled regular monthly meeting. The agenda, together with data, reports, and memoranda, should be sent early enough to reach each Member at least three days before the meeting. Any item received after the deadline will be held over for the next meeting unless a majority present at the meeting vote to add it to the agenda. For specially called meetings, other than the regularly scheduled monthly meeting, the agenda shall consist only of the item or items specifically indicated as the purpose of the called meeting in accordance with the Open Meetings Act. Failure to include on the agenda an item which becomes necessary to address during the course of a meeting shall not preclude considering and acting upon such item. The permanent agenda format shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order; 
a.  Announcement re: Cell phone use; 
(2)  Pledge of Allegiance; 
(3)  Roll call; 
(4)  Approval of minutes of previous meetings; 
(5)  Approval of order of agenda items; 
(6)  Identify actionable items for public comment as they arise and before the vote; 
(7)  Consent agenda; 
(8)  Zoning hearings on second Mondays, to come after other business on fourth Mondays. Zoning hearings shall only occur when they are scheduled to come before mayor and council; 
(9)  Legal matters; 
(10)  Unfinished business; 
(11)  New business; 
(12)  Public comments; 
(13)  Adjournment. 
(Amd. of 12-11-2006(2), § 2; Amd. of 8-13-2012(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(3), § 1; Amd. of 8-11-14, § 1) 
Sec. 2-44. - Ordinances, resolutions and contracts. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the following manner: 
(1)  Preparation. All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. No ordinances shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested by the mayor or city manager, or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
(2)  Introduction and adoption. 
a.  Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the city council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council; except that the mayor, city manager or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the city council, and any councilmember may assume sponsorship by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted. 
b.  An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers in attendance. For the purposes of tallying such vote, an abstention shall be deemed a negative vote. 
(3)  Effective date. No ordinance shall take effect until its adoption. 
(Code 1991, § 3-206(9)) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
Sec. 2-45. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 3-203 of the 1991 Code relating to vacancies in the office of mayor or city council is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 2-46. - Affidavit affirming executive sessions. 
Prior to exiting any executive session meeting of the council, there shall be a motion properly made and approved that the council exit executive session. Upon entering regular session the presiding officer and council shall sign an affidavit in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq., ratifying the propriety of the subject of such executive session within the exceptions provided by law and that no other matters were discussed other than those of a purely personal or non-governmental nature. Such affidavit shall be in substantially the following form: 
AFFIDAVIT AS REQUIRED UNDER O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4(b) 
The undersigned presiding officer and members of the Mayor and Council of the City of Madison, Georgia, under oath, hereby state and certify that at the meeting of the Mayor and Council held on ___________, the following: 
1)  Council properly entered executive session as permitted by O.C.G.A. 50-14-4. The only matters discussed during such executive session of its meeting as allowable under O.C.G.A. § 50-14-2 and 50-14-3 were as follows: 
( )  To consult and meet with legal counsel pertaining to pending or potential litigation, settlement, claims, administrative proceedings or other judicial actions; 
( )  To discuss tax matters which are confidential by state law; 
( )  To discuss future acquisition of real estate; 
( )  To discuss the appointment, employment, compensation, hiring, disciplinary action or dismissal or periodic evaluation or rating of a public officer or employee, but not when receiving evidence or hearing argument on charges filed to determine disciplinary action. 
2)  To the best knowledge and belief of the undersigned, no other matters than those of a purely personal and/or nongovernmental nature were discussed during said executive session. 
3)  By executing this affidavit, the undersigned do hereby state that they in no way waive any rights granted under the 5th Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
4)  This affidavit is executed solely for the purpose of compliance with the mandate of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4(b) and shall serve no other purpose. 
This ________ day of _______, 1999. 

 
Sworn to and subscribed before me the date first above written. 
___________ 
Notary Public, Morgan County, GA 
My commission expires:_______ 
(Ord. of 7-12-1999, § 102; Amd. of 8-13-2012(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 2-47—2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The city compiles and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in its manual of personnel policies and procedures. The manual includes regulations and standing operating procedures pertaining to operation of the police department. The retirement plan for city employees is administered by the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. Official copies of the referenced documentation are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Charter reference— Appointment of city manager, § III-A; removal of city manager, § III-B; absence or disability of city manager, § III-C; powers and duties of city manager, § III-D; elected officials dealing with city employees, § III-E. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-7(4). 
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; civil service system for county employees authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-76. - Activities prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall be appointed to or removed from or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office because of race, sex, or political or religious opinions or affiliations. 
(b)  No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or appointment under the personnel provisions of this Code or the rules and regulations made under such provisions, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit such fraud preventing the impartial execution of such provisions, rules and regulations. 
(c)  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable item or thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(d)  No person shall orally, by letter or otherwise, solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political party or political purpose whatever from any person holding any compensated appointed city position. 
(e)  No person who holds any compensated appointive city position shall make, solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any political party or any candidate for public office or take any part in the management affairs or political campaign of any political party; but he may exercise his rights as a citizen to express his opinions and to cast his vote. 
(Code 1991, § 1-106) 
Secs. 2-77—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of 2-25-08(3), § 3, repealed Div. 2, §§ 2-101—2-111, which pertained to drug and alcohol abuse prevention. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 2-101—2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Historic preservation commission, § 42-3; recreation commission, § 50-31 et seq.; tree board, § 86-3. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-141—2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority means the City of Madison Airport Authority as created by the provisions of this division. 
Cost of the project embraces the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery, equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, the cost of plans and specifications, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this division, the construction and improving of any project, and the placing of the project in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the authority, including the proceeds from any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division for any project. 
Project means and includes the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving, and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part of all such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable. 
Revenue bonds, bonds or obligations means revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (1957 Ga. Laws, page 36) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761); and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under the Revenue Bond Law and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter authorized in this division. 
Self-liquidating, in regard to any project, means that, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority from the project, and all properties used, leased and sold in connection with the project will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, and improving and extending the project, and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of a project. 
(Code 1991, § 16-106) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-162. - Created. 
There is created a body, corporate and politic, to be known as the City of Madison Airport Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the state and a public corporation by that name, style and title; and the authority may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity; except that the authority or the trustee, acting under the trust indenture provided for in this division, shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the authority. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(Code 1991, § 16-102) 
Sec. 2-163. - Membership. 
The authority shall be composed of seven members, five of whom shall be appointed by the city council. The mayor and the chairman of the board of commissioners of the county shall be ex officio members of the authority. It shall be the duty of the city council to appoint the members of the authority. The authority shall be composed of five posts, to be designated as Post No. 1, Post No. 2, Post No. 3, Post No. 4, and Post No. 5. The initial members appointed to Post No. 1 and Post No. 2 shall be appointed for a term which shall expire December 31, 1972, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The initial members appointed to Post No. 3, Post No. 4, and Post No. 5 shall be appointed for a term which shall expire December 31, 1974, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Thereafter, successors to the initial members of the authority who are appointed by the city council of the city shall be appointed in the year in which such members' respective terms of office shall expire and shall take office on January 1 following their appointment and shall serve for a term of six years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1991, § 16-103) 
Sec. 2-164. - Purpose of authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this division, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, improving and operating airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, including any related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, and to do any and all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
(Code 1991, § 16-127) 
Sec. 2-165. - Meetings. 
The first regular meeting of each year shall be in January. The authority shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less than quarterly. At its first meeting in January of each year, the authority shall elect one of its members as its chairman and another member as secretary-treasurer. Only one person shall hold the office of secretary-treasurer. These officers shall be elected for a term ending on December 31 of the year in which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified. Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business coming before it. The members of the authority shall be compensated as determined by the city council of the city; however, it is expressly provided that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1991, § 16-104) 
Sec. 2-166. - Vacancies in office. 
In the event of a vacancy on the authority by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the city council of the city; and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1991, § 16-105) 
Sec. 2-167. - Powers. 
The authority shall have powers to: 
(1)  Have a seal and alter it at pleasure. 
(2)  Acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes. 
(3)  Acquire in its own name by purchase, gift or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements in such property or franchise necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use such property so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contract with respect to the use of or disposition of such property in any manner it deems to be the best advantage of the authority. 
(4)  Appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations. 
(5)  Make contracts and leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects, or lease of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they may deem advisable; the authority is further granted the authority to make contracts and leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, with the United States government, or any agency or department of the U.S. government, concerning the projects of the authority, subject to the rights and interests of the holder of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued and, by the resolution or trust indenture of the authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations, as provided in section 2-168. 
(6)  Construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel and maintain, and to extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, the cost of any such project to be paid, in whole or in part, from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds, and any grant from the United States or any of its agencies or instrumentalities. 
(7)  Accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States or any of its agencies or instrumentalities or political subdivisions, or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the United States, or such agency or instrumentality, or other source may impose. 
(8)  Accept loans and grants, or accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the state or any of its agencies or instrumentalities or political subdivisions, or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the state or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision, or any other source may impose. 
(9)  Borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, and execute evidence of and secure such indebtedness, and issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and provide for the payment of such bonds and for the rights of the bondholders. 
(10)  Exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of the state. 
(11)  Along with the trustees acting under the trust indenture, sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real and personal, or interest in such property, not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in this article. 
(12)  Regulate traffic at the airport. 
(13)  Do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers especially given in this division. 
(Code 1991, § 16-107) 
Sec. 2-168. - Revenue bonds. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the authority, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rates as may be authorized by the authority, shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 30 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the Revenue Bond Law (1957 Ga. Laws, page 36) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761); and all procedures pertaining to such issuances and conditions shall be the same as those contained in the Revenue Bond Law. 
(Code 1991, § 16-108) 
Sec. 2-169. - Form, denominations, registration, place of payment of bonds. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds and the places of payment of principal to such bonds, and shall fix the denomination of the bonds and the places of payment of principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust company within or outside of the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine; and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(Code 1991, § 16-109) 
Sec. 2-170. - Signatures, seal on bonds. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be an officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and attested by the secretary-treasurer of the authority, and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed to the bond. Any coupons attached to the bond shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary-treasurer of the authority. Any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of delivery and payment of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(Code 1991, § 16-110) 
Sec. 2-171. - Negotiability of bonds, exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instrument law of the state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose; and the bonds, their transfer, and the income from such bonds shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(Code 1991, § 16-111) 
Sec. 2-172. - Sale, price of bonds. 
The authority may sell bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority; but no such sale shall be made at a price less than par as provided in the Revenue Bond Law, unless the Revenue Bond Law is amended to permit the sale of such bonds at less than par. 
(Code 1991, § 16-112) 
Sec. 2-173. - Proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the projects; and, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit for the cost of the projects which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue, and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purposes. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into a sinking fund or used for additional construction as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture. 
(Code 1991, § 16-113) 
Sec. 2-174. - Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(Code 1991, § 16-114) 
Sec. 2-175. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(Code 1991, § 16-115) 
Sec. 2-176. - Conditions precedent to issuance of bonds, object of issuance. 
Revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specified or required by this division. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this division shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of the quorum as provided in this division. 
(Code 1991, § 16-116) 
Sec. 2-177. - Credit of bonds not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the city, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this division; and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the city to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever or to make any appropriation for the payment; and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face to cover substantially the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1991, § 16-117) 
Sec. 2-178. - Trust indenture as security of bonds. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of revenue bonds under this division may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale of any surplus property of the authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property; the construction of the project; the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the property; and custody, safeguarding and application of all moneys, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the authority, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the condition, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(Code 1991, § 16-118) 
Sec. 2-179. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustees of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes of this division, subject to such regulations as this division and such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
(Code 1991, § 16-119) 
Sec. 2-180. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any moneys derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal, of the authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide; and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals, as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as such principal shall fall due; 
(3)  The necessary charges of paying agents for paying interest and principal; and 
(4)  Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture; but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture surplus moneys sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(Code 1991, § 16-120) 
Sec. 2-181. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division or any of the coupons appertaining to such bonds; and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this division may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the state or granted in this division or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this division or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority, or any of its officers, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(Code 1991, § 16-121) 
Sec. 2-182. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds issued under the provisions of this division and then outstanding, together with accrued interest. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details, the rights of the holders, and the duties of the authority in respect to the bonds shall be governed by the provisions of this division insofar as may be applicable. 
(Code 1991, § 16-122) 
Sec. 2-183. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of the Revenue Bond Law. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the state, or the United States government, or any department or agency of the United States government, if subject to being sued, which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated; and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contracts and their terms and conditions should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the authority issuing the bonds and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the United States government if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the authority. 
(Code 1991, § 16-123) 
Sec. 2-184. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this division or any suit against the authority shall be brought in the superior court of the county; and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this division shall likewise be brought in such court, which shall have original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(Code 1991, § 16-124) 
Sec. 2-185. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will adversely affect the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds; and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to adversely affect the interest and right of the holders of such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this division, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(Code 1991, § 16-125) 
Sec. 2-186. - Moneys considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this division, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this division. 
(Code 1991, § 16-126) 
Sec. 2-187. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to revise and collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases or its lands or facilities, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects. 
(Code 1991, § 16-128) 
Sec. 2-188. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of projects constructed under the provisions of this division, including the basis on which airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft shall be furnished. 
(Code 1991, § 16-129) 
Sec. 2-189. - Traffic at the airport. 
On runway 14, the traffic pattern shall be a left-hand traffic pattern. On runway 32, the traffic pattern shall be a right-hand traffic pattern. Traffic pattern markings shall be installed so as to delineate these traffic patterns. 
(Code 1991, § 16-130) 
Sec. 2-190. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The sections of this division shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this division and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any existing powers. 
(Code 1991, § 16-131) 
Sec. 2-191. - Liberal construction of division. 
This division being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the state, or of the city shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. 
(Code 1991, § 16-132) 
Sec. 2-192. - Eminent domain. 
Through the use and power of eminent domain, the authority shall have the right, power, privilege and authority to condemn real property, rights-of-way or easements for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this division; any such condemnation shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of this state. 
(Code 1991, § 16-133) 
Sec. 2-193. - Jurisdiction. 
All property the title to which shall vest in the authority shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the county wherein such property shall lie. 
(Code 1991, § 16-134) 
Secs. 2-194—2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An Amend. of Jan. 12, 2015, repealed former Div. 3, §§ 2-216—2-218, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. former Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1991, Ch. 7 (intro.) and §§ 7-101—7-102. 
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 54. 

Sec. 2-216. - Creation. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the planning and zoning commission was created and established in the zoning ordinance, and the planning and zoning commission shall be organized and empowered as provided therein. 
(Amend. of 1-12-2015, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 2-217. - Membership. 
The Planning and zoning commission shall be composed of seven members, all of whom shall reside within, and appointed by the mayor and city council of the City of Madison. Following initial appointments of members for four one-year terms and three two-year terms, thereafter terms of the commission shall be for three years and any vacancy appointment shall utilize the unexpired term. No commission member shall receive compensation for public service. 
(Amend. of 1-12-2015, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 2-218. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
From among its members, the planning and zoning commission shall elect its officers, who shall serve one year with eligibility for re-election. The commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures, which shall be known as the Rules and Procedures of the City of Madison Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be available at the municipality's website and its Planning and Development Department. The commission shall be provided city staff from the planning and development department, which shall be responsible for the commission's administration, record management, and coordination of any consulting services providing work for the commission. 
(Amend. of 1-12-2015, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 2-219—2-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BIRACIAL COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-241. - Policy. 
In the city, with its population consisting of people of every race, color, creed, national origin and ancestry, there is no greater danger to the health, morals, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants than the existence of groups prejudiced against one another and antagonistic to each other because of differences of race, color, creed, national origin or ancestry. The mayor and city council find and declare that acts of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, discrimination and disorder threaten the rights and proper privileges of its inhabitants and menace the institutions and foundations of a free democratic state. A committee is created through which the city officially may encourage and bring about mutual understanding and respect among all groups in the city; eliminate prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, discrimination and disorder; and give effort to the guarantee of equal rights for all assured by the constitution and the laws of this state and of the United States. 
(Code 1991, § 22-101) 
Sec. 2-242. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Discrimination means any difference in treatment based on race, creed, color, national origin or ancestry and shall include segregation, except that it shall not be discrimination for any religious or denominational institution to devote its facilities, exclusively or primarily, to or for members of its own religious denomination, or to give preference to such members, or to make such selection as is calculated by such institution to promote the religious principles for which it is established or maintained. 
Religious or denominational institution means an institution which is operated for religious purposes or is operated, supervised or controlled by a religious or denominational organization. 
(Code 1991, § 22-102) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-243. - Created. 
There is hereby created a biracial committee for the city. It shall consist of 14 members, all of whom have been residents of the county for at least one year, to serve without compensation, and to be appointed by the mayor with approval of the city council, one of whom shall be designated by the committee as its chairman at the organizational meeting and at each annual meeting thereafter. Seven members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Of the 14 members first appointed, four shall be appointed for one year, five for two years and five for three years; thereafter all appointments to the committee shall be for a term of three years; and all appointments as members rotate off shall be made by mayor with approval by the city council. Any member may be removed by the committee for failure to attend meetings or inattention to duties. In the event of the death, resignation or removal of any member, his successor shall be appointed by the mayor to serve for the unexpired period of the term for which such member had been appointed; however, all members shall continue in office until their successors shall have been appointed. 
(Code 1991, § 22-103) 
Sec. 2-244. - Officers; committees. 
At its organizational meeting and each annual meeting thereafter, the biracial committee shall elect from its membership a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. The chairman, vice-chairman and secretary shall perform such duties as are commonly associated with their respective titles. The officers of the committee shall be and constitute the executive committee of the whole committee, which executive committee shall exercise such powers of the committee between its regular meetings as may be authorized by the committee. The committee shall be further authorized to appoint and fix the membership and number of standing and temporary committees as it may find expedient for the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1991, § 22-104) 
Sec. 2-245. - Meetings; regular and special. 
The biracial committee shall meet at least once each quarter at such time and place as shall be fixed by the committee by its standing rules. Special meetings shall be called by the chairman or, in his absence, by the vice-chairman, or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the committee. All such requests shall state the purpose for which such special meeting is to be called and shall be filed with the secretary at least 24 hours before the time of the special meeting so called and authorized. Such request and call for a special meeting shall be read at the meeting and entered in the minutes, and no business shall be transacted except that stated in the request for such special meeting. The committee shall prepare its own agenda for the meetings and establish its own rules of order or adopt Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, for the conduct of their meetings. 
(Code 1991, § 22-105) 
Sec. 2-246. - Functions. 
The functions of the biracial committee shall be to: 
(1)  Foster mutual understanding and respect among all racial, religious and ethnic groups in the city; 
(2)  Encourage equality of treatment for and prevent discrimination against any racial, religious or ethnic group or its members; 
(3)  Cooperate with governmental and nongovernmental agencies and organizations which have like or kindred functions; and 
(4)  Make such investigations and studies in the field of human relations as in the judgment of the committee will aid in effectuating its general purposes. 
(Code 1991, § 22-106) 
Sec. 2-247. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the biracial committee shall be to: 
(1)  Work together with federal, state and city agencies in developing courses of instruction for presentation to city employees and in public and private schools, public libraries, museums and other suitable places, on techniques for achieving harmonious intergroup relations within the city; 
(2)  Enlist the cooperation of the various racial, religious or ethnic groups or their members; 
(3)  Study and make recommendations concerning the problems of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, discrimination and disorder in all or any fields of human relationship; 
(4)  Receive and investigate complaints and initiate its own investigations of racial, religious and ethnic group tensions, prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, and disorder or discrimination against any person, group of persons, organizations or corporation, whether practiced by private persons, associations or corporations; 
(5)  Hold hearings, request the attendance of witnesses, take the testimony of any person under oath and in connection therewith to require the production of any evidence relating to any matter under investigation or in request before the committee. No public hearing shall be held without written approval of the mayor and city council. The powers encumbered in this subsection may be exercised by any group of three or more members of the committee when so authorized in writing by the committee. The committee after the completion of any hearing shall make a report in writing to the mayor and city council, setting forth the facts found by it and its recommendations. If the committee finds that there has been a violation of an existing ordinance, it shall recommend to the mayor that he refer the matter to the legal department for appropriate legal action. If the committee finds that there is no existing ordinance that prohibits such discrimination, it shall recommend to the mayor that an ordinance be enacted by the mayor and city council prohibiting such discrimination. At any hearing before the committee or any of its committees, a witness shall have the right to be advised by counsel present at such hearings. 
(Code 1991, § 22-107) 
Sec. 2-248. - Relations with city department and agencies. 
So far as practicable and subject to the approval of the mayor and city council, the services of all other city departments, agencies and committees may be utilized for the carrying out of the functions stated in this division. The head of any department, agency or commission shall furnish information in the possession of such department, agency or commission when the committee, after consultation with the mayor and city council, so requests. The city attorney may assign counsel to assist the committee in the conduct of its investigation or hearings. 
(Code 1991, § 22-108) 
Secs. 2-249—2-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-7(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(14); any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes saved from repeal, § 1-7(16); occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-31 et seq.; taxation, ch. 70. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-281. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of the following year. 
(Code 1991, § 4-301) 
Secs. 2-282—2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL BONDS 

Sec. 2-301. - Preliminary review by finance committee. 
Prior to any issue of bonds by the city, the proposal for such issue may be referred to a committee, which committee shall give careful consideration to the proposal and submit a recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval, with applicable reasons for approval. 
(Code 1991, § 4-201) 
Sec. 2-302. - Bond ordinances. 
(a)  Contents. Any bond ordinance introduced for adoption as provided in this section shall contain in substance the following: 
(1)  An authorization for the issuance of obligations, stating in brief and general terms sufficient for reasonable identification the purpose for which the obligations are to be issued, a statement of the estimated maximum amount of bonds or notes to be issued, and the estimated cost of such purpose, but related improvements of properties may be treated as one improvement or property; 
(2)  A determination of the period of usefulness of the purpose according to its reasonable life computed from the date of the bonds or, if issued for several purposes, a determination of the average period of usefulness, taking into consideration the respective amounts of obligations authorized for the several purposes; 
(3)  A determination that the obligations authorized by the bond ordinance will be within the debt limitations prescribed by state law; and 
(4)  A statement of the aggregate cost of the improvement or property sought to be financed, which cost may include the following: 
a.  Interest on obligations until the end of the fiscal year in which the obligations are issued or until six months after the completion of construction or acquisition; 
b.  Architect's fees, accounting, engineering and inspection costs; 
c.  Costs of issuing and selling obligations; 
d.  Legal expenses; 
e.  Preliminary planning expenses; 
f.  Test and survey expenses; and 
g.  A reasonable proportion of the compensation and expenses of municipal employees in connection with the construction or acquisition of the improvement or property. 
(b)  Procedure for adoption. 
(1)  Introduction. All bond ordinances shall be introduced in writing at a regular meeting of the mayor and city council and at such meeting shall receive a first reading, which may be by title. 
(2)  Publication, hearing, adoption. Any bond ordinance introduced as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be published after first reading, together with notice of the date, time and place set for further consideration and final passage. Such publication shall be at least ten days after introduction and first reading and at least seven days prior to the date for further consideration. At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such meeting or further consideration shall be adjourned, such bond ordinance may be read by its title if: 
a.  At least one week prior to such date or further consideration, there shall have been posted, on a bulletin board or other place upon which public notices are customarily posted in the municipality: 
1.  A copy of such bond ordinance; and 
2.  A notice that copies of such bond ordinance will be made available during the week and up to and including the date of such meeting or further consideration to the members of the general public of the city who shall request such copies, naming the place at which such copies will be so made available; and 
b.  Copies of such bond ordinance shall have been made available accordingly, but otherwise such bond ordinance shall be read in full. All persons interested shall then be given an opportunity to be heard; and the mayor and city council shall proceed to amend the bond ordinance and finally adopt or reject it, with or without amendments. 
(3)  Final adoption and publication. A bond ordinance shall be finally adopted by the recorded affirmative votes of at least two-thirds of the full membership of the city council and thereafter shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  Effective date. A bond ordinance may take effect 20 days after its publication following final adoption. 
(Code 1991, § 4-202) 
Sec. 2-303. - Bond sales. 
(a)  Private sale; when authorized. All bonds shall be sold at public sale upon sealed proposals, except that bonds may be sold at private sale: 
(1)  Without any previous public offering if: 
a.  Constituting all or part of an authorized issue of $20,000.00 or less; or 
b.  Sold to any board, body, agency, commission, instrumentality, district, authority or political subdivision of any local unit, the state or the federal government; or 
(2)  If no legally acceptable bid is received at advertised public offering, such bonds or any of them may be sold within 30 days after the advertised date for public bidding; however, no bonds shall bear interest at any rate of interest which is higher than the rate or maximum rate specified in the notice of sale, or contain substantially different provisions from those specified in the notice. 
Any purchaser of bonds at private sale, other than a public body, shall deposit a certified or cashier's or treasurer's check drawn upon a bank or trust company in an amount equal to five percent of the amount of bonds purchased; and such amount shall be applied as in the case of a deposit made at public sale. Any private sale of bonds as permitted under this division shall be made or confirmed by resolution of the mayor and city council adopted by not less than a two-thirds vote of the full membership, which resolution shall set forth the date, maturities, interest rate and price of the bonds and the name of the purchaser. 
(b)  Publication of notice of bond sale. A public sale of bonds shall be advertised at least once and at least seven days prior to the sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in a publication carrying municipal bond notices and devoted primarily to financial news or the subject of state and municipal bonds and published in the state. 
(c)  Procedure for public sale of bonds. 
(1)  All bidders shall be required to deposit a certified or cashier's or treasurer's check drawn upon a bank or trust company, equal to not less than two percent of the bonds to secure the city in part from any loss resulting from the failure of the bidder to comply with the terms of his bid, or as liquidated damages for such failure. 
(2)  All bids for bonds shall be publicly opened and announced at the advertised time and place of sale. Such bids as comply with the terms of the notice of sale shall be considered, and any bid not complying with the terms of such notice may be rejected. All bids received may be rejected. 
(3)  Bonds of two or more issues may be sold on the basis of combined maturities, or the maturities of each issue offered for sale. 
(4)  Bonds may be offered for sale at a single rate of interest, or bidders may be requested to name a single rate of interest; but no proposal shall be considered which offers to pay less than the principal amount of bonds offered for sale or which names a rate of interest higher than the lowest rate of interest stated in any legally acceptable proposal. As between proposals naming the same lowest rate of interest, the proposal offering to accept the least amount of bonds shall be accepted; the bonds to be accepted shall be those first maturing; and as between such proposals, the proposal offering to pay the greatest premium bid for the bonds shall in no event exceed $1,000.00 for the principal amount of bonds offered for sale. In order to effect the foregoing, a sufficient number of the last maturing bonds shall be of the denomination $1,000.00 or less. 
(5)  Bonds may be offered for sale at different rates of interest of the same issue or different rates of interest for different issues, or parts of issues, or bidders may be requested to name any such rates of interest. No proposal shall be considered which offers to pay an amount less than the principal amount of bonds offered for sale or under which the total loan is made at an interest cost higher than the lowest net interest cost to the local unit under any legally acceptable proposal. Such net interest cost shall be computed in each instance by adding to the total principal amount of bonds bid for the total interest cost to maturity in accordance with such bid, and by deduction of the amount of premium bid, if any. 
(6)  Additional terms or conditions of sale may be established by the mayor and city council. 
(d)  Sale of bonds at one time or in installments. Any issue of bonds may be sold at one time or in installments at different times. The maturities of an installment of bonds offered for sale, when combined with all maturities of the issue previously sold, shall be such as to comply with requirements as to maturities of a single issue of bonds. Any unsold part of an issue or installment may be sold notwithstanding that the maturities, when considered alone, do not comply with such requirements. 
(e)  Power of sale. The city treasurer is authorized and empowered to sell and award bonds in accordance with the advertised terms of public sale. Such officer shall report in writing to the mayor and city council at the next meeting following such sale, which report shall indicate the principal amount, interest rate and maturities of the bonds sold, the price obtained and the name of each purchaser. 
(f)  Attorney's fees. Any qualified and practicing attorney at law who renders services in connection with the issuance and sale of bonds for this city shall be compensated for such services. 
(g)  Application of proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of municipal bonds shall be applied only to the purposes for which such obligations are authorized. If, for any reason, any part of such proceeds are not necessary for such purposes, such part shall be used to pay any outstanding obligations or to finance the cost of any other purpose which may be deemed proper by the mayor and city council. 
(h)  Prohibited agreements. In the issuance or sale of bond obligations, it shall be unlawful for the mayor and city council or any member of the council or any official: 
(1)  To pay or agree to pay, directly or indirectly, any illegal or unauthorized bonus, commission, fee, or other compensation or consideration for the issuance or for the sale of such obligations; and any amount so paid may be recovered for the city. 
(2)  To make any agreement with any purchaser or bidder, or his representative, regarding the deposit or disposition of any moneys received or to be received from such sale; and every such agreement shall be void. 
(3)  To make any agreement pertaining to the sale of bond obligations which contains provisions as to any other matter, and such sale and any such agreement shall be void. 
(4)  a.  To make any agreement or service contract with respect to publication of notice of sale and printing of bonds or notes, the providing of a legal opinion or for any of such services, whether or not accompanied by an offer to bid for or purchase such obligations. Any such agreement or contract shall be void, and any amount so paid may be recovered for the city, except, however, agreements made directly with a newspaper, bond printer or an attorney licensed to practice law in the state in which he has his office. 
b.  A municipal bond dealer, banker or financial expert may be engaged or employed as financial advisor to provide financial services in connection with the sale of bond obligations, including the preparation of a bidding circular or prospectus; but unless approved by the city, no such financial advisor shall purchase any such obligations at any public or private sale; but any such purchase shall not affect the validity of the obligations, and the city shall recover any compensation and profit to such financial advisor. 
(Code 1991, § 4-203) 
Sec. 2-304. - Bond registration. 
(a)  Application for registration. Any holder of a bond issued by the city may register such bond as to principal and interest, or as to principal only, by making written application for such registration to the city clerk and presenting the bond desired to: 
(1)  The number of bonds presented; 
(2)  The issue; 
(3)  The date; 
(4)  The amount; 
(5)  The date due; and 
(6)  To what extent the bonds are to be registered; 
and each application shall be signed by the applicant who, if holding the bonds in any capacity other than for himself, shall sign the application in the name of the party for whose benefit he holds the bonds, state the capacity in which he signs, and attach proof of such capacity. 
(b)  Bond register. A bond register shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk in which, upon written application and presentation of the bond by the holder, shall be entered a description of each bond so presented. Such description shall state: 
(1)  The bond number; 
(2)  The nature of the issue; 
(3)  The face amount; 
(4)  The date issued; 
(5)  The date of maturity; 
(6)  The rate and due dates of interest; 
(7)  Whether the bond is registered as to principal and interest or as to principal only; 
(8)  The name and mailing address of the bond holder; 
(9)  The name of the person registering the bond; and 
(10)  The capacity in which such person registered the bond. 
All bonds registered in compliance with this section shall be nonnegotiable to the extent registered. 
(c)  Statement of registration and form. Upon registration of any bonds, the city clerk shall stamp, print or write upon each bond so registered a statement of the registration in the following form, inserting in the blanks the matter applicable to each transaction: 
Registered by ___________. Nonnegotiable. Principal and interest to be paid only to ___________ located at ___________. This _____ day of ________, ___. 

 
(d)  Procedure for transfer after registration. In order to transfer any bond which may have been registered under the provisions of this section, the holder shall present the bond to the city clerk and shall authorize such transfer in writing, giving the name of the transferee, the number of the bond, of what issue, and the dates of issue and maturity. Such authority shall be signed and acknowledged in the presence of a notary public or some other officer authorized by law to administer oaths; and such notary public or other officer shall certify, in writing and under seal of his office, that such authority was signed and acknowledged in his presence. In addition to giving such written authority, the holder shall enter a statement of the transfer on the face of each bond, properly dated and signed. Thereupon, the city clerk shall enter the transfer of each bond opposite the original entry of registration in the bond register, giving the name of the transferee and date of the transfer, and shall enter the transfer on each bond over his official signature. The transferee may thereafter, in the manner prescribed in this section, also transfer such bond. 
(Code 1991, § 4-204) 
Sec. 2-305. - Lost, destroyed or defaced bonds. 
Lost, destroyed or defaced bonds may be reissued in the form and tenor of the original obligations upon the mayor and city council being supplied to its satisfaction with the following: 
(1)  Proof of ownership; 
(2)  Proof of loss, destruction or defacing of the obligations; 
(3)  Adequate surety bond; and 
(4)  Payment of the cost of preparation of the new obligations. 
All such new obligations shall be issued pursuant to resolution of the mayor and city council setting forth the written request of the holder or owner, or his authorized attorney or legal representative, of the lost, destroyed or defaced obligations and the date, maturity, interest rate, denomination and numbers of such obligations, and the amount and term of the surety bond. 
(Code 1991, § 4-205) 
Sec. 2-306. - Disposition of bonds and coupons. 
Whenever the city clerk pays any bond or coupon of the city, he shall forthwith stamp, print or write upon such bond or coupon the word "PAID" and shall notify the mayor that he has in hand such canceled paper, whereupon the mayor shall take possession after giving the city clerk a receipt for the bonds and coupons. Such bonds and coupons shall thereafter be destroyed by the mayor in the presence of the city clerk, who shall then make an entry to that effect on the receipt given him. 
(Code 1991, § 4-206) 
Sec. 2-307. - Sinking fund. 
(a)  Establishment. All taxes collected for the payment of principal and interest on city general obligation bonds shall be kept by the city clerk as a separate fund to be known as the sinking fund. Under no circumstances shall funds be paid out by the city clerk for any other purpose than for the payment of the interest and principal on the bonds for which it was collected or for the purpose of investment as provided by law and city ordinance. 
(b)  Certification of amount. Prior to adoption of the annual budget, the amount to be included in the sinking fund for the prospective fiscal year shall be certified by the city auditor as an amount sufficient to pay all principal and interest coming due in such fiscal year; and the sinking fund as certified shall be included in the annual budget. 
(c)  Investment of sinking fund. It shall be the duty of the city clerk promptly to make arrangements for the investment of the sinking fund in the manner provided by law and, upon approval of such arrangements by the city council, promptly to make such investment. 
(Code 1991, § 4-207) 
Secs. 2-308—2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUDGET[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-331. - Procedures for adoption of budget. 
The municipal budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by ordinance passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the city council. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Public hearing. The municipal budget shall not be adopted until a public hearing has been held on the budget and taxpayers and all persons having an interest in the budget shall have been given an opportunity to present objections. Such hearing shall be held not less than 21 days after the initial approval of the budget at the time and place specified in the advertisement of the budget, and may be adjourned from time to time until the hearing is closed. 
(2)  Amendments. 
a.  The city council may amend the budget during or after the public hearing, except that no proposed amendment shall be effective without such a hearing if it shall: 
1.  Add a new item of appropriation in an amount in excess of one percent of the total amount of appropriations as stated in the initially approved budget; 
2.  Increase or decrease any item of appropriation by more than ten percent; or 
3.  Increase the amount needed to be raised by taxes by more than five percent. 
b.  Notice of hearing on any amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set for the hearing. Any such amendment must be published in full in the same manner as an original publication and must be read in full at the hearing and before adoption. 
(3)  Adoption. The municipal budget shall be adopted not later than permitted by state law. Upon adoption, the budget shall constitute an appropriation for the purposes stated in the budget and an authorization of the amount to be raised by taxation for the purposes of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-302) 
Sec. 2-332. - Budget message. 
When introduced to the city council for approval, the municipal budget may be accompanied by a budget message, which shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The budget message may: 
(1)  Outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year; 
(2)  Describe the important features of the budget; 
(3)  Indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and the revenues, together with the reasons for such change; 
(4)  Summarize the city's debt position; and 
(5)  Include such other material as will provide a complete synopsis of the financial condition of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-303) 
Sec. 2-333. - Form and content of budget. 
The municipal budget may be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It may be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items may be included for at least the following: 
(1)  Administration, operation and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city, including a breakdown for salaries and wages for each such unit; 
(2)  Interest and debt redemption charges; 
(3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable; 
(4)  Cash deficits of the preceding year; 
(5)  Contingent expenses in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount of administration, operation and maintenance expenses; and 
(6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the city council. 
The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue. 
(Code 1991, § 4-304) 
Sec. 2-334. - Capital program. 
A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city council at the time the budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvements; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operation and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
This information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition. 
(Code 1991, § 4-305) 
Sec. 2-335. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The mayor or the city manager may, at any time during the fiscal year, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office; and the city council may, by ordinance, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another; except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. 
(Code 1991, § 4-306) 
Sec. 2-336. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption of the budget, or for which adequate provision was not made in the budget. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
(Code 1991, § 4-307) 
Sec. 2-337. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
(Code 1991, § 4-308) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1, repealed the former Ch. 6 and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Amd. of 3-23-09, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A). See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; public drunkenness, § 46-7; possession of alcoholic beverages in parks and facilities, § 50-67; alcohol testing for gas pipeline workers, § 82-76 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
City means the mayor and council, or alternatively, where the context demands such, the area in Madison. 
Church means a building primarily used for public religious worship on a regular basis. 
Distilled spirits means alcohol obtained by distillation or more than 21 percent alcohol, including but not limited to all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcohol more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries or grapes, by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to brandy. 
Governing authority or city means the mayor and city council, provided, however, where the context demands such, city means the geographical area within incorporated Madison, Georgia. 
License in article II means authorization to sell alcohol by the package not for consumption on the premises. 
Licensee in article II means any person selling, at retail, any alcohol in unbroken packages not for consumption on the premises. 
License in article III means the authorization to engage in the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises. 
Licensee in article III means any person engaged in selling, at retail, any alcohol for consumption on the premises. 
Lounge means a separate room where alcoholic beverages are served by the drink connected with or adjacent to a restaurant. No lounges shall be permitted. 
Malt beverage means any alcohol obtained by fermentation of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Permit means the authorization for a wholesaler or wholesale distributor for wholesale sales of alcohol to retail licensees. 
Place of business means the premises described in a license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Premises means the location where a licensee is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Restaurant means any place held out to the public where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations. Such place shall be air-conditioned and contain adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining equipment and seating capacity for at least 40 people, and have sufficient employees to cook and serve food for its patrons. At least one meal per day shall be served at least four days a week, except holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. Serving of such meals shall be the principal business, with the serving of alcohol consumed on the premises as only incidental to such business. A restaurant shall derive at least 60 percent of its total annual gross food and beverages sales from the sale of prepared meals or prepared food and shall have food sales in excess of $150,000.00 per year. 
School means building used for teaching and includes below the first grade usually serving pupils of the four to six age group and fostering their natural growth and social development through constructive play, including pre-K and kindergarten. 
Wholesaler or wholesale distributor means distributor or seller to retailers for resale any alcoholic beverage. 
Wine means any alcohol containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Posting of warning in licensee's establishment. 
A licensee under this chapter shall post in a conspicuous place in his establishment a sign in letters at least four inches high reading: 
"SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE STRICTLY PROHIBITED." 
The licensee shall also post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign in letters at least four inches high reading: 
"WARNING, DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS." 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Secs. 6-3—6-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTILLED SPIRITS; BEER AND WINE; PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 6-32. - Off-premises consumption. 
Alcohol under this article will be for consumption only off the premises of the licensee. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-33. - Licensee qualifications. 
(a)  No license shall be granted unless such person is at least 25 years and has been a resident of the state for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application. If a corporation or LLC should be an applicant, it shall designate a person responsible for all matters regarding the business. 
(b)  No official or employee or member of the city shall be eligible for a distilled spirits license; however, any nonprofit corporation whose earnings are purely civic and for community purposes may be organized or owned by or operated by members of the city, and/or by officials or employees of the city as the case may be. 
(c)  Per O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, no license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church (no such restriction for beer/wine only sellers) or of any housing authority property and beyond 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus (100 yards for beer/wine only sellers) and not less than 100 yards from any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center. The distance shall be measured by most direct route of travel on the ground. Each application license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing distance to nearest church, (no such restriction for beer/wine only sellers), housing authority property, school and alcohol rehabilitation center or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this section. 
(d)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(e)  No license shall be issued unless the building is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building comply with all ordinances of the city, all regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and all the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so the building and the premises on all sides shall be readily visible at all times from the street. The lighting shall illuminate the inside retail area and all the outside premises. Each applicant shall attach evidence of ownership or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing. 
(f)  The licensee shall not have been convicted of or pled nolo to a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within ten years of the date of application. As to entity applicants, including without limitation LLCs, corporations, and partnerships, the foregoing requirements, regarding no such convictions, apply to any owners who own a 20 percent or more interest in the entity. All such owners, and all applicant's managers, shall furnish picture ID and a complete set of fingerprints for state and federal law enforcement background check. The manager(s) shall also submit a complete set of fingerprints and will be photographed by the city. 
(g)  The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
(h)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to this section and shall place the statement on file with the city clerk before any license is issued. 
(i)  If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. 
(j)  If the application covers a corporation or LLC, the manager of the proposed licensed premises must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. A corporate license applicant shall appoint and designate to the city an agent authorized to receive service of process under state law. If no such designation is made, the city may serve or notify the applicant or license holder at any address of the applicant or license holder known to the city. 
(k)  The city, in its reasonable discretion, may objectively consider any and all relevant circumstances regarding location history and proximity to residential which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, the application or the proposed location of the business. If in its reasonable judgment circumstances are such that the granting, suspension or revocation of the license would or would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for the decision of the city. 
(l)  Any misstatement or concealment shall be grounds for revocation and make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury. 
(m)  When the city shall deny an application, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of the denial to request a hearing before the city. The applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-34. - Application for a package sales license. 
Application (which for distilled spirits includes permission to sell malt beverages and wine as well) shall be made on forms furnished by the city as follows: 
(1)  All applications shall be presented in person. 
(2)  Each applicant shall attach a completed application for a state license. Upon applicant's receipt of the state license, it shall be promptly forwarded to the city. 
(3)  Per O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c) applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints for search of the files of the GCIC and NCIC for any instance of criminal activity during the last ten years. 
(4)  Before any license is granted, the applicant must post with the city a performance bond with an insurance company as surety. This bond shall require the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations in this article. Upon the violation of this article the amount of bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the city. The bond is to be approved by the city and shall be properly executed. The bond is to be in the amount of $100.00 for a wholesale license and $2,500.00 for a retail license ($1,000.00 for beer and wine only). 
(5)  A license shall be valid only for the calendar year on the license, and not renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business must make a new application for next year by December 15 of the present year. The prior year's application may be used, with complete supplementation addressing any and all changed circumstances. The accuracy of the original application and any supplemental information shall be certified under oath. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-35. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a new distilled spirits license shall be $5,000.00 ($500.00 for beer and wine only) and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license and shall be cash or a bank certified check. A holder of a current license is only required to pay $1,500.00 ($500.00 for beer and wine only), when applying for a license the next year. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they were granted. License fees shall be prorated quarterly. 
Each new licensee shall complete an alcohol training class, approved by the city after careful investigation of the proposed program and test by the city, within six months of license approval. Every person working on a licensee's premises who may ever provide alcohol to a customer shall complete an alcohol training class, approved by the city after careful investigation of the proposed program and test by the City of Madison, within six months of license approval, and within six months of a new employee's hiring date and renew such every three years. Licensee shall supply proof of such at the time of permit application. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-36. - Licensee regulations. 
No licensee, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, nor any other person shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises. No licensee shall: 
(1)  Sell or deliver any alcohol to any person except in the licensee's place of business. 
(2)  Furnish, sell or offer for sale any alcohol before 12:30 p.m. on Sundays or after 11:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(3)  Sell or possess for sale any alcohol where such person does not have a license to sell or possess for sale. 
(4)  Receive alcohol at the premises other than by a wholesale dealer with a permit granted by the city. 
(5)  Knowingly and intentionally offer for sale, sell, barter, exchange, give, provide or furnish alcohol to any person confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional facility, prison camp, penitentiary or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or is an habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee. 
(6)  Fail to post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises the signs required by subsection (2). 
(7)  Fail to maintain on the licensed premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
(8)  Knowingly allow any person with a criminal record for violence or disorder to frequent or loiter on the premises. 
(9)  Knowingly allow any person to frequent the licensee's premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. 
(10)  Fail to report to the police at the earliest possible time any known incident of a criminal nature. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to willfully withhold from the police any information pertaining to any crime on the premises. 
(11)  Knowingly allow any criminal act to be committed on the premises. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1; Amd. of 9-10-2012(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-37. - Limitations. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  All licensees shall sell or offer to sell in the original unbroken package only and shall sell no package less than half pint. 
(c)  No distilled spirits licensee shall keep in stock, display, sell or offer to sell at any place of business licensed under this article any other product or commodity except the following: 
(1)  Wines, when properly licensed; 
(2)  Malt beverages, when properly licensed; 
(3)  Nonalcoholic beverages commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
(4)  Tobacco products; 
(5)  Ice, to be sold in sealed containers only and not to be opened on the premises; 
(6)  Paper, Styrofoam or plastic cups; and 
(7)  Distilled spirits (if licensed for such). 
Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits may be dispensed through the use of vending machines, but no alcohol shall be dispensed through such vending machines. 
(d)  No licensee shall keep any alcohol in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor enter into any type of arrangement whereby alcohol is stored by any wholesaler. A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of alcohol at any place except licensed place of business, and within licensed place of business, storage space for distilled spirits shall be immediately adjacent to the distilled spirits display area. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1; Amd. of 9-10-2012(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-38. - Display of license. 
Licenses shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-39. - Wholesale permits. 
Any wholesale distributor licensed by the state or the agent of such licensed wholesale distributor may be granted a permit from the city to distribute in the city upon making application for such permit to the city clerk and upon the presentation of evidence satisfactory to the city that the applicant understands and will comply fully with all terms and conditions and provisions of this article, and upon payment of an annual fee of $100.00. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-40. - Taxes. 
(a)  There is levied an excise tax per state law. 
(b)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices sold to each retailer in the city by the 20th day of each month following such purchases. This shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-41. - Financial responsibility. 
All applicants for a license must show financial responsibility. Selling alcoholic beverages is a privilege, not a right, and financial responsibility requirements are reasonable. All applicants shall, at the time of application and periodically thereafter, upon request of the city, submit to the city clerk or designee, evidence of financial responsibility. The evidence or certification shall include without limitation: 
(1)  Financial statements and other proof of the finances of the business, which may be provided at the business for confidentiality reasons, the review to be at the licensee's expense, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner that the licensee is a viable going concern, being operated in a fiscally responsible manner, which maintains reasonable reserves and maintains and follows a responsible business plan, and that the licensee is therefore "financially responsible" and meets that requirement of the City of Madison alcohol regulations; 
(2)  Proof of liability insurance coverage in the amount of no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, $2,000,000.00 aggregate with a company listed on the U.S. Treasury Circular 570; 
(3)  A $2,500.00 performance bond with an insurance company as surety, approved by the city and properly executed, requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations in this article; 
(4)  Proof the applicant is the owner or lessee of the business (a fully executed deed in recordable form or a copy of the lease); 
(5)  An affidavit from applicant that it has adequate financial participation in the business to direct and manage its affairs, and is not a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
(6)  Payment of the applicable license fee; 
(7)  For distilled spirits licenses, proof upon request of a minimum of $50,000.00 stock of the types of alcohol typically sold, to prevent undercapitalized businesses and to demonstrate the financial viability of the business, which shall be subject to inventory audit at the end of each month, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
(8)  Certified copies of the sales and use tax monthly reports filed with the state department of revenue for each month during the prior year (presentation of such, including with totals for the year, to the city clerk or designee at the business shall be deemed lawful compliance with any report filing requirement in this article), and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
(9)  An affidavit certifying that all state and local excise taxes were charged and paid the prior year, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
(10)  Written acknowledgement that the city shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of the applicant for auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this article, proving or disproving violation of any part of this article by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. If the city has a reasonable suspicion that an affidavit/certification is inaccurate, it may insist upon and be entitled to tender of the actual backup documentation. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1; Amd. of 9-10-2012(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-42. - Transferability. 
(a)  Except as otherwise stated, no license shall be transferable to any person or location; if a licensed business is sold or closed, licensee shall immediately surrender the license. Under no circumstances will the license fee be refunded. 
(b)  No license shall be transferred during the year in which the license was obtained except in the case of death. In such a case, the executor or administrator may continue to operate for up to six months. 
(c)  Upon the sale of any licensed business, the new owner may operate under the old license, but in no event for longer than 60 days or until his application is granted or denied, whichever shall first occur. 
(d)  All holders of licenses shall, within six months, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to shall serve as a forfeiture of the unused license, and no refund of the license fee shall be made. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-43. - Inspections. 
The business shall be open to inspection at all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-44. - Gambling. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, slot machines, lotteries, tickets or chances therein or any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value, or in any adjoining room owned, leased or controlled by licensee; however, the sale of Georgia lottery tickets in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-1 et seq. is permitted. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-45. - Compliance with laws. 
Each licensee shall comply with all laws, and all rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner; any violation shall subject the licensee to suspension or revocation and also may subject the licensee to criminal prosecution. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-46. - Sales to minors. 
(a)  "Minor" shall mean any person under the age of 21 years, or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, or by other state laws. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase alcohol for a minor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged or borrowed ID to obtain alcohol. 
(d)  No person shall make or permit to be made any sale of alcohol to minors. Upon violation, the licensee shall generally be treated as follows: upon a first offense by the licensee, a suspension for seven consecutive days of sales of alcoholic beverages; proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, such proof to be provided to the city council within 75 days of the first day of the suspension of the license; a $500.00 civil penalty; and on the first day of the suspension, the posting at the premise's entrance of a sign notifying patrons of the nature and length of the suspension. Upon a second offense by the licensee, within three years of a prior offense, a suspension of 60 consecutive days of sales of alcoholic beverages; proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, such proof to be provided to the city council within 75 days of the first day of the suspension of the license; a $1,000.00 civil penalty; removal of all alcoholic beverages from the premises; on the first day of the suspension, the posting at the premise's entrance of a sign notifying patrons of the nature and length of the suspension; and probationary status for one year. Upon a third offense within three years, by the licensee, the license shall be revoked for a period of one full year. 
(e)  Upon receipt of letter of notification of penalty, licensee has ten days to file a written request for a hearing to appeal the fine, suspension, attendance at an approved alcohol awareness class, and/or the starting date of suspension of sales. 
(f)  If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days of receipt of notification of penalty letter, the fine and suspension will begin on the eleventh day after the receipt of the notification of penalty letter unless the 11th day is a Saturday, in which case the suspension will begin on the next day of the establishment's operation during which alcoholic beverages would normally be available. Additionally, proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, to be provided to the city council within 75 days of the receipt of the notification of penalty. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. 
(g)  Schedule if appeal hearing conducted. The fine and/or suspension will commence within five days thereafter, on a date set at the appeal hearing by the mayor and city council. Proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, such proof to be provided to the city council within 75 days after the hearing. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-47. - Violations. 
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in City Code. In addition, such violation may be a cause for revocation or suspension of the license of a licensee by the city. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-48. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Any license issued under this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The making of any false statements on an application for a license; 
(2)  A violation of the regulations in this article and/or the laws of the United States and/or the state and/or the city; 
(3)  The failure to have the financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned; 
(4)  Default in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation of a state license; 
(6)  Any violation of this article; or 
(7)  For any other legal and sufficient case. 
(b)  Any action taken by the city to suspend or revoke a license shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and/or ordinances of the city, the state and/or the United States. 
Whenever any action is taken by the city to suspend or revoke any license, the city shall provide written notice to the licensee of the action taken. The notice shall set forth the reasons for such action. The licensee shall have ten days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the city. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-49. - Production of records. 
In conjunction with any license or the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license or the hearings or payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected under this article, the city shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or licensee. This shall be for auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this article, proving or disproving violation of any part of this article, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-50. - Conditions of premises. 
(a)  All premises used for the sale of alcohol and/or for the storage of alcohol shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the regulations of the county health department. 
(b)  All premises shall be subject to inspection by the health department, the fire department, the building inspector, and any authorized law enforcement officers to determine if the premises are in compliance with all rules, regulations, laws and codes. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-51. - Incorporation of state law. 
The state laws and/or regulations relating to the sale and/or distribution of alcohol within the state are incorporated in and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this article. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-52. - Employees. 
(a)  Every licensee shall maintain at all times on the premises a list of all persons employed, which shall show the full legal name, alias, date of birth, current address, current home telephone number, and social security number of each employee. 
(b)  The employee list shall be available during reasonable hours for inspection by any law enforcement officer or official or his designee. If so required by such person, an employee must submit to a fingerprint identification and criminal history check. 
(c)  No minors shall be employed in any capacity. However, persons under 18 employed in supermarkets and drugstores may sell or handle malt beverages and wine. 
(d)  The licensee shall not employ any person who in the last ten years has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-53. - Copy of article. 
Licensees shall keep a copy of this article on the licensed premises and instruct any person working there to read and follow this article, and all persons selling alcohol shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this article. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees. Each new licensee shall complete an alcohol training class, approved by the city after careful investigation of the proposed program and test, within six months of license approval. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. Every person working on a licensee's premises who may ever provide alcohol to a customer shall complete an alcohol training class, approved by the city after careful investigation of the proposed program and test, within six months of license approval, and within six months of a new employee's hiring date and renew such every three years. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. Licensee shall supply proof at the time of permit application. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-54. - Prohibited sales. 
No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcohol to any person in any jail or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or is of unsound mind, or is an habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or his agent or employee. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-55. - Contraband. 
All malt beverages and/or wine owned or possessed contrary to the provisions of this article are declared to be contraband and shall be seized by the proper authorities. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1; Amd. of 9-10-2012(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 6-56—6-301. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POURING LICENSES FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-302. - Unlawful sales without license. 
As used in this article, defined words shall have the meanings specified unless the context in which the word or term is used clearly requires that a different meaning be used. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises without first complying with the regulations in this article. The business of selling or otherwise dealing in or possessing alcoholic beverages is declared to be a privilege, not a right, and such privilege shall not be exercised in the city except as licensed under the terms of this article. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-303. - Applications. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises except under a license granted by the city. Application for an: 
(1)  Alcohol (distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, and fortified wine); or 
(2)  Beer and wine pouring license may be made only on behalf of restaurants located within the city, and shall be made on forms provided by the city, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  A pouring license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and not renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business must make a new application for next year on or before December 15 of the preceding year. 
b.  The owner and/or manager of each applicant shall be photographed, and shall furnish picture identification, a separate form of identification, and a complete set of fingerprints, which shall be forwarded to law enforcement, who shall institute a search of the files of GCIC/NCIC for criminal activity within the ten-year period immediately preceding the date of such application. Law enforcement shall make such other investigations as are appropriate in the judgment of law enforcement. All new owners and/or managers shall also immediately undergo this procedure. As to entity applicants, including without limitation LLCs, corporations, and partnerships, the foregoing requirements, regarding no such convictions during the prior ten years, apply to any owners who own a 20 percent or more interest in the entity. All such owners, and all of applicant's managers, shall furnish picture identification and a complete set of fingerprints for state and federal law enforcement background check. The manager(s) shall also submit a complete set of fingerprints and will be photographed by the city. 
c.  Each applicant shall attach a completed form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. 
d.  Before a license is granted, the applicant must post with the city, along with his application, a performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond is to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violation as determined by the city. Said bond is to be approved by the city and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $2,500.00. Bond amount for beer and wine only is $1,000.00. 
e.  All applications for a license shall be presented in person. 
f.  At the time an application is made for a license, the city clerk shall give notice to the applicant of the date on which the city shall consider the application. The city clerk shall then give notice of the making of such an application by advertisement, once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration by the mayor and council on such application, in the newspaper in which legal advertisements for the county are published. The notice shall state the address of the proposed business, give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of all partners, and if a corporation or LLC, the names of the officers and stockholders or members, and day and time the mayor and council will consider such application. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-304. - Legal age, residency and ownership. 
No license shall be granted unless such person is at least 25 and been a resident of Georgia for one year prior to filing an application. If a corporation or LLC should be an applicant and has not been allowed to do business by the secretary of state in Georgia for said one-year period, then the incorporator or managing member and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock or interests shall all have been residents of Georgia for at least one year prior to filing an application. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-305. - Standards of issuance. 
The following standards shall be applied to all decisions pertaining to the issuance or denial of licenses hereunder: 
(1)  All applicants for a license must show financial responsibility. All applicants shall, at the time of application and periodically thereafter, upon request of the city, submit to the city clerk or designee, evidence of financial responsibility. The evidence or certification shall include without limitation: 
a.  Financial statements and other proof of the finances of the restaurant, which may be provided at the restaurant for confidentiality reasons, the review to be at the licensee's expense, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner that the licensee is a viable going concern, being operated in a fiscally responsible manner, which maintains reasonable reserves and maintains and follows a responsible business plan, and that the licensee is therefore "financially responsible" and meets that requirement of the City of Madison alcohol regulations. 
b.  Proof of liability insurance coverage in the amount of no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, $2,000,000.00 aggregate with a company listed on the U.S. Treasury Circular 570; 
c.  A $2,500.00 performance bond with an insurance company as surety, approved by the city and properly executed, requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations in this article. Bond amount for beer and wine only is $1,000.00. 
d.  Proof the applicant is the owner or lessee of the restaurant (a fully executed deed or a copy of lease); 
e.  An affidavit from applicant that it has adequate financial participation in the restaurant to direct and manage its affairs, and is not a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
f.  Payment of the applicable license fee; 
g.  Proof of quarterly and annual food sales (with totals) of 60 percent or more of its total gross sales, and annual food sales in excess of $150,000.00 via presenting a confidential non-public sworn statement of the true and correct sales during the preceding calendar quarter and year respectively on forms approved by the city, which reflect the gross dollar sales amount for: total sales for the quarter and year, sales of alcohol for the applicable calendar quarter and year, and sales of food items for the quarter and year (presentation of the statement to the city clerk or designee at the restaurant shall be deemed lawful compliance with any statement filing requirement in this article) and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
h.  Proof, upon request, via purchase receipts and sales records, of ongoing maintenance of two weeks supply (consistent with past sales) of the types of alcohol typically sold, to prevent undercapitalized restaurants and to demonstrate the financial viability of the restaurant, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
i.  Certified copies of the sales and use tax monthly reports filed with the state department of revenue for each month during the prior year (presentation of such, including with totals for the year, to the city clerk or designee at the business shall be deemed lawful compliance with any report filing requirement in this article), and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
j.  An affidavit from the CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, certifying that all state and local excise taxes were charged and paid the prior year; 
k.  Written acknowledgement that the city shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of the applicant for auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this article, proving or disproving violation of any part of this article by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. If the city has a reasonable suspicion that an affidavit/certification is inaccurate, it may insist upon and be entitled to tender of the actual backup documentation. 
(2)  No officials or employees of the city or members of its city shall be eligible to receive a license. 
(3)  All applicants for a license must be the owner or lessee of the premises and must provide evidence of ownership of the premises in the form of a fully executed deed or a copy of the lease. 
(4)  All applicants for a license must be of good character as evidenced by no conviction within the last ten years of misdemeanors involving moral turpitude or felonies, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of such good character. Furthermore, corporate or firm applicants shall also be of such good character, with all officers and members being of such good character. The application shall be sent within five business days of receipt to law enforcement for investigation of the applicants, employees, officers and members, then law enforcement shall timely present a written investigation report to the city. 
(5)  A license may be denied to any applicant if it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or if it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(6)  The city, in its reasonable discretion, may objectively consider any extenuating circumstances regarding location history and proximity to residential that may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in the reasonable judgment of the city circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(7)  A corporate applicant shall appoint and designate to the city an agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of Georgia. If no such designation is made, the city may serve or notify the applicant or license holder at any address of the applicant or license holder known to the city. 
(8)  The city shall give notice in writing to the applicant of any decision to deny an application and give reasons for the decision. When the city shall deny an application, applicant shall have ten days from notice of denial to request a hearing before the city. The applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-306. - Transfer. 
No license shall be transferable and if a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of licensee to immediately surrender said license to the city, and under no circumstances will the license fee be refunded to the holder; provided, however, license transfer and temporary licensing can occur subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If the owner of a license desires to transfer, or a 50 percent or greater interest in the business is sold or otherwise transferred, then the purchaser or transferee shall make a new application to the city as for an original license, before the date on which such sale or transfer is made. Ownership of such license shall remain unchanged until the application is approved by the city and all proper fees and taxes are paid. 
(2)  Upon the sale or other transfer of 50 percent or more interest in the business for which the license was issued, the purchaser or transferee shall be entitled to continue to operate such business for 30 days, pending the a new license, but only if such purchaser or transferee has filed a complete application with the city as required in subsection (1). 
(3)  In case of the death of any natural person the license may be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heir or devisee by filing a new application for the change in license ownership within 30 days of such death. The business may continue to operate until disposition of the application is determined as for an original license. No additional fees shall be charged above what would be due if the business, or portion thereof, remained under the deceased person's ownership. 
(4)  All holders of licenses shall within six months after the issuance of such license open for business the establishment. Failure to open shall serve as a forfeiture of the unused license, and no refund of the license fee shall be made. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-307. - Separate license. 
A separate license shall be required for each pouring location of each place of business. Each license will enable the licensee to sell the licensed alcoholic beverages only in the areas of the premises permitted by state laws and regulations. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-308. - Building. 
No license shall be issued to any person unless complete and detailed diagrams of the building and the outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building are attached. The building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of Georgia. Upon completion, the proposed building shall be subject to final inspection and approval by the building inspector. Each applicant shall attach evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease. Licensees shall provide on the premises adequate sanitary toilet facilities as required by the health and building codes and the building shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-309. - Distance requirements. 
No license shall be granted unless the front door of the building at the proposed location is situated not less than 40 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, and not less than 20 yards from any church building or 100 yards from any housing authority property or any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center. This distance is to be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Each application shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distances or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-310. - Hours of operation. 
No alcohol may be served before 11:00 a.m. on any day or after last call, which will be at 11:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 12:00 midnight on Fridays and Saturdays. Provided, however, when December 31 is Sunday—Friday, alcohol service may, in the discretion of the licensee, be extended to 1:00 a.m. of the following day. Saturdays must still observe 12:00 midnight as the conclusion of service, to avoid service on Sunday morning. No licensee shall furnish alcohol at any of the following times: 
(1)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the city; or 
(2)  At any time in violation of state law or regulation; 
(3)  At any time more than one hour after the restaurant shuts down the kitchen for the evening. 
However, the wholesale or retail sale of alcohol shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election, except that the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place is unlawful during such hours that the polls are open. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1; Amd. of 11-12-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-311. - Minimum age of consumption; exceptions. 
No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall give, furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage(s) to a person under 21. Licensee shall post in a conspicuous place in the establishment a sign in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: 
"SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE STRICTLY PROHIBITED" and "WARNING: DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS." 
It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged, or borrowed ID to obtain alcoholic beverages. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-312. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to certain persons prohibited. 
No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcohol to any person confined in any jail or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said person. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-313. - Certain employment prohibited. 
No licensee shall employ, require or permit a person under 18 to sell or take orders for any alcohol. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-314. - Containers. 
The sale of alcohol in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is prohibited. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-315. - Annual fees. 
(a)  The fee for a license shall be $4,300.00 ($800.00 for beer and wine only), and shall be paid prior to issuance of any license. Said fee shall accompany the application and shall be either a cash payment or a bank check. 
(b)  Annual fees shall be prorated quarterly. 
(c)  Wholesalers shall be exempt from said fee unless payment of said fee is required under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-316. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Distilled spirits. City taxation is per O.C.G.A. § 3-7-60, $0.22 per liter. 
(b)  Malt beverages. City taxation is per O.C.G.A. as follows: Where malt beverages are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15 gallons; and where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(c)  Wine. City taxation is per O.C.G.A., $0.22 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate for any fractional parts of a liter. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-317. - Responsibility. 
Any holder of an license shall keep a copy of this article on the premises and shall instruct any person working there to read and follow such, and each licensee and the licensee's agents and employees selling alcohol by the drink shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of the licensee's agents and/or employees in any violation hereof and/or of the laws of Georgia and/or the rules and regulations of the revenue commissioner. 
Each new licensee shall complete an alcohol training class, approved by the city after careful investigation of the proposed program and test, within six months of license approval. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after proof of compliance. Every person working on a licensee's premises who may ever provide alcohol to a customer shall complete an alcohol training class, approved by the city after careful investigation of the proposed program and test, within six months of license approval, and within six months of a new employee's hiring date and renew such every three years. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. Licensee shall supply proof of such at the time of permit application. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-318. - Inspection. 
The business premises of the holder of a license shall be available for inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections, including without limitation law enforcement and city staff. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-319. - Production of records. 
In conjunction with any license application or any license issued hereunder, or the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license or any of the hearings contemplated by this article, or the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the city shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or licensee. Said subpoena right shall be had for auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance with this article, proving or disproving violation of any part of this article by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-320. - False statement. 
The making of any false statement on an application shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-321. - Gambling. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, slot machines, lotteries or tickets of chance or operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value, nor in any room adjoining owned or controlled by licensee. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-322. - Soliciting. 
No licensee shall require, permit, or induce any person to solicit the purchase of any drink or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-323. - Display of license. 
A license issued under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which it was issued. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-324. - Delivery. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make delivery of any alcoholic beverage, except inside of the premises or area licensed for the sale thereof. It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption off the premises. Provided, however, that to the extent permitted by state law, wine bottles may be re-corked by the licensee and taken with the purchaser for subsequent consumption off the premises at locations allowed under state law. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1; Amd. of 5-29-2013, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-325. - Criminal record. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person with a criminal record for violence or disorder to frequent the premises or loiter on the premises. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-326. - Prostitution; adult entertainment. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow any person to frequent the licensee's premises for soliciting prostitution. Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city, the mayor and council note the conditions and occurrences generally associated with adult entertainment establishments. It is the finding of the mayor and council that adult entertainment establishments, particularly those where alcoholic beverages are served, result in an increase in criminal behavior and create undesirable community conditions. An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, prostitution, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other counties and municipalities that permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly those in which alcoholic beverages are served. The mayor and council also find that the increase in criminal behavior which accompanies adult entertainment establishments causes undesirable community conditions. Conditions experienced in other counties and municipalities are depression of property values in neighborhoods surrounding the adult entertainment establishment, community blight, an increased burden on and expenditure for law enforcement, and an increase in the criminal case load in the judicial system due to a greater number of arrests because of the above-mentioned crime problems. 
In addition to the prohibitions under Georgia law at O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41, no alcoholic beverages may be sold in any restaurant which features performances by topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers whose performances involve erotic dancing including without limit simulation of sexual activities and/or erotic or lewd touching. No such adult entertainment may be located within 1,000 feet of any restaurant selling alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this subsection, distance shall be by direct measurement between property lines, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-327. - Police reports. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report to the police at the earliest possible time known incidents of a criminal nature that happen on the licensee's premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to willfully withhold from the police any information pertaining to any crime that may have happened on the premises. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-328. - No employees with criminal records. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ on the premises any person who in the preceding ten years has been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. It shall also be unlawful for any licensee to allow any criminal act to be committed on the premises. No applicant or licensee shall have been convicted of or have pled nolo to, within ten years of the date of application, a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any crime relating to the sale of alcohol. If the applicant or licensee is a partnership, all members of such partnership must meet this requirement. If the applicant or licensee is a corporation or LLC, all stockholders and officers and members must meet this requirement. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-329. - Advertising. 
It shall be unlawful to display on the outside of the premises any form of signs or lettering using brand names or words or advertisements indicating or have the connotation of promoting or advertising the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-330. - Minors. 
(a)  The term "minor" as used in this article shall mean any person under 21, or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, or by other state laws. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase distilled spirits for a minor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged or borrowed ID to obtain alcohol to which he is not legally entitled. 
(d)  No person shall make or permit to be made any sale of alcohol to minors. Upon violation, the licensee shall generally be treated as follows: upon a first offense by the licensee, a suspension for seven consecutive days of sales of alcoholic beverages; proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, such proof to be provided to the city council within 75 days of the first day of the suspension of the license; a $500.00 civil penalty; and on the first day of the suspension, the posting at the premise's entrance of a sign notifying patrons of the nature and length of the suspension. Upon a second offense by the licensee, within three years of a prior offense, a suspension of 60 consecutive days of sales of alcoholic beverages; proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, such proof to be provided to the city council within 75 days of the first day of the suspension of the license; a $1,000.00 civil penalty; removal of all alcoholic beverages from the premises; on the first day of the suspension, the posting at the premise's entrance of a sign notifying patrons of the nature and length of the suspension; and probationary status for one year. Upon a third offense within three years, by the licensee, the license shall be revoked for a period of one full year. 
(e)  Upon receipt of letter of notification of penalty, licensee has ten days to file a written request for a hearing to appeal the fine, suspension, attendance at an approved alcohol awareness class, and/or the starting date of suspension of sales. 
(f)  If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days of receipt of notification of penalty letter, the fine and suspension will begin on the eleventh day after the receipt of the notification of penalty letter unless the 11th day is a Saturday, in which case the suspension will begin on the next day of the establishment's operation during which alcoholic beverages would normally be available. Additionally, proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, to be provided to the city council within 75 days of receipt of letter of notification of penalty. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. 
(g)  Schedule if appeal hearing conducted. The fine and/or suspension will commence within five days thereafter, on a date set at the appeal hearing by the mayor and city council. Proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, such proof to be provided to the city council within 75 days after the hearing. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-331. - Containers. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-332. - Conditions of premises. 
(a)  All premises for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or for the storage of alcoholic beverages shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the regulations of the health department. 
(b)  All premises shall be inspected by the health department, the fire department, the building inspector, and law enforcement officers to determine if the premises are in compliance with all rules, regulations, laws, and codes. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-333. - Telephone. 
A licensee shall maintain on the premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-334. - Incorporation of state law. 
The state laws and/or regulations relating to the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages within Georgia are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this article as if fully set out herein. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-335. - Employees. 
(a)  Every licensee shall maintain at all times on the premises a list of all persons employed by such licensee, which list shall show the full legal name, alias, date of birth, address, home telephone number and social security number of each employee. 
(b)  The employee list shall be available during reasonable hours for inspection by any law enforcement person or government official or his designee. Upon reasonable grounds for making such request, an employee must submit to a fingerprint identification and criminal history check. Every retail licensee shall cause each of the licensee's employees during the hours of employment to be identified by a conspicuous label or badge on which shall appear the employee's first name. 
(c)  No person under 16 shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed hereunder. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-336. - Promotions. 
No licensee shall engage in any of the following in connection with sale or other disposition of alcohol: 
(1)  Giving away a ticket, token or any other item that can be exchanged for any alcohol on purchase of any other beverage; 
(2)  The sale of two or more beverages for a single price or at the substantially same price as customarily charged for one; 
(3)  The sale of one beverage with a ticket, token or any other items redeemable for a subsequent beverage; 
(4)  The sale of all alcohol a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(5)  The sale of alcohol during any special period of the day or the week, at prices lower than those customarily charged; 
(6)  Encouraging purchase of a second beverage at the same time another is purchased, or before the first is consumed; and 
(7)  Conducting or allowing promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of consumption of alcohol. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-337. - Prohibited acts. 
No licensee or business shall authorize or permit anyone to bring onto the premises any alcohol acquired elsewhere, nor shall any such licensee authorize anyone to take out of the premises any alcohol. No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises except a law enforcement officer or other person authorized by law to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises, nor shall licensee act as a keeper, bailee or custodian of any kind of deadly weapon or firearm for anyone. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-338. - Clearing service areas. 
All licensees shall remove or cause to be removed from the area of the premises utilized by the customers all alcoholic beverages within one-half hour after the times for last call specified in this article. To discourage customers from trying to evade this requirement, at no time shall licensees give customers multiple drinks or "doubles" or similar, or provide a new drink or refill before the customer finishes the current drink. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-339. - Lock and key. 
All alcoholic beverages shall be under lock or behind closed doors or fully covered by opaque material during those hours when their sale is not permitted. All alcoholic beverages owned or possessed contrary to this article are hereby declared to be contraband and shall be seized by the proper authorities. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-340. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license. 
No person shall engage in the sale of alcohol without first complying with the rules in this article. Any license shall be subject to suspension or revocation, and/or any licensee subject to civil penalty, upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The making of any false statement on an application for a license issued hereunder; 
(2)  A violation of the regulations in this article and/or the regulations of the United States and/or Georgia and/or the city; 
(3)  The failure to have the financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned; 
(4)  Default in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation of a state retail dealer's license; or 
(6)  For any other legal and sufficient cause. 
Any action taken by the city to suspend or revoke a license shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by a proper authority. Whenever any action is taken by the city to suspend or revoke any license, the city shall provide written notice to the licensee of the action and set forth the reasons for such action. The licensee shall have ten days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the city. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-341. - Restaurants; temporary licenses; private clubs; caterers; arts and entertainment district. 
(a)  Restaurants. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a person may apply as a qualified restaurant even though the establishment has not yet been in operation for the previous 12 months. Because it is not possible to determine if such restaurant has annual food sales which are 60 percent or more of its total gross sales and it is not possible to determine if such restaurant has annual food sales in excess of $150,000.00, the city may in its reasonable discretion consider the size and seating capacity of the restaurant, the size and seating capacity of any lounge in the restaurant, the size and type of kitchen facilities and all other relevant factors to determine if it appears substantially likely that the restaurant will qualify for a license under this article. If the city anticipates that the establishment will qualify for a license, it may vote to award the applicant a temporary license not to exceed 90 days. At or before the conclusion of the 90-day period, the city shall use a pro rata analysis to determine if the applicant is operating a qualified restaurant. If the city has determined that the restaurant is qualified under this article, the applicant may make application for a license under section 6-303. 
(b)  Temporary licenses for special events. 
(1)  Nonprofit organization. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, a nonprofit organization which has at least 75 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual dues and has received and has maintained approval from the IRS as a 501(c)(3) organization, may apply for a temporary license in accordance with the local and state provisions set forth below. 
(2)  For profit enterprise. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, a for profit enterprise (located within the arts and entertainment overlay district or those enterprises identified in (e)(4) below located within the central business special tax district) and which has received and maintained from the city an occupational tax certificate may apply for a temporary license in accordance with the local and state provisions set forth below, excepting (3)d. 
(3)  Such temporary licenses shall be limited to a three-day special event license for consumption of malt beverages and wine (not distilled spirits, except one single-day event, one time per year, upon approval of the mayor and council, using as criteria all applicable standards and requirements; applicant shall then comply with all applicable liquor serving requirements). In addition to the city requirements below, such applicants must file an application with and pay a fee of $25.00 to the commissioner of the state department of revenue, and receive approval and issuance of the state license. No more than six licenses may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this Code section. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to distribute or sell alcohol during any hours in which the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises is not permitted in the jurisdiction. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to employ any person under 18 who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. To make application for such license, the organization must comply with all the following: 
a.  Make application at least 14 days prior to the proposed license date(s); 
b.  Pay a fee of $25.00 per licensed event; 
c.  Not hold more than 18 days and/or nights of such sales per calendar year. A license shall only be granted for a period not to exceed three days and/or nights per event; 
d.  All sales must be for fundraising, or to directly further the purpose of the organization, or made with service of a meal; 
e.  All sections of this article must be complied with except sections 6-303, 6-305, 6-306, 6-308, 6-315 and 6-342; 
f.  Only one such license shall be issued for any one location in the city, and such location shall be stated in the application. Licenses issued pursuant to this Code section shall be valid only for the place specified in the license; 
g.  All applicants for a license must be of good character, as evidenced by no conviction within the last ten years of misdemeanors involving moral turpitude or felonies, and all operators, managers, clerks or other employees shall be of such good character, and corporate or LLC or firm applicants shall also be of good business reputation, with all officers and members being of such good character; the application shall be sent within five business days of receipt to law enforcement for investigation of the applicants, employees, officers and members, then law enforcement shall timely present a written investigation report to the city; 
h.  Whenever the city shall deny an application for a license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of denial to request a hearing before the city; the applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses; and 
i.  No license under this section shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. Under no circumstances will the temporary license fee be refunded to the organization. 
j.  A person who willfully, knowingly, and unlawfully sells, furnishes, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person who is not of lawful drinking age, knowing that such person will soon be driving a motor vehicle, or who knowingly sells, furnishes, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication, knowing that such person will soon be driving a motor vehicle, may become liable for injury or damage caused by or resulting from the intoxication of such minor or person when the sale, furnishing, or serving is the proximate cause of such injury or damage. 
(c)  Private clubs. In addition to restaurants, private clubs as defined hereinbelow are permitted to have a beer and wine pouring license, subject to certain limitations to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Among those limitations is a requirement that beer and wine only be served with food at special events that have received the approval of the city upon proper written application, said application to be filed at least 30 days prior to the proposed special event. 
Per O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1, a private club means; any non-profit association organized under the laws of Georgia which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of the application; 
(2)  Has received approval from the United State Internal Revenue Service as a bona fide 501(c)(3) organization; 
(3)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(4)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members; 
(5)  Has suitable kitchen space of no less than 400 square feet, with meal preparation equipment; 
(6)  Has sufficient dining space with tables and chairs, of no less than 400 square feet; and 
(7)  The club is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests. 
Due to the operation of the kitchen and dining facilities on the premise, the private club will be subject to inspections by the health department as if it was a restaurant, and in all other regards will be treated as a restaurant as well, including without limitation financial responsibility requirements. Provided, however, the 60 percent non-beer and wine sales and $150,000.00 annual sales requirements shall not apply. 
Service and consumption of beer and wine are limited to indoors, plus porches, decks and lawns which are directly contiguous to or attached to the main structure on the private club's premises. Provided, however, that beer and wine may not be served or consumed beyond a distance of 150 feet from the main structure. Hours of beer and wine service are limited to Monday through Saturday, noon until 11:00 p.m., and Sunday from 12:30 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
The private club may serve beer and wine at special events only. A "special event" is defined as a publicly advertised event involving displays of items and/or musical entertainment or other entertainment, wherein the public is invited to attend and participate, and where food is served in conjunction with the service of beer and wine. 
There shall be a separate application for each special event. The application shall be filed with the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the scheduled special event. The application shall state in detail the nature, location and time of the event. 
The application will also describe the level of staffing, the food/meals to be provided in conjunction with the service of beer and wine, and safeguards taken by the private club to insure that no provisions of this Article are violated. 
For the per event approval, the private club must pay $25.00 per event to cover actual costs incurred by the city in reviewing the application and processing the same. 
In the cases of festivals and multi-day events, each festival and multi-day event shall be treated as one special event for the purpose of event approval hereunder. 
All requirements of this article which pertain to restaurants, shall also apply to a private club. Provided, however, that if there are any differing standards between this section and the rest of this article, the stricter requirement shall apply. 
Notwithstanding the immediately foregoing, the 60 percent non-beer and wine sales and $150,000.00 annual safes requirements shall not apply. 
No member, officer, agent or employee may directly or indirectly receive via any compensation or any profits from the sale of beer and wine, other than a fixed salary unrelated to the sale of the beer and wine. 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission on any profits from the sale of beer and wine. For the purposes of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of beer and wine. 
(d)  Caterers. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, a state-approved alcoholic beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid license from the city which authorizes the licensee to sell alcohol by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued from the city an off-premises license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages and wine (not distilled spirits) by the drink off premises and in connection with a specifically designated catered function. Such shall be known as a "special event license." A "licensed alcoholic beverage caterer" means any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-2, 3-5-2, or 3-6-2. In addition to the city requirements below, such organizations must file an application with and pay a fee of $25.00 to the commissioner of the state department of revenue, and receive approval and issuance of the state license. It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell malt beverages or wine during any hours in which the sale of alcohol by the drink for consumption only on the premises is not permitted in the jurisdiction. It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person under 18 who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle malt beverages and wine. To make application for such license, the organization must comply with and agree to all the following: 
(1)  Make application at least 14 days prior to the first date of the proposed license period. The application shall include without limitation the name of the caterer; the date, address, and time of the event; and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; 
(2)  Pay a fee of $250.00 annually; 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  All sales of malt beverages and wine must be for fundraising, or to directly further the purpose of the organization, or made in conjunction with service of a meal; 
(5)  All sections of this article must be complied with except sections 6-303, 6-305, 6-306, 6-308, 6-315 and 6-342; 
(6)  Only one such license shall be issued for any one location within the city and such location shall be stated in the application. Licenses issued pursuant to this Code section shall be valid only for the place specified in the license; 
(7)  All applicants for a license must be of good character as evidenced by no conviction of misdemeanors involving moral turpitude or felonies, and all operators, managers, clerks or other employees shall be of such good character, and corporate or LLC or firm applicants shall also be of good business reputation, with all officers and members of such good character; the application shall be sent within five business days of receipt to law enforcement for investigation of the applicants, employees, officers and members, then law enforcement shall timely present a written investigation report to the city; 
(8)  Whenever the city shall deny an application for a license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of denial to request a hearing before the city; the applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses; 
(9)  No license under this section shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. Under no circumstances will the temporary license fee be refunded to the organization; 
(10)  All sales of malt beverages and wine in connection with an authorized catered event, shall be cash at the time of delivery or not more than five days in advance of the authorized catered event. All other malt beverages and wine sales will be subject to restrictions and requirements imposed by department of revenue regulations. The acceptance of checks and credit cards shall be deemed the same as cash and are subject to the requirements and restrictions imposed by department of revenue regulations; 
(11)  All sales are final and in no case will broken packages of beverage alcohol be removed or returned by the licensed beverage alcohol caterer from the site of the authorized catered event to his place of business or any other location. All returns of unbroken packages must be documented on the quantity-destination report. Under no circumstances will malt beverages or wine be returned to caterer's inventory on Sunday. Returns of unbroken packages of beverage alcohol will be handled as no sale; 
(12)  Leftover broken packages of malt beverages and wine shall be the property of the event sponsor; 
(13)  The licensed beverage alcohol caterer must provide such personnel as needed to handle all malt beverages and wine at the authorized catered event. This shall include bartending services, dispensing, serving, providing, or furnishing beverage alcohol. Employees of a licensed alcohol beverage caterer must be 18 years of age or older in order to handle malt beverages and wine at such authorized catered event; 
(14)  The licensed beverage alcohol caterer shall notify the state revenue commissioner in writing of the site of the authorized catered event. The notification will also contain such other information as the commissioner may require. Such notification must be received five working days prior to such authorized catered event; 
(15)  The licensed beverage alcohol caterer will keep on file at his place of business, all beverage alcohol quantity/destination reports, local catering event permits and all other documents, records and reports required by Georgia Law and other department of revenue regulations for a time period prescribed by those laws and regulations; 
(16)  The licensed beverage alcohol caterer is required to notify sponsors of authorized catered events of the authority of the state revenue commissioner or his agents to enter upon the premises which is the site of an authorized catered event for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of these regulations and all other laws and regulations pertaining to the sale, possession and dispossession and distribution of beverage alcohol; 
(17)  Delivery of malt beverages and wine by a licensed beverage alcohol caterer shall be made only in connection with an authorized catered event. Delivering not meeting the requirements as set forth in these regulations shall be a violation of these regulations and department of revenue regulations governing the transportation of beverage alcohol by retail dealers and alcohol pouring licensees and shall be cause for the suspension or revocation of licensee's beverage alcohol licenses and forfeiture of licensee's bond or both by the state revenue commissioner. All beverage alcohol transported in violation of these regulations shall be declared contraband and subject to seizure by the state revenue commissioner or his agents; 
(18)  Vehicles used by a licensed beverage alcohol catering establishment for the transportation and delivery of beverage alcohol in connection with an authorized catered event will be marked only with the state license number two inches high and one inch wide. No other wordage or advertisement pertaining to the catering service will be permitted; 
(19)  While transporting and delivering beverage alcohol in connection with an authorized catered event, the licensee or the employee of the licensed beverage alcohol catering establishment shall have in his possession a copy of the establishment's valid state beverage alcohol license, a copy of the establishment's valid local beverage alcohol catering license, a copy of the establishment's valid local beverage alcohol catering event permit from the local governing authorities in the jurisdiction the event is being held along with the department of revenue alcohol beverage catering quantity/destination report; 
(20)  Delivery of all beverage alcohol by a licensee to an authorized catered event must be made in unbroken containers. Subsequent serving of all beverage alcohol at the authorized catered event must be by the drink; and 
(21)  A person who willfully, knowingly, and unlawfully sells, furnishes, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person who is not of lawful drinking age, knowing that such person will soon be driving a motor vehicle, or who knowingly sells, furnishes, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication, knowing that such person will soon be driving a motor vehicle, may become liable for injury or damage caused by or resulting from the intoxication of such minor or person when the sale, furnishing, or serving is the proximate cause of such injury or damage. 
(e)  Specific land uses within the arts and entertainment overlay district. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the city clerk is authorized to issue a license for ancillary alcohol sales for on-premise consumption to establishments meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Located in the arts and entertainment overlay district, as depicted on the official zoning map and defined in official zoning ordinance, section 645; 
(2)  Pay a fee of $500.00 annually; 
(3)  Which meet all other license application requirements set forth in this chapter, including having a current occupation tax certificate; 
(4)  An establishment where the sale, service or consumption of alcohol is not the primary business of the licensed establishment, specifically limited to those land uses outlined in the zoning ordinance under section 645.3 (1); 
(5)  Any wine and/or beer served on the premises shall only be served by an employee of the establishment otherwise authorized to serve alcoholic beverages under this article; 
(6)  No customer of an art shop shall consume more than two six-ounce servings of wine or two 12-ounce servings of beer during a three-hour period or four six-ounce servings of wine or four 12-ounce servings of beer within a single business day; 
(7)  The serving of wine and/or beer in an art shop shall be subject to all of the provisions related to the service of other alcoholic beverages under this article, including, but not limited to, the prohibition of serving wine or beer to anyone under 21 years of age or to anyone intoxicated; 
(8)  In no event shall a licensee's total annual gross alcohol revenue exceed ten percent of the licensee's gross annual revenues; 
(9)  Establishment shall also be required to obtain a state alcohol license for consumption on the premises and except as expressly provided for herein, shall be subject to all state and local laws, rules and requirements, including licensing requirements and the other provisions of this chapter related to the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises; and 
(10)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit an establishment from serving food, provided that it meets all of the requirements provided in this Code and is properly permitted. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1; Amd. of 9-10-2012(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. Of 1-20-2017, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 6-342. - Reports. 
(a)  Each licensee under this section shall as a condition of maintaining such license, file with the clerk within 30 days after the end of each calendar year evidence of financial responsibility required under subsection 6-305(1). 
(b)  The statements shall be confidential and shall not be open for public inspection except as otherwise required by law. Said documentation shall be used solely by the city for determination of whether the licensee remains qualified to hold its license. 
Failure to timely file such documentation including evidence of financial responsibility shall be a violation of a city ordinance punishable by a civil penalty of up to $500.00 and cause for suspension or revocation of the license granted hereunder. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 6-343. - "Brown bag" and "bring your own bottle" practices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to bring alcoholic beverages into any restaurant or similar eating facility within the city limits or for any person to permit such. It shall also be unlawful for any establishment to charge a "corkage fee" or wine bottle opening fee or similar. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2012(2), § 1) 
ARTICLE IV. - BREWPUBS 

Sec. 6-344. - Brewpub definition, regulation, excise tax and administration. 
(a)  (1)  Brewpub. An eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured including for consumption on premises. "Eating establishment" as used in this section is limited to any "restaurant" as defined under this chapter, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full service kitchen prepared to serve food every hour the establishment is open and derives at least 60 percent of gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared food. 
(2)  Restrictions. Free sampling of malt beverages is prohibited. Market prices must be charged, no "happy hour" discounts, no "buy one get one free" or other "specials." No retail package sales for consumption off premises are permitted except as specified below. In addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brewpub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers. All regulations of this chapter must be complied with except as expressly stated otherwise. 
(b)  A brewpub license is $500.00 per annum, and requires first obtaining a city and state malt beverages pouring license. 
(c)  A brewpub license authorizes the holder to manufacture on the premises no more than 5,000 barrels of malt beverage in a calendar year, total, for 1) consumption on premises in draft form, 2) for wholesalers, and 3) for retail package sales in sealed bottles known as "growlers," combined. "Growler" means a glass bottle holding between 12—68 oz. filled by a licensee or employee from a barrel, cask, tank, or keg with malt beverage manufactured on the licensed premises. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. 
(d)  Distribution of malt beverages produced by a brewpub to a wholesaler is permitted, within the 5,000 barrels above. Under no circumstances shall such malt beverages be sold by a brewpub licensee to a person holding a retail consumption dealer's license or a retailer's license for the purpose of resale. 
(e)  There is levied an excise tax on all malt beverages produced by a brewpub at $6.00 per half barrel (15½ gallons) and $12.00 per barrel (31 gallons). Such tax shall be paid to the city by the 20 th of each month for the preceding month's production. A late payment penalty of ten percent of the tax otherwise due shall be added to the amount due for any payment not received by the due date. 
(f)  Administration. 
(1)  The city clerk or designee is authorized to establish procedures for administering this chapter, including forms, requirements, procedures and schedules for financial audits or inspections of books and records of any establishment licensed under this section. 
(2)  Every brewpub shall file a monthly report with the city by the 20 th of each month, on the state forms per Ga. Comp. R. & Regs, setting forth all malt beverages produced during such month, to include beginning and ending inventories. Such brewpub shall also indicate the proper tax remittance for such production. Failure to properly complete or submit the required reports shall subject the licensee to a late filing penalty of $25.00 for each deficient reporting period. 
(Amd. of 12-11-17, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment of Feb. 26, 2007 repealed the former art. II, §§ 10-31—10-53, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 12, 1994. 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; use of rooms in roadhouses, public dance halls, etc., for immoral purposes, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-61. 

Sec. 10-31. - Findings, public purposes. 
(a)  Findings. The mayor and council have reviewed the experiences of other counties and municipalities regarding the undesirable secondary effects of sexually explicit businesses and businesses allowing nudity, especially where alcohol is permitted. These effects include increased crime and neighborhood blight. The mayor and council reasonably believe those experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city. The mayor and council note the well-known and self-evident adverse conditions and occurrences generally associated with adult entertainment establishments and the commercial exploitation of human sexuality. Relying on said evidence, it is the finding of the mayor and council that adult entertainment establishments result in an increase in criminal behavior and create undesirable community conditions. However, the mayor and council also recognize that lawful adult entertainment implicates First Amendment protection, and they have no desire to censor or control the content of protected speech. The mayor and council have neither any animosity toward nude entertainment nor any desire to chill protected expression. 
(1)  The mayor and council and police chief have carefully reviewed relevant portions of voluminous documentation provided by the Georgia Municipal Association legal counsel, including, without limitation, information from the December, 1994, St. Cloud Adult Use Regulation Report; a detailed 18-page report from Dr. Richard McCleary in the 2005 case involving Starship Enterprise of Atlanta, Inc, versus Fulton County and others; a 26-page report from Dr. Richard McCleary in a 2005 case in Texas, involving Reliable Consultants, Inc., versus City of Kennedale, Texas; relevant portions of a very lengthy 2003 report from Dr. Richard McCleary to the Greensboro, North Carolina, city attorney; a detailed April, 1997, report from appraiser Peter Malin to the City of Dallas city attorney; and certain documentation from a 2002 criminal case involving the State of Tennessee and various individuals regarding an adult entertainment business in Chattanooga, Tennessee. All this documentation reviewed by the police chief and the mayor and council is being attached to the minutes of the meeting approving this ordinance and is officially made a part of the record. The mayor and council also recognize that case law has made findings in these issues; additionally the mayor and council rely on their own wisdom and common sense. The mayor and council reasonably rely on the evidentiary foundation set forth in City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S.Ct. 1382, 146 L.Ed.2d 265, (2000) and in Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 106 S.Ct. 925 to the effect that secondary effects are caused by the presence of even one adult entertainment establishment in a given neighborhood. 
(2)  An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, public indecency, public solicitation, violent crime, prostitution, exploitation of young women, drug use, drug trafficking, and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other counties and municipalities that permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly where there are two or more such businesses in close proximity, and particularly with such businesses that serve alcohol. The mayor and council have a substantial interest in guarding against these undesirable secondary effects; in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare; and in preserving and protecting the quality of life in the city. The mayor and council also wish to guard against public indecency, which is a crime per O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8, and to guard against certain sexual contact provided for money, which is a crime per O.C.G.A. § 16-6-16. 
(3)  The council also finds that the increase in criminal behavior which accompanies adult entertainment establishments causes undesirable community conditions, particularly where there are two or more such businesses in close proximity, and particularly with such businesses that serve alcohol. Conditions experienced in other counties and municipalities are depression of property values in neighborhoods surrounding the adult entertainment establishment, neighborhood blight, an increased burden on and expenditure for law enforcement, and an increase in the criminal case load in the judicial system due to a greater number of arrests because of the above-mentioned crime problems. The mayor and council note a substantial governmental interest in regulating this and any atmosphere conducive to violence, sexual harassment, public intoxication, prostitution, spread of sexually transmitted diseases, and other negative effects. The mayor and council wish to protect against neighborhood blight and downgrade of surrounding neighborhoods due to the problems and undesirable behavior associated with adult entertainment establishments. 
(4)  The mayor and council find that the above-stated undesirable secondary effects will result in the city unless these regulations are imposed to limit such adverse affects. These regulations are meant to minimize the adverse effects in order to preserve quality of life; to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and morals; and to maintain the integrity of this community, especially in residential areas and areas which have a church, school, daycare center, governmental building, library, civic center, public park, or playground. These regulations are meant to promote these legitimate public and governmental interests in a way that will not infringe upon the constitutional right of freedom of expression. The mayor and council are not trying to preclude adult entertainment, but just attempting to regulate adult entertainment establishments to protect the public from the negative secondary effects. The mayor and council have narrowly tailored these regulations to combat the negative secondary effects and protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to allow reasonable avenues of protected First Amendment communication. The mayor and council have found no less restrictive alternative to these regulations that would adequately protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The restrictions posed by these regulations are no greater than is essential to the furtherance of the government interest stated above. 
(b)  Purposes. The purpose of this section is to replace the previous adult entertainment regulations so as to regulate adult entertainment establishments to prevent increases in criminal activity and undesirable community conditions. The city notes that since the initial ordinance was passed, the law governing such regulations has evolved to the point that it is now necessary for the mayor and council to update its regulations to ensure that they comport in all respects to the law. Adult entertainment establishments are erotic dance establishments and the businesses defined at section 10-36 below. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
Erotic dance establishment. An adult entertainment establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers; dancers wearing lingerie; dancers wearing panties, thongs, or g-strings and pasties; go-go dancers; strippers; or similar entertainers whose performances are distinguished or characterized by the display of partial nudity and/or exposure of specified anatomical areas. The performance of specified sexual activities is prohibited. The display of specified anatomical areas is prohibited. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted in the ten years prior to the date of application for a license or permit under this section of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or of any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12; or convicted of any offense in any state which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture. The city may take into account the length of time since any conviction, efforts by the applicant or employee to rehabilitate himself, number of such convictions by applicant or employee, and status of any sentence or probation imposed upon applicant or employee for any such felony or crime involving moral turpitude. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment. 
Church. An institutional building or buildings wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious congregation or body organized to sustain public worship, including synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such places of worship. 
Civic center. A multipurpose governmental or quasi-governmental facility operated primarily for the public good and benefit, often used by community organizations and for recreational purposes for the public good. 
Daycare center. A structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article, the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
Governmental building. Building owned by any local, state, or federal government. 
Library. Building open to the general public which contains a collection of books. 
License. Authorization by the city to operate an adult entertainment establishment. This license is sometimes referred to as an adult entertainment establishment license. 
Licensing officer. The city employee in charge of granting, denial, or suspension of all licenses and permits under this section. Either the city manager or his/her designee. 
Licensee. Holder of a current, valid adult entertainment establishment license. 
Obscene. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, as written on July 1, 2006. 
Partial Nudity. A state of undress wherein only specified anatomical areas are covered. 
Permit. Authorization by the city after approval by the licensing officer for a person to be an employee of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Public place. All outdoor places owned by or open to the general public and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls, whether or not limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, and whether or not an admission charge is levied. 
Public playground. An open space or courtyard for recreation that is open to the general public. 
Public park. A lot, with grass and trees, for recreation that is open to the general public. 
School. A building, publicly or privately owned, used for teaching or giving instruction in any subject to pupils of the school. 
Sexual conduct. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3 and described in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41(a), as written on July 1, 2006. 
Sexually explicit nudity. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, as written on July 1, 2006. 
Specified sexual activities. This means sexually explicit nudity and sexual conduct. 
Specified anatomical areas. This means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; cleft of the buttocks; or the uncovered nipple or areola of the female breast or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola; or human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-33. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  Advertising without a license prohibited. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Gross receipts report required. Reserved. 
(c)  Licensee to maintain employee list. A licensee shall maintain a list of the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. Said list shall be subject to inspection by authorized city or state officials or employees upon reasonable notice for reasonable cause. Ex-employees' names shall not be removed from the list until two years have elapsed from the last date of employment. 
(e)  Dancers and employees under age 21 prohibited. No licensee shall employ or contract with a person to be a dancer or other employee who is under the age of 21 years. 
(f)  Admission of minors prohibited. No person under eighteen years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(g)  Operating hours. An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on any Sunday or on Christmas Day. 
(h)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. No licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or allow the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(i)  Display of licenses required. A licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this section. 
(j)  Height requirements for dancing platforms. All dancing at any erotic dance establishment shall occur on a platform used solely for dancing which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(k)  Distance from patrons to be maintained. No dancing at any erotic dance establishment shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. This distance shall be ensured with either a physical barrier at floor level or via a painted line on the platform ten feet from the edge thereof. 
(l)  Touching prohibited. No dancer at any erotic dance establishment shall touch any patron, and no patron shall touch any dancer. 
(m)  Gratuities prohibited. No patron at any erotic dance establishment shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(n)  Soliciting of gratuities prohibited. No dancer at any erotic dance establishment shall solicit any pay or gratuity from a patron. 
(o)  Lighting requirements. All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five tenths foot-candles per square foot. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A) 
Sec. 10-34. - Prohibited activities. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall display or expose or permit the display of sexually explicit nudity or specified sexual activities or materials or videos depicting such. Nor shall the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas be permitted in a public place. All adult entertainment business operations shall be inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered or mirror tinted so that the inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A) 
Sec. 10-35. - Licensing. 
In or upon any premises within the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, association, entity, partnership, or corporation to engage in, conduct, or carry on any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this section without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. The fee for the annual license shall be $400.00. A new license must be applied for and purchased annually. There shall be no renewal of licenses. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A) 
Sec. 10-36. - Operation of premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an erotic dance establishment or other adult entertainment establishments defined hereinbelow unless such business has a current, valid license, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. Each of these adult entertainment establishments shall constitute a separate adult entertainment business. In the event the establishment maintains booths, cubicles, rooms or similar (collectively "booths") for the use of its patrons, no doors are permitted on the booths, illumination must meet or exceed three and five-tenths foot-candles per square foot, and the booth interiors must be fully visible from the entrance to the premises. Each booth shall have a permanently open entranceway and view not less than two feet eight inches wide and not less than seven feet high, which may not be closed by any door, curtain, or other partition which would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring any person in the viewing room. This entranceway and view shall open directly to an adjacent public room where the front counter is located or to a main aisle so that a person located in the front room or main aisle is able to view any person or persons located in any viewing rooms in order to monitor compliance with this article. 
Specified sexual activities in booths or on the premises generally are prohibited. No more than one chair (couches are prohibited) is allowed in a booth. Holes in interior walls to facilitate specified sexual activities are prohibited in booths and on the premises generally. Each booth shall be separated from adjacent booths and any nonpublic areas by a wall. All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet, and be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. The other adult entertainment establishments are defined and regulated as follows: 
(a)  Adult bookstore. An adult bookstore is herein defined as (i) an establishment having as a portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and which has a display area or section of such materials of more than ten square feet or (ii) an establishment which derives five percent or more of its gross sales from the sale or rental of such materials. 
(b)  Adult motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons which, on a regular, continuing basis, is used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(c)  Adult motion picture mini-theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons which, on a regular, continuing basis, is used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(d)  Adult motion picture arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, typically in a booth, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(e)  Adult video store. An establishment having as its stock in trade video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material; or an establishment which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos or movies or other reproductions which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(f)  Escort bureau/introduction service. Any business, agency, or person(s) who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons whose practice is to engage in specified sexual activities or to expose their and/or their patrons' specified anatomical areas, who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment, or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(g)  Massage parlor. A business used for commercial entertainment, sometimes also described as a "bath house," where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or to allow personal contact by employees, devices, or equipment or by personnel provided by the establishment which involves specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A) 
Sec. 10-37. - Admission of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, entity, partnership or corporation to admit or permit the admission of minors within an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-38. - Location requirements. 
(1)  Location requirements specified. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(a)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land inside or outside the city which is zoned for residential uses or purposes; 
(b)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land inside or outside the city upon which a church, school, day care center, governmental building, library, civic center, public park, or playground is located; 
(c)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land inside or outside the city upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(d)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land inside or outside the city upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  In the same building as another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(2)  How to measure distances. For the purpose of this subsection, distance shall be by airline measurement between the closest property line on which the adult entertainment establishment is located to the closest property line on which the other use is located. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-39. - Adult entertainment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than 21 years of age and be in good health and mentally competent. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined above. Any employee who is convicted of a crime described in the definition of good moral character shall not work at any adult entertainment establishment premises for a period of ten years from the date of such conviction unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. The terms "employed at the adult entertainment establishment premises" and "work at any adult entertainment establishment premises" shall include work done or services performed while in the scope of employment by an adult entertainment establishment off the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work at an adult entertainment establishment, he/she shall file a notice with the licensing officer of the intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and must receive a permit for such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such relevant information as the licensing officer reasonably requires consistent with subsection (a) above, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. The notice of intended employment shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $150.00 or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. Upon the issuance of a permit showing approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. Approval and a permit shall be granted if the qualifications defined in subsection (a) above are met. Approval shall be denied if said qualifications are not met. An appeal from such decision shall be governed by section 10-47 of this article. Approval or denial must be within 15 days of application. If such permit approval or denial is not issued within 15 days, the employee seeking the permit may begin engaging in the expressive activity for which the permit is sought without such a permit. 
(c)  Permit suspension, permit revocation. Violation of this section, any other sections of the city Code, any other ordinances of the city and/or laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, shall subject an employee to permit suspension or permit revocation. An appeal from such a decision shall be governed by section 10-47 of this article. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this section, independent contractors of adult entertainment establishments shall be considered employees and must comply with employee permit requirements, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-40. - Application for license. 
Requirements. Any person, association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the licensing officer. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable regulatory fee of $400.00 shall be paid to the clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this section. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the mayor at the time such application is submitted. 
Application is not a license. The mere application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of, or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-41. - Application contents. 
(a)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's true full name (including names of officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities) and any other names ever used; 
(2)  The applicant's present address and telephone number (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities); 
(3)  The applicant's previous addresses and the dates of residence at each address for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities); 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities) is at least 21 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities) height, weight, eye and hair color, and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two color photographs of the applicant (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities) at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months, which clearly show the applicant's face; 
(7)  A statement of the business, occupation and employment history of the applicant (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities) for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(8)  A statement of the business license history of the applicant (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities) and whether said persons or the corporate applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state, or territory, has had a license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended within the previous five years, the reasons therefor, and the business activities and/or occupations subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. The same type of information should be set forth for a limited liability company. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address, and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation or limited liability company, the provisions of this subsection 10-41(a)(9) pertaining to corporations and limited liability companies shall apply. The applicant entity shall designate one of its officers, members, or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this section, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner(s) and lessor(s) of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  If the applicant (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities), is not of good moral character as defined in this section, a complete description of any such crime must be provided, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction, and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(12)  The applicant's (including officers, members, directors, shareholders and/or partners of business entities) fingerprints; 
(13)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the properly recorded trade name must be provided. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant must provide a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation; trade name affidavit, if any; and most recent annual report, if any. The same type of information should be set forth for a limited liability company; 
(14)  A statement that all activities to be carried on in the establishment shall comply with all applicable legal requirements; 
(15)  Addresses of the premises to be licensed; 
(16)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal rights; 
(17)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the acreage of the proposed site, the location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to the closest church, school, day care center, library, civic center, public park, playground, governmental building, other adult entertainment establishment; and 
(b)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  The applicant, if the applicant is an individual; 
(2)  The managing or general partner, if a partnership; 
(3)  The president of the corporation, if a corporation; 
(4)  The chief administrative official, if any other organization or association. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-42. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation or limited liability company or other organization, shall personally appear before the licensing officer of the city and produce proof that the nonrefundable regulatory fee in the amount of $400.00 has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. - 10-43. Investigation. 
Time limits. The city shall have 30 days from filing of the application to investigate the application and the background of the applicant and to grant or deny the license. Failure to act in such time shall allow the applicant to begin engaging in the express activity for which the license is sought. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-44. - Findings for granting a license. 
Upon completion of the investigation, the licensing officer shall grant a license if it finds that: 
(a)  The required fee has been paid; 
(b)  The application complies in all respects with the requirements hereof; 
(c)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(d)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(e)  The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders of the corporation; any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the members, if the applicant is a limited liability company or other organization; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, is of good moral character as defined in this section; 
(f)  As of the date of the application, the applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied, suspended, or revoked for cause by this city or any other city, county, state, or territory; 
(g)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business and the operation of the business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, and fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(h)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(i)  The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders of a corporation; or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the members if the applicant is a limited liability company or other organization; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has/have not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities or exposure of specified anatomical areas as defined in this section to be committed in violation of this Code or any city ordinances and/or the laws of any county or state and/or the United States. 
(j)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and every day thereafter, there will be a person of good moral character as defined in this section on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(k)  The proposed premises are not located in violation of the requirements of this section; 
(l)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this section or any other laws, ordinances, codes, or regulations of the city, State of Georgia, or the United States; and 
(m)  Any other reasonable and relevant inquiry directly related to these regulations reasonably deemed necessary by the city to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city and the preservation of its neighborhoods and quality of life has been made and the results of the inquiry demonstrate the granting of the license will not threaten the health, safety, welfare, or quality of life of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-45. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  Specific persons prohibited. No license provided for by this section shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes or property taxes for the business or property at that location; 
(2)  Any applicant who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors, or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any limited liability company or other organization, partnership, or association, any of whose members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any applicant employing, assisted by, or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; and 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold a business license and/or conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia, or the city. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-46. - Other conditions. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, defined based on legal precedent as one adult entertainment establishment per 5,000 citizens, no new licenses shall be issued. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-47. - Appeal of applicant from license or permit refusal, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Clerk to notify applicant. If the city licensing officer, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this section, or if a license or permit is suspended or revoked, he/she shall notify the city clerk ("clerk") of such action. The clerk shall within ten days notify the applicant/licensee/permittee by certified mail of such action. Any applicant/licensee/permittee who is denied a license or permit or whose license is suspended or revoked may appeal such to the council by filing a written appeal with the clerk within 30 days of receipt of the notice of the action. 
(b)  Appeal to contain certain information. The appeal shall be delivered to the clerk and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the action, and the date of receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the relief requested of the council, and the name and address of the appellant. 
(c)  Appeal to appear on council agenda. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than 15 nor more than 45 days after receipt of the appeal. 
(d)  Initial council action. When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the clerk shall give the appellant certified mail notice of placement of the hearing on the agenda. The notice shall advise the appellant of the names of witnesses who may appear and of the appellant's right to cross examine the witnesses and to call his/her own witnesses. The council may in its discretion appoint a hearing officer to preside over the hearing in a judicial capacity. 
(e)  Council to hear appeal; render decision. When the clerk has scheduled an appeal before the council, at the scheduled time and date the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the appellant and from competent witnesses. All witnesses shall be subject to examination and cross examination. The council may sustain, overrule, or modify the action appealed. The mayor and council shall confine their analysis to whether this section has been complied with and shall not make a specific determination as to whether there has been conduct which is obscene, indecent, or lewd in violation of state law. The action of the council shall be final, unless the appellant files a petition for certiorari to the superior court within 30 days of the decision of the council. 
(f)  Hearing officer. Any hearing officer appointed pursuant to the discretionary procedure set out in this section may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear relevant testimony under oath, and call witnesses as the hearing officer may reasonably deem advisable. 
(g)  Rules of evidence. The council and any hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this section. 
(h)  Hearing officer recommendation. Within a time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is completed, any hearing officer shall submit a written recommendation to the council. Such recommendation shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions, and recommendations. Such recommendation shall be filed with the clerk and shall be considered a public record. A copy shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant within one business day after it is filed with the clerk. Copies shall be given to the city manager and the city police chief. 
(i)  Council to consider any recommendation of the hearing officer. The clerk shall place any such recommendation on the agenda of the next regular council meeting, occurring not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the recommendation is filed, and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(j)  Council to act on hearing officer's recommendation. The mayor and council shall confine their analysis to whether this section has been complied with and shall not make a specific determination as to whether there has been conduct which is obscene, indecent, or lewd in violation of state law. The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's recommendation in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it shall decide the case upon a review of the entire record. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-48 - Annual licenses and permits. 
Licenses and permits for adult entertainment establishments shall be applied for annually. The licensee or permittee must meet all applicable requirements of this section. The application fee for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be $400.00. The application fee for the adult entertainment permit shall be $150.00. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-49. - Nontransferability of license or permit. 
(a)  Sale, transfer of licenses prohibited. No adult entertainment establishment license or permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a licensee or permittee or by operation of law. Any purported sale; transfer; assignment; or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall constitute a voluntary surrender of such license or permit, and such license or permit shall thereafter be null and void. 
(b)  Exceptions in partnership arrangements. If the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and, in such case, the license, upon notification to the city clerk shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(c)  Corporations and limited liability companies. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation or limited liability company shall be deemed terminated and void if any of the outstanding stock or membership interests thereof is/are sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of a license or if any of the stock or membership interests authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued or sold, transferred, or assigned, unless an existing shareholder or membership interest holder acquires all the sold, transferred, or assigned shares or interests. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-50. - Location and/or name change. 
(a)  Location change. No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee of $100.00 to cover costs of processing and investigating the change of location has been deposited with the clerk and written approval has been obtained from the city manager and the building inspector after their relevant investigation including but not limited to regarding distance requirements. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations contained in all city ordinances, laws, and regulations have been met. The city shall have 30 days to make such determination. Failure to make such determination in a timely manner shall be deemed approval. 
(b)  Name change. No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than the licensee's name and the name of the business as specified on the license. 
(c)  Building Expansions. Any application for an extension or expansion of the premises where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require an investigation as provided for by section 10-43 of this article and shall comply with all other provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-51. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this section shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-52. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to this section shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. The city may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin the operation of an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this section. In addition, violation of any provision of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license or permit granted hereunder. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 10-53. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee or licensee's designated representative shall make compliance inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record the findings of the inspections on a form supplied by the licensing officer. All licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Amd. of 2-26-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment of July 10, 2017, repealed and reenacted ch. 14 to read as herein set out. Formerly, ch. 14 pertained to animals and derived from the Code of 1991, §§ 10-101, 20-101(D, E); Amd. of August 22, 1988, §§ A—I, and Amd. of January 8, 2001, § 1, and Amd. of July 8, 2002. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Madison Animal Control Regulations." 
(Amd. of 7-8-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to minimize health hazards of animals, and to provide a more healthy atmosphere in which the citizens may enjoy their pursuits and rights in their individual properties. 
(Amd. of 7-8-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-3. - Definitions. 
The following, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any domestic animal or livestock unattended or not cared for in excess of 36 hours. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance, appropriate to the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid or contaminated food is not adequate. 
Adequate shelter means protective cover appropriate for the species and adequate space to maintain the animal in good health and prevent pain, suffering or a significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with three to four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It shall be clean, dry and compatible with current weather and age, size, species and condition of the animal. The structure shall be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure comfortably. Adequate shelter must be compatible with the number of animals on the property. 
(1)  Adequate shelter includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Sufficient coverage and insulation to protect from extreme hot and cold temperatures; 
b.  Sufficient protection from the elements to keep the animal dry; 
c.  Sufficient shade and ventilation to prevent overheating and/or dehydrating; and 
d.  Adequate bedding or resting area suitable for the animal. 
(2)  Materials not suitable for shelters include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Inadequately insulated containers; 
b.  Plastic kennels or airline-type animal shipping crates; 
c.  Metal or plastic drums; 
d.  Abandoned or parked vehicles; 
e.  Uncovered porches or decks; 
f.  Lean-tos; 
g.  Any other structure that fails to provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate veterinary care means care from or under the direction of a veterinarian and necessary to maintain health, or to prevent suffering from: 
(1)  Infections; 
(2)  Parasites; 
(3)  Disease; or 
(4)  Any other condition/injury where withholding or neglecting to provide such care would: 
a.  Endanger the health or welfare of the animal; or 
b.  Promote the spread of diseases. 
Adequate water means potable water in adequate supply. 
Adult means a person at least 18 years of age. 
Animal means any vertebrate, domestic and wild, male and female, singular or plural. 
Animal control officer means an individual selected by a local government per O.C.G.A. 4-8-22 to aid in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Animal control unit means the municipal animal control unit, a department of the city. 
Animal establishment means an animal facility and services location, including but not limited to pet dealer, kennel, grooming shop, auction, or performing animal exhibition; any facility operated, owned or maintained by a humane society, animal welfare society or other nonprofit for the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals; or other facility engaged in handling animals, excluding licensed vets and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
Animal shelter means a facility operated by a government for impounding or caring for animals. 
Animal under restraint means: 
(1)  Any animal controlled within the property of its owner; 
(2)  Any animal secured by a leash with a collar, or enclosed by way of a fence or other enclosure; 
(3)  Any animal at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to the person's commands; or 
(4)  Any animal inside a vehicle driven or parked on the streets. 
At large means any animal not under control as provided in this chapter. 
Auction means any place where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions. 
Classified dog means a dog classified as a dangerous or vicious dog per this chapter. 
Certificate means a certificate issued at time of vaccination, by a licensed veterinarian, with the license number, name and address of the dog or cat's owner and date of vaccination. 
Cruelty means act, omission or neglect whereby pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no injury occurs; barking, growling, or showing of teeth shall not be sufficient to classify a dog dangerous; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet; provided, however, this shall not apply where death is caused by a dog working or training as a hunting, herding, or predator control dog. 
Dangerous Dog Control Law is O.C.G.A. 4-8-20 et seq., incorporated herein and made a part by reference. 
Dog means any member of the canine genus, including wolves. 
Domestic animals means: 
(1)  Cats, dogs, fowl (warm-blooded, feathered, flying or non-flying domesticated animal; some not permitted); 
(2)  Livestock (which means any animal that has hooves, some not permitted); 
(3)  Ferrets, rabbits, guinea pigs, or other animals recognized by the state as customarily and legally obtained and kept as a pet. Some not permitted. 
EAID means an electronic animal identification device: microchip or similar device. 
Feral means wild or untamed state due to birth or reversion to wild state from domestication. 
Fowl means any warm-blooded, feathered, flying or non-flying animal. 
Humane manner means care of an animal to include, but not be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food, and access to potable water at all times, consistent with normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Impoundment means taking physical control of an animal by animal control officer or others empowered to act by law or ordinance and subsequent transportation of such animal to the animal control facility. 
Kennel means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where dogs or cats are maintained for boarding, holding, training, or similar purposes for a fee or compensation. 
License means license issued by animal control upon annual registration for a dog. 
Livestock means hooved animal: bovine, swine, equine, fowl, sheep, goats, mules, other grazing animals, ratites, non-traditional livestock not limited to, ostriches, emus, rheas, farmed deer. Not all are permitted. 
Neutered means rendered permanently incapable of sexual reproduction, sterilized. 
Nuisance means animal which: 
(1)  Damages property other than the property of the owner; 
(2)  Soils, defiles or defecates on property other than the owner of the animal; however, if the owner immediately removes any feces, the animal shall not constitute a nuisance; 
(3)  Disturbs trash or other refuse, causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; 
(4)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise making, habitually or continually yowling, crying or screaming or as further described hereinafter; 
(5)  Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless animal is a guard dog actively performing duties while confined to property of the owner; or 
(6)  Chases vehicles or attacks other animals. 
Obstruction of officer means obstruction, interference, or hindrance of an animal control officer or law enforcement officer in the discharge of official duties. 
Owner means any person who owns, harbors, keeps and maintains, has possession of, or causes or permits an animal to be harbored or kept, who has an animal in their care, who shelters or provides food seven consecutive days or longer, or permits an animal to remain on or around their premises. "Owner" shall also include any person hired or acting as custodian of the animal for its owner. 
Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act or event in which performing animals are used, other than circuses. 
Pet means any animal kept by an owner, excluding livestock. 
Pet dealer means any person/entity who sells, offers to sell, exchanges, or offers for adoption dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles, or other customary pets. However, a person who sells only animals that he or she has produced and raised, not to exceed 30 animals a year, shall not be considered a pet dealer unless such person is licensed for a business by a local government or has a Georgia sales tax number. 
Private kennel means entity or person, excluding commercial kennels, pet dealers and vet clinics or hospitals, who keeps, harbors, or knowingly permits to remain on or about their premises, more than five dogs or five cats or more than a combination of five dogs and cats over four months of age. 
Proper enclosure means enclosure for keeping a dangerous or vicious dog on owner's property, securely confined indoors or outdoors in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and if the animal is enclosed in a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height, and the bottom of the fence shall prevent the animal's escape from either over, under, or through the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements, fresh food, and water. 
Running at large means domestic animal on public property, not under the control of a responsible person, or on property other than its owner's without the consent of such other owner. 
Sanitary means in clean, healthy condition; hygienic; consistent with normal requirements of the animal's living area, size, species, and breed. 
Secure enclosure means locked pen or structure to prevent a dog or cat in heat from escaping and preventing other animals entering. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of function of any bodily organ. 
Tethered means attached to a stationary object or pulley system by chain, rope, cable, or similar. 
Under control means animal secured on property of owner or another with consent. 
(1)  Confined by fence, pen, cage, or secure enclosure to the premises of its owner; or a vehicle. 
(2)  Secured by leash, chain or lead of sufficient strength to prevent escaping from premises of owner or vehicle. 
(3)  Under immediate physical control of owner; if a dog immediately heeds owner's verbal commands, it need not be leashed if within sight of owner and responds to verbal commands. 
Vaccination means inoculation by authorized person of specified dose of rabies vaccine which has the U.S. government license number approval stamp on the label of the vaccine container. 
Veterinarian or vet means any person who holds a license to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
Veterinary clinic or hospital means a clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
Wild and exotic animals means any wild animal, wildlife, vertebrate or invertebrate recognized by the state as wild animal, wildlife, exotic or hybrid or regulated in O.C.G.A. 27-5-5 irrespective of actual or asserted state of docility, domesticity, tameness or intended use and/or capable of causing severe injury by means of, venoms, poisons, toxins, constriction or bite, and includes without limitation any primate, raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, bear, wild rabbit, wild rodent and reptiles, including, but not limited to, crocodiles, alligators, snakes, caiman and gavials, and any other animal so designated by the animal control unit. Shall not include, psittaciformes, ferrets, miniature pigs, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, chinchilla, dogs, cats or llamas, any other animals recognized by the state as customarily and legally obtained and kept as a pet, or snakes that are exotic animals and are recognized as pets by Georgia (boa, python, etc.) less than eight feet. Some not permitted. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-4—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 14-31. - Enforcement responsibility. 
This chapter shall be enforced by animal control and city police. Animal control is authorized to employ any equipment it deems necessary to enforce this chapter, including, without limit, wire box traps. Animal control may, subject to conditions it may determine, lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals running at large. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-32. - Interference, obstruction of an officer. 
No person shall interfere with, hinder or prevent animal control or any other in the performance of duty or seek to release any animal in the custody of animal control. 
Obstruction of an officer includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Relocating, interfering with, or altering a device, equipment, item, or property used for animal control. 
(2)  Placing one's animal in or removing any animal confined in a cage used for animal control. 
(3)  Giving a false name, address, or date of birth to any officer, employee, or agent of city. 
(4)  Giving information with intent to mislead an officer, employee, or agent of city. 
(5)  Refusing to show proper identification where required. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-33. - Right of entry, animal control authority 
(a)  Animal control, police and other enforcement have authority to go on public or private property to investigate and seize and impound animals therein/thereon. 
(b)  They may use any force necessary to remove an animal in a closed vehicle. The operator of the vehicle may be charged with cruelty. No legal action may be had for such use of force. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-35. - Penalties for violations. 
Except as otherwise provided, a person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in this chapter. Every violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any person in violation of this chapter may be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment, as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. Each day a violation exists shall be a separate offense. The court may suspend the sentence on terms and conditions as it may prescribe for payment of a fine, for community service in lieu of fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution, or other condition. Where allowed by law, the court may prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on offender's premises, any animal for a period not to exceed maximum by state law for each offense, may order the violator to pay boarding fees and restitution for medical treatment and expenses incurred by city during investigation, and impose other sanctions allowed by law. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-36—14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-56. - Prerequisites for keeping. 
(a)  No one may own an exotic animal without a certificate of registration by the city. Some not permitted. 
(b)  Animal control shall issue a certificate of registration only if owner presents sufficient evidence of proper licensing by state or federal agencies with inspection report containing area of inspection. See housing requirements in O.C.G.A. 27-5-6. 
(c)  The owner shall notify animal control if the animal is moving out of the city. 
(d)  The owner shall register it within ten days of moving into the city. 
(e)  The owner shall not allow it at large and must immediately notify animal control of escape. 
(f)  The owner of an exotic that attacks a human must notify animal control immediately. 
(g)  The owner must notify animal control within 24 hours of transfer of ownership and provide name, address and telephone number of the new owner. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
ARTICLE IV. - FOWL AND LIVESTOCK, AND TOTAL NUMBER OF ALL DOMESTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-71. - Manner of keeping, total number domestic animals. 
Domestic animals are allowed only to the extent permitted in this article. All other livestock, poultry and fowl are prohibited. This prohibition includes, without limitation, pigs, hogs and other animals of the swine species, mules, hinnies, guineas, turkeys, ducks, and all other livestock, poultry and fowl other than horses, cattle, donkeys, sheep, goats and chickens. This prohibition includes not only keeping or raising, but also slaughtering. Slaughtering and processing any animals within the city is prohibited. A maximum of 12 domestic animals total is permitted. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-72. - Number of cats and dogs; acreage restrictions. 
(a)  Over three acres: six dogs, six cats. One and one half to three acres: five dogs, five cats. .75 to 1.49 acres: four dogs, four cats. Less than .75 acres: three dogs, three cats. However, for any dwelling unit in a multifamily development (e.g., apartment, condominium, townhome, mobile home park, duplex, or similar) it shall be unlawful to possess or keep more than two dogs and two cats. 
(b)  References to dogs and cats only refer to dogs and cats older than 12 weeks. A new litter shall be exempt from the provisions herein for 12 weeks from the date of birth. 
(c)  If it is determined that a person is in violation of this section, such person shall be allowed 30 days from notice of violation to cure same. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-73. - Number of livestock, chickens and small mammals; acreage restrictions, setbacks. 
(a)  Livestock. On lots of one and one half to ten acres, one horse, pony, donkey, sheep, goat, or mule is permitted per fenced pastured acre of land, for personal, non-commercial, purposes; each shall be kept on high ground with proper drainage. Stables (not enclosures or fences) shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner. 
(b)  Chickens. On lots of at least one and one half to ten acres, chickens (hens only, no roosters) may be kept for personal, non-commercial, purposes provided the following requirements are met: One chicken per one third acre of fenced pastured high ground shall be permitted, provided, however, the maximum number of chickens permitted is three total, or six if three to ten acres. The minimum setback of the chicken habitat shall be 100 feet from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner. 
(c)  Small mammals. On lots of at least one acre, small mammals housed outside such as rabbits, guinea pigs and other small mammals kept for personal, non-commercial, purposes may be permitted provided the following requirements are met: One small mammal per 1,000 square feet of high ground will be permitted, provided, however, the maximum number of mammals permitted is five per acre. The minimum setback of small mammal habitat from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner is 50 feet. 
(d)  Large acreage exception. On any property larger than ten acres, there are no restrictions as to the number of livestock that may be kept. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-74—14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VACCINATION AND LICENSING 

Sec. 14-81. - Required generally. 
(a)  No person shall have any dog or cat in the city unless vaccinated. 
(b)  Animal control shall maintain a record of all licenses and certificates issued. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-82. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats over four months shall be vaccinated against rabies and maintain proof of current vaccine by a licensed veterinarian, who will issue a metal tag and certificate approved by the state. Tags must be attached to collar or harness and worn at all times. Tags are not transferable. 
(b)  A dog or cat less than four months shall not be required to be vaccinated, but the dog or cat shall be confined to its owner's premises. 
(c)  Animal control may adopt other rabies regulations it deems necessary for protection of the public. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-83. - Vaccination procedure generally. 
Licensed vets may vaccinate dogs or cats against rabies, a metal tag, approved by the state, bearing the official serial number shall be provided by the vet to be attached to a suitable collar or harness. The vet shall furnish a certificate verifying the vaccination. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-84. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-85. - Health regulations incorporated. 
All current rules and regulations of the board of health and the state department of public health are incorporated in this chapter by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-86. - Misuse of tag. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination or city pet license tag to any dog or cat for which it is not issued, or to remove a tag or collar without the consent of its owner. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-87. - Registration—dog license. 
All dogs shall be subject to a registration fee, to be paid by July 1 each year. Should the owner fail to timely pay, a penalty will be assessed as set forth in the schedule of fees. A certificate of vaccination shall be required for registration. If there is a lapse in registration for a complete registration year, the owner is responsible for the registration penalty and must register by July 1 of the new year or the penalty will be doubled. Owner must provide animal control any changes in the registration year, i.e., change in ownership, animal death, moved out of city, etc. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-88—14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES—NUISANCE AND RESTRAINT 

Sec. 14-111. - Animal created nuisance. 
If an animal constitutes a nuisance, a proceeding to abate may be brought by the party aggrieved or the city. An animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity by the court to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered. 
(1)  Nuisance, generally. An animal which habitually barks, whines, howls, or causes other noise, which constitutes a continual repetitive noise for a half hour or more which a person in a residence can hear and distinguish from background ambient noise and can be identified as to its nature and source, or causes serious annoyance to a neighboring residence or interferes with the reasonable use or enjoyment of a neighbor's property, or is otherwise offensive is a violation. 
(2)  Nuisance, excrement. Failure to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal on property other than owner's own property is a nuisance. Owner, while not on their own property, shall have a means of pickup and removal of excrement. This section shall not apply to any animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal in police or rescue activities. 
(3)  Nuisance, dead animals. The owner shall remove a dead animal without delay to a place where it shall not be a nuisance or source of annoyance to any person. 
(4)  Nuisance, other. If an animal molests, attacks or interferes with persons on property other than owner's property, or chases vehicles or attacks other animals, the owner shall be in violation, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing duties on the premises of the owner. Any animal off premises which attacks or attempts to attack a human or domestic animal without provocation is a public nuisance and may be impounded except as provided in 14-115(g). 
(5)  A dog in heat may not be allowed to roam free. If outdoors, a dog in heat must either be under control of a responsible person or confined in a secure enclosure. 
(6)  A cat in heat may not be allowed to roam. If outdoors, it must be confined in a secure enclosure. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-112. - Maintenance of areas. 
The owner shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition, and free from unreasonably objectionable odor, all structures, pens, yards, and areas adjacent, wherein any animal is kept. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-113. - Adequate housing. 
It shall be unlawful to keep any domestic animal except as follows: 
(1)  Any housing or enclosure shall be well drained, free from accumulations of excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(2)  Excrement shall be disposed of as approved by the board of health. 
(3)  An enclosure for a dangerous or vicious dog shall comply with the section pertaining to such. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to chain, tie, fasten or otherwise tether the animal to dog houses, trees, fences, vehicles or other stationary objects as a means of confinement except that the animal may be temporarily confined by a tether while directly attended by its owner. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-114. - Confinement. 
(a)  Owners shall confine dog(s) within an adequate fence or enclosure or in a house, garage or other building, adequate to prevent the dog from running at large. Dogs may be tethered only temporarily and only while directly attended by their owner. 
(b)  When a dog is off the premises, it must be controlled by leash, however, it need not be leashed if it is within sight of its owner and immediately heeds its owner's verbal commands. The dog must be confined in a vehicle or tethered/ kenneled in the back of a moving vehicle which is properly secured. 
(c)  An owner shall prevent dogs or cats from becoming a danger to persons or property at any location, or trespassing upon another person's property without permission. 
(d)  An owner shall prevent a dog from running at large on the public places in the city. 
(e)  Every dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or a vet clinic or hospital or a kennel to prevent contact with another dog or cat, except intentional breeding. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for horses or any other type of animal, livestock or other fowl to run at large or be a menace or nuisance to neighbors or the public. 
(g)  Any animal in violation is subject to impoundment. 
(h)  It is unlawful to allow a dog or cat in any food store, restaurant or place where food is for sale except animals trained for the handicapped and law enforcement. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-115. - Rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  Every veterinarian shall report promptly to animal control all cases of rabies in animals treated by such vet, giving name and address of owner of any animals bitten by such rabid animal, if known. 
(b)  Any person who knows an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies, or knows an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report such to animal control. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, health department, physicians, hospitals or other persons or agencies gaining information that an animal or person has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies to notify animal control, which will impound the animal for observation for such time as reasonably necessary to determine if the animal has rabies. If it reasonably appears to animal control that the animal is not domesticated and does not have an owner, it may be destroyed in lieu of live capture. 
(d)  The heads of all animals having had rabies or which were suspected of having had rabies at the time of their deaths shall be submitted to animal control for examination. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-116—14-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOG CONTROL 

Sec. 14-131. - Dangerous and vicious dog control. 
(a)  Animal control. Animal control may administer and enforce this article. 
(1)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be dangerous or vicious, animal control shall make such investigations as necessary to determine if it is a dangerous or vicious dog, and is authorized to make such investigations and inquiries necessary to identify dangerous and vicious dogs and their owners. Law enforcement or animal control shall immediately impound a dog if believed the dog poses a threat to safety. 
(2)  When animal control classifies a dog as dangerous or vicious, animal control shall notify the dog's owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. Such notice shall be dated and deemed complete upon its mailing. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  The procedures in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime in this article. 
(2)  When a dangerous or a vicious dog is classified as such, animal control shall notify the owner in writing mailed within 72 hours of classification. 
(3)  The notice shall: 
a.  Be in writing and mailed by certified mail to owner's last known address; 
b.  Include a summary of the findings that formed the basis for the classification; 
c.  Dated and state that the owner, within 15 days after the date on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the determination of dangerous or vicious dog; 
d.  State that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the probate court; 
e.  State if a hearing is not requested, the determination will become effective on a date specified in the notice, after the last day to request a hearing; and 
f.  Include a form to request a hearing before the probate judge and provide instructions on mailing or delivering such request, (the mayor and council is not an "authority" which is "established for the jurisdiction" of hearing appeals as contemplated by O.C.G.A. 4-8-23, "classification of vicious or dangerous dog; notice; hearing; judicial review"). If an owner cannot be located within ten days of a determination of dangerous or vicious dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or euthanized, as determined by animal control. 
(4)  When the court receives a request for a hearing, it shall schedule such within 30 days after the request and notify the owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place, mailed to the owner at least ten days prior to hearing. At the hearing, the owner may testify and present evidence and the court shall receive such evidence and testimony it may find necessary to sustain, modify or overrule the determination. 
(5)  Within ten days after the hearing, the court shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination, and if dangerous or vicious dog, the notice shall specify effective date. Review of the decision shall be by Certiorari to superior court, costs to be paid per 5-3-22. 
(6)  A dog found, after opportunity for hearing as above, to have caused serious injury to a human more than once, shall be euthanized, however, no injury before July 1, 2012, shall count. 
(c)  Requirements. 
(1)  It is unlawful to have a dangerous or vicious dog without a registered dog certification. Certificates shall be nontransferable and only be issued to a person 18 or older. No more than one certificate per domicile. No owner may keep a dangerous or vicious dog within 200 yards of any aquatic center, church, convenience store, daycare, grocery store, hospital, humane society, library, nursing home, park, playground, restaurant, school, skilled nursing unit, or walking trail, due in part to these being frequented by children and senior citizens, and in some cases, food present. No certificate shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. No person shall own more than one vicious dog. No certificate for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: a serious violent felony defined in 17-10-6.1 or a felony of dog-fighting in 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals in 16-12-4; or a felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy in 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1, from time of conviction until two years after completion of sentence, nor any person residing with such person. 
(2)  Animal control shall issue a registered dog license to a qualified owner of such dog if the owner presents or animal control otherwise finds sufficient evidence on the property of: 
a.  An enclosure that securely confines the dog on the owner's property, indoors or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure that prevents the dog from leaving; 
b.  Posting of all entrances with clearly visible signs warning of dangerous or vicious dog with a symbol designed to inform small children of a dangerous or vicious dog. 
c.  In addition, that the dog has been surgically sterilized and micro-chipped. 
(3)  The owner of a vicious dog shall present a policy of liability insurance of at least $50,000 by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring against liability for any bodily injury or property damage inflicted by the dog. 
(4)  The owner shall notify animal control within 24 hours if the dog is unconfined, attacks a human, or dies. If a dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall provide animal control with name, address and phone number of the new owner. A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated unless to a governmental facility or vet to be euthanized. An owner who moves shall notify animal control immediately then register the dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days. An owner who moves into the City shall register the dog within 30 days. 
(5)  Animal control may make any inquiry deemed necessary to ensure compliance herewith. 
(6)  Certificates shall be renewed annually, after animal control verifies the owner is continuing to comply. 
Failure to renew within ten days of the anniversary is a violation. Owners shall pay an additional annual fee plus obtain an annual dog license per dog, per the schedule of fees. 
(d)  Restraint. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a dangerous dog to be unattended with minors or outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash not longer than six feet, and is under the restraint of a responsible person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal, or the dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate, or the dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog, subject to the limitations below. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a vicious dog to be unattended with minors or outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is in a closed and locked cage or crate or is muzzled and is restrained by a substantial chain or leash not longer than six feet, and is under the restraint of a responsible person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal. The muzzle shall prevent biting, but not cause injury to the dog or interfere with vision or respiration. 
(3)  A proper enclosure must keep a dog securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure that prevents the dog from escaping and prevents the entry of young children. It shall have secure sides and top, and, if the dog is within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured to prevent escape. It shall be at least 25 feet from the front door and any utility meter point to protect utility employees and the public. It shall provide protection from the elements. 
(4)  Training, hunting, herding ("working") exemption from dangerous dog restraint/leash requirement: the person working the dog must be the owner, and doing so per all DNR requirements including without limitation a valid hunting license. Working cannot take place off the property of the owner, unless with written permission and acknowledgement of danger of the dog by the landowner, and only with a dog that will instantly respond to verbal commands of the owner, including without limitation to immediately return to the owner. 
(e)  Confiscation. 
(1)  If any violation of this article, the dog shall be immediately confiscated by animal control or law enforcement. A refusal to surrender a dog shall be a violation. 
(2)  A confiscated dog shall be returned upon owner's compliance and payment of confiscation costs. If owner has not complied within 20 days of confiscation, said dog shall be destroyed humanely. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to return or euthanasia. 
(f)  Violations. 
(1)  The owner of a vicious dog who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. In addition to any confinement, for the second conviction a fine not less than $500.00 shall be imposed and for a subsequent conviction a fine not less than $750.00. 
(2)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed, for a second conviction a fine not less than $250.00 shall be imposed and for a subsequent conviction a fine not less than $400.00. 
(3)  If an owner who has a previous conviction for a violation of this article knowingly and willfully fails to comply with this article and the dog attacks or bites a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this article, they shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature, and punished by a fine not less than $1,000.00 or imprisonment not less than one year or both fine and prison. 
(4)  If an owner knowingly and willfully fails to comply with this article and the dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being under circumstances constituting a violation of this article, they shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature, and punished by a fine not less than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not less than one year or both fine and imprisonment. 
(5)  In addition to the penalties, the dog shall be immediately confiscated and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the board of health, then destroyed humanely. 
(6)  No owner of a dog shall be criminally liable for injuries to a human willfully criminally trespassing on owner's property. 
(g)  Exceptions. A dog that inflicts injury when used by law enforcement to carry out official duties shall not be a dangerous or vicious dog. Nor if injury was sustained by a person who: was committing a willful criminal trespass, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or had in the past tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting a crime. 
(h)  Previously classified. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as potentially dangerous shall after that date be classified as dangerous. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012, as dangerous or vicious shall on and after that date be classified as vicious. The owner of any dog referred to in subsection (a) shall comply with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2013. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-132—14-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CRUELTY, WELFARE AND MANNER OF KEEPING 

Sec. 14-161. - Prohibited treatment. 
It shall be unlawful, by commission or omission, to: 
(1)  Overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner or otherwise mistreat, any animal. 
(2)  Fail to provide an animal with proper food and veterinary care. 
(3)  Fail to provide access to a hard floor shelter of not less than three walls and a roof adequate to protect from all types of weather, 24 hours daily. 
(4)  Fail to provide potable water at all times. 
(5)  Abandon any animal. 
(6)  Poison any animal. 
(7)  Allow or promote any fight between animals. 
(8)  Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions. 
(9)  Keep or confine an animal in other than a humane manner. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-162. - Abandonment. 
It is unlawful to abandon any domestic animal or livestock, willingly permit such, or aid in the same. Such shall be punished with a fine up to the maximum allowable as well as restitution. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-163. - Adequate and sanitary housing. 
Animals permitted must be provided with adequate and sanitary housing: a solid floor, roof and at least three walls, and approved by the appropriate health officer. Adequate floor space must be provided. 
(1)  As to livestock, each animal enclosure no less than 150 square feet per animal. 
(2)  Whoever fails to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition, free from objectionable odor, all housing and adjacent areas where an animal is kept, shall be in violation, which is a nuisance likely to endanger the public health. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-164. - Manure. 
Every owner of livestock or fowl shall maintain a pit or container in which manure shall be placed pending removal, with covers sufficient to prevent flies and insects. Manure shall be removed before odorous or unsanitary. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-165. - Adequate drainage, etc. 
All places where animals are kept shall have adequate drainage to prevent standing water, and be regularly covered with lime or other suitable agents, approved by the health officer, to prevent odors. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-166. - Exemption. 
This article does not apply to killing animals raised to be hunted in compliance with state law. The killing of an animal for humane purpose or legitimate medical or scientific research is justifiable. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-167—14-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 14-191. - License and permit generally. 
(a)  No one shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining an occupational tax permit from Madison plus a license from the state. Both must be provided to animal control by 30 days. Animal control may inspect all premises where animals are kept. 
(b)  Renewals and new businesses must be per Madison and state regulations. 
(c)  Each facility location regulated by this article is a separate enterprise requiring a separate permit. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-192. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-193. - Revocation of permits 
(a)  Animal control may report any violations to the state, which may revoke any permit if the holder fails to comply with this chapter or any other applicable regulation. 
(b)  If a permit is revoked for cause animal control shall notify the owner of the reasons and time allowed for removal of animals. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-194. - Compliance with Code. 
(a)  An animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any dog or cat over four months unless vaccinated. 
(b)  Animal control may inspect all animals and the premises to ensure legal compliance. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-195—14-197. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-198. - Private kennel structures. 
It is unlawful for a private kennel structure to be nearer than 100 feet to the nearest property line. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-199, 14-200. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-201. - Animals as prizes forbidden. 
It is unlawful to offer a prize or give away any animal in any contest, raffle or lottery or as enticement for fund raising or entry into any place of business unless care and health are certified by a veterinarian licensed in the state. The validity of the certificate will extend for a maximum of seven days from issuance. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-202—14-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-221. - Health of animal. 
No animal shall pull a carriage unless in good health and meets the following: 
(1)  Weigh at least 1,000 pounds. 
(2)  No open sores or wounds or be lame or any other ailment, unless a veterinarian states in writing the animal shall not be harmed by the work. 
(3)  Hooves must be properly shod and trimmed. 
(4)  Groomed daily and no fungus, dandruff nor poor or dirty coat. 
(5)  Adequate flesh and muscle tone. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-222. - Working conditions. 
(a)  No animal shall be worked under any of the following: 
(1)  No carriage with ball bearing wheels with more than 12 people (including driver) or a carriage with bushing wheels with more than nine people (including driver). 
(2)  Total hours worked may not exceed eight in a 24-hour period, nor less than 15-minute rest between each trip. 
(3)  Between June 1 and August 31, total hours worked not to exceed six in a 24-hour period, nor less than a 15-minute rest every hour worked. 
(4)  Not move at a speed faster than a slow trot. 
(5)  No impairment of vision, other than normal blinders. 
(6)  No conditions that will impair the good health or physical condition. 
(b)  Animal control may order temporary suspension of operation upon a determination that special circumstances exist which jeopardize the animal. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-223. - Equipment and facilities. 
Equipment and facilities must meet the following: 
(1)  Harness and bit of standard construction, appropriate for the animal, properly fitted, padded, maintained, free of makeshift wire, rope and/or chain, oiled and cleaned to be soft at all times. 
(2)  Carriage properly lubricated and wheels spin freely. 
(3)  No driver may whip any animal with more than a light touch by a light whip. 
(4)  Adequate potable water in the working area and stables. 
(5)  Drivers shall keep stands sanitary. 
(6)  Stalls and stables must comply with the following: 
a.  Ceilings at least ten feet high from bedding, and bedding at least six inches deep and dry enough not to show wetness under pressure of animal's hoofs. Sharp surfaces shall not be permitted anywhere they may come in contact with animals. 
b.  Roofs free of leaks. 
c.  Each animal must have a stall large enough to turn around. 
d.  Food free of contamination. 
e.  Animal areas treated to exterminate and repel insects. 
f.  Ventilation provided. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-224. - Inspections. 
Animal control may inspect all animals, carriages, stalls and stables to ensure compliance. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-225—14-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - IMPOUNDMENT AND ADOPTION 

Sec. 14-246. - Impoundment authorized. 
(a)  Any animal at large or in violation of this chapter may be impounded in a humane manner. The owner must claim the animal within three business days, and is liable for all costs during impoundment, plus all other expenses of the city including, but not limited to, veterinarian fees. All costs shall be paid prior to the owner retrieving said animal, or upon disposal of such animal. 
(b)  The following may be impounded, but are not limited solely to these: 
(1)  Animals running at large, 
(2)  Animals, the ownership of which is unknown, 
(3)  Female dogs/cats in heat and off the premises of their owners, 
(4)  Animals which have bitten a person or animal, or been bitten by animal suspected of rabies, 
(5)  Dogs/cats not vaccinated for rabies. 
(6)  Dogs/cats which have strayed from the premises of their owners. 
(7)  Dogs/cats suspected of having rabies; and 
(8)  Unconfined dogs/cats in quarantine areas. 
(c)  If an animal has not been reclaimed within three business days, it shall become the property of animal control, which may convey ownership to any responsible person on conditions animal control may prescribe, or may humanely destroy such animal. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-247. - Entry on private property. 
Animal control may follow an animal at large onto private property. No injunction, action or claim for damages may be brought against animal control, its agents or the city with respect to action herein contemplated. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-248. - Notice to owner. 
Animal control shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner the animal has been impounded, how the animal may be reclaimed, that the animal shall become property of animal control and be adopted out or destroyed. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-249. - Notice of proposed destruction. 
Following impound, animal control shall give the owner five days' notice of proposed destruction by certified letter, return receipt requested. If no timely response, the animal shall become city property and may be disposed of. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-250. - Holding animals due to quarantine or evidence. 
Animal control may refuse to release any animal impounded for rabies or contagious disease quarantine or for use as evidence for such time period as the animal control may determine. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-251. - Destruction. 
Animal control may humanely destroy any animal when it believes destruction is necessary due to an injury or disease which will likely result in maiming, prolonged and/or severe suffering or death, or to prevent disease or injury to animal or humans, due to overcrowding, the presence or threatened presence of contagious disease, the likelihood of danger or injury to humans or animals, or any other condition. 
Sec. 14-252. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-253. - Reclaiming. 
(a)  Unless the owner failed to provide proper care, committed cruelty, or engaged in dog fighting, the animal may upon presenting evidence satisfactory to animal control of compliance with all requirements, and upon payment of all costs, be returned to the owner. Such costs shall not be in lieu of any fine or penalty provided by law. Animal control may condition the return to the owner by requiring execution by owner of a contract stating this chapter will be complied with and that the animal will receive proper care. 
(b)  Fees for reclaiming shall be as established in the schedule of fees. 
(c)  The owner shall be liable for the fees and charges notwithstanding destruction or adoption. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-254. - Adoption. 
Animal control may convey ownership of any animal which has become the property of animal control, except dogs which have been designated dangerous or vicious, to a responsible person subject to conditions as may be prescribed by animal control, including, but without limitation: 
(1)  Approval of an adoption application. 
(2)  Payment of an adoption fee and any vaccination, licensing or veterinary costs. 
(3)  The animal is examined by a vet and has required vaccinations and tests administered. 
(4)  Animal control verifies the animal has been spayed or neutered. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-255. - Records required to be kept. 
Animal control should keep accurate records of impoundment and disposition. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Secs. 14-256—14-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - QUARANTINE 

Sec. 14-276. - Desegregation of quarantine area; confinement of animals. 
Where rabies has been found or is suspected, the city may designate an area for quarantine and such animal shall be immediately confined to the premises designated. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-277. - Movement into or out of quarantine. 
No animal shall be removed from or brought into a quarantine area without written city approval. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-278. - Duration. 
A quarantine shall be maintained for such a period of time as the city deems necessary. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-279. - Notice to be given by signs. 
Quarantine areas and areas where rabid animals or animals suspected of rabies remain at large, may be posted with signs which read: "Rabies suspected," or "Rabies—keep away from animals", conspicuously displayed in a place designated, and shall not be defaced or removed. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
ARTICLE XIII. - MANAGED CARE OF FERAL CATS 

Sec. 14-280. - Definitions. 
Abandoned cat means a domesticated cat that an owner has forsaken or neglected to provide care and support. 
Domesticated cat means a cat socialized to humans and appropriate as a companion for humans. 
Eartipping means straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat. 
Feral cat means a cat (i) born in the wild or the offspring of an owned or feral cat and not socialized, (ii) a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized, or (iii) lives on a farm. 
Feral cat caretaker means any person other than an owner who provides food, water or shelter to or, otherwise, cares for a feral cat. 
Feral cat colony means a group of cats that congregates, more or less, as a unit. Any non-feral cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed part of it. 
Feral cat colony caretaker means a feral cat caretaker approved by a sponsor to care for a colony. 
Owner means any person having a right of property in an animal or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has it in his care, acts as its custodian, or knowingly permits an animal to remain on any premises occupied by him or her. "Owner" does not include a feral cat colony caretaker. 
Sponsor is any humane society that agrees to comply with this article for sponsors and provides written notice that it will serve as a sponsor. 
TNR means trap, neuter and return. 
TNR program means feral and stray cats are trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies, and returned to the location where they congregate. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-281. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-282. - Feral and colony cats TNR. 
(a)  Feral and colony cat requirements: 
(1)  All such cats must be cared for on the private property of the caregiver or with permission of the property owner or manager or qualified person making decisions. 
(2)  All caregivers shall assist animal control to have all cats within their care sterilized, vaccinated against rabies, and ear-tipped. 
(3)  All caregivers shall provide proper nutrition and potable water. If a cat is in need of medical care, the caregiver must contact animal control for approval. If animal control is not available for prior authorization, caregiver may make necessary decision to not allow cat to suffer. Dumping on the ground or dispensing food more than will be immediately eaten by the cats present is prohibited. Feeding areas must be clean and sanitary. 
(4)  Caregivers shall make reasonable attempts to remove kittens for domestication and notify animal control when new kittens arrive in the colony. 
(b)  A person returning a cat to the colony must provide the cat's description and any other information upon request by animal control. 
(c)  Such cats are exempt from the license tag requirements of section 14-83. 
(d)  Animal control may remove or authorize removal of any unsterilized feral or colony cats without identification or because of immediate public health or safety concerns. Cats found at large, without proper identification (rabies tag or EAID) in an area active for TNR, animal control has the right to TNR cat. If owner is known animal control will attempt to make contact with owner and a written warning will be issued on first offense. If owner does not comply by time given in accordance with the mandatory sterilization section a citation may issue. If cat is TNR and owner comes forth after the procedure, owner is responsible for costs. 
(e)  No such cat shall be released at any park, natural area, environmentally sensitive land or on any easement adjacent to such lands without approval from the property owner. 
(f)  Healthy cats impounded may be returned to colony, released to a caregiver or adopted. If such cat is injured or diseased and appears to be suffering and it appears that such cat cannot be expeditiously cured and returned, transferred to a humane society or similar or placed in foster care, then animal control may humanely euthanize the cat upon the advice of a licensed veterinarian. 
(g)  Animal control may provide donated food to the caregiver when necessary. If animal control does not have donated food it is the caregiver's responsibility to sponsor the food. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-283. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - STERILIZATION PROGRAM FOR DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 14-284. - Purpose 
(a)  Purpose. Unintended or uncontrolled breeding of dogs and cats leads to dogs, cats, puppies, and kittens being unwanted, becoming strays, suffering deprivation and death, being impounded and euthanized at expense to the community, and constituting a nuisance and health hazard. Every feasible means of reducing the number of unwanted dogs, cats, puppies, and kittens is encouraged. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-285. - Spay and neutering of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Spaying, neutering of dogs and cats. 
(1)  Every dog and cat four months or older shall be spayed or neutered, unless proof of one of the following is provided to animal control: 
a.  The dog or cat is registered with a national or international club, association, or registry recognized by animal control, and owner certifies in writing the animal is used, trained, or considered for use in a show(s), sporting competition(s), or other similar competitive event(s) held by one or more national or international clubs, associations, or registries. 
b.  A vet licensed in the state certifies in writing the dog or cat is medically unfit to undergo the required spay or neuter procedure because of a medical condition that would be substantially aggravated or would likely cause death. The writing must state the date by which it may be safely spayed or neutered. For a dog or cat not spayed or neutered due to a health condition, the license tag fee for sterilized dogs or cats shall apply. As soon as the medical condition ceases to exist, it shall be the duty of the owner to promptly comply. 
c.  The dog is used by a law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes. 
d.  The dog is a guide dog or service animal defined by law. 
e.  The owner certifies in writing that the dog will be bred or used for stud purposes after a breeder permit is first obtained from the state and has registered with the city. 
f.  The dog or cat is used for breeding purposes by a licensed hobby or commercial breeder and a cat is registered as a pedigreed cat with the Cat Fancier Association or the International Cat Association. 
g.  The dog or cat is being harbored by a shelter, humane society, or similar, whose principal purpose is adoption of dogs or cats or offering sanctuary for dogs or cats, provided the dog or cat is spayed or neutered prior to being placed for adoption. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
ARTICLE XV. - PUBLIC THREAT ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-286. - Public threat. 
Public threat means nuisance and similar behavior by dogs or other animals, that does not rise to the level of dangerous dog or vicious dog. Examples include chasing cars, people or pets, injuring or killing pets, regular wandering at large, damage to or interference with property such as getting in trash cans, trespassing on neighbor property and urinating or defecating on car tires, bushes and yards, attempting to mount other animals, and similar behaviors that pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, including without limitation behavior defined as nuisance hereinabove. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-287. - Investigation and classification. 
Animal control shall investigate any complaint filed against an animal alleged to be a public threat, notify the owner of the complaint, determine if there are/were any mitigating circumstances, then report the results to the owner via certified mail. If animal control classifies the animal as a public threat, and the owner disputes that the animal is a public threat, the owner may appeal to the city manager within 15 days. City manager written determination shall be final unless petition for certiorari is sought from and granted by the superior court within 30 days of said determination. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-288. - Requirements for an animal classified as a public threat. 
(a)  The owner must provide a proper enclosure to confine the animal on the owner's property. 
(b)  When off the owner's property, the animal must be on a leash of no more than six feet and under the control of a responsible person. 
(c)  The owner must file photos of the animal with animal control. 
(d)  Animal control will implant an EAID for identification. 
(e)  The owner must register the animal and pay a yearly fee of $50.00. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Sec. 14-288. - Declassification/removal of public threat classification. 
If for 18 months a public threat animal commits no further actions that would justify classification as a public threat and the owner can provide proof of obedience training at a reputable club or business or a "canine good citizen" certificate or the equivalent from a reputable kennel club, the owner may request in writing to animal control for removal of the classification. 
(Amd. of 7-10-2017, § Exh. A) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; historic preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Utility connections. 
No utility furnishing gas, electricity or water to a structure shall connect services to the structure until written approval for such service has been obtained from the governing authority. 
(Code 1991, § 9-109) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
Secs. 18-2—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of May 11, 2015(1), § 1(Exh. A), repealed former Art. II, § 18-31 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1991, § 9-101. 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

Sec. 18-31. - Adoption of state law. 
State standards adopted by the city are set out in sections 18-31.1 and 18-31.2 below. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A) 
Sec. 18-31.1. - State minimum standards adopted. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code; 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code; 
(3)  International Mechanical Code; 
(4)  International Plumbing Code; 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
(6)  International Fire Code; 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code; 
(8)  International Residential Code; 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code; 
(10)  International Existing Building Code; 
(11)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code; 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city to adopt as permissive and voluntary the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  National Green Building Standard. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-10-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-31.2. - Additional building standards. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City to enforce the Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Office of Insurance and Safety Fire Commissioner: 
(1)  NFPA 1, Fire Code; 
(2)  NFPA 101, Life Safety Code; 
(3)  All applicable National Fire Protection Association Standards and Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner as adopted by the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The city also adopts minimum requirements as set forth by National Fire Protection Association and the American Water Works Association standards: 
(1)  NFPA Code 10, Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers; 
(2)  NFPA Code 13, Standard for Installation of Sprinkler Systems; 
(3)  NFPA Code 13R, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low-Rise Residential Occupancies; 
(4)  NFPA Code 13D, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes; 
(5)  NFPA Code 72, National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code; 
(6)  NFPA Code 96, Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations; 
(7)  AWWA Code, Underground Fire Lines. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-32. - Administrative procedures for enforcement of adopted codes. 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-33. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof- which are public safety, health, and general welfare - through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The City of Madison, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-34. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  One and two- family dwellings. In addition to those codes referenced herein, the provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the building, mechanical, and gas systems in new one and two-family dwellings, including additions, alterations, renovations and general repairs of existing one and two-family dwellings. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Any appendices referenced in section 18-43 of this chapter shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Local amendments to the construction codes. Amendments to the construction codes that are periodically adopted by council are listed in section 18-43.1 of this chapter. 
(e)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(f)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-35. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs, or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The Building Official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the Building Official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-36. - Building office. 
(a)  Creation of building office. There is hereby established an office to be called the building office, which shall be administered by the building and code official (also known as the building official). Oversight of the office and the building official shall be the responsibility of the city manager (also known as the building and zoning administrator). The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. The duties of the office may be contracted out in full to a third party entity. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the office, except one whose only connection is as a member of the construction board of adjustment and appeal, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the office. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the office. The records of the office shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall submit a report each year covering the work of the building office during the preceding year. He/she may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the construction board of appeals during said year. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-37. - Building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. The city may contract with a third party to provide the duties of the building official. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-38. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. A permit shall not be issued to an owner, who is neither a state licensed contractor nor the intended sole occupant of a residential structure being constructed or altered. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs, with a value of less than $2,500.00, may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 6 months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor, or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes, and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment, and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the planning department for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect, or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler, or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his place, a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. In instances where work commences prior to obtaining a necessary permit, the building official shall have the discretion to issue a one-time warning and penalty waiver for the first instance of such work but shall keep a record of the warning and waiver, the person and/or business conducting said work, and the date of the warning and waiver. No warning or waiver shall be issued to a same person and/or business commencing said work on another building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, etc. system within a three-year period. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the schedule of fees as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment, and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (6), herein below. He/she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation and foundation wall inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated, the reinforcement is in place, and the forms erected, prior to the placing of concrete. 
2.  Slab inspection: To be made prior to the placing of concrete. 
3.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking, bracing and fasteners are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete. 
4.  Moisture barrier inspection: To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finishing materials. 
5.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for immediate occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-In inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
4.  Note: See Section 312 of the International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, sructure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a commercial building, which in the opinion of the building official, may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. The temporary/partial certificate of occupancy shall be forfeited if the certificate of occupancy is not issued within 90 days. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial, or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor, or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building office. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial, or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-39. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-40. - Appeals. 
(a)  Powers. The building and zoning administrator (also known as the city manager) shall have the power, as herein defined, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(b)  Appeals process. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure, or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the building and zoning administrator whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. The building and zoning administrator, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in his opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures, or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will made possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
In granting the variance, the building and zoning administrator may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the building and zoning administrator may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the Building Official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the Building Official. 
(4)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  Establishment. The building and zoning administrator shall establish rules and regulations for this procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The building and zoning administrator shall review the appeal within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(2)  Decisions. The building and zoning administrator shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the building and zoning administrator shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the building and zoning administrator reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the building and zoning administrator shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-41. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of the construction codes is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the construction codes. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-42. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation. each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by general law. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-43. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
See sections 18-43.1 and 18-43.2 below. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-43.1. - Local amendments. 
Reserved. 
Sec. 18-43.2. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city for purposes of the construction codes shall be the same as is provided in this article. 
(Amd. of 5-11-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 18-44—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 1991, § 17-102(A)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-62. - Residential restrictions. 
No construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which employs a: 
(1)  Gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 1991, § 17-102(B)) 
Sec. 18-63. - Commercial restrictions. 
There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 18-62. 
(Code 1991, § 17-102(C)) 
Sec. 18-64. - Applicability to repairs, renovations. 
The requirements of section 18-62 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building, including replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Code 1991, § 17-102(D)) 
Sec. 18-65. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-62, 18-63 and 18-64 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewerage system servicing toilets, faucets or shower heads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewerage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or shower heads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Code 1991, § 17-102(E)) 
Sec. 18-66. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 17-102(F)) 
Secs. 18-67—18-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNFIT BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of Feb. 9, 2004(1), § 1, repealed article IV, sections 18-101—18-111, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article IV, sections 18-101—18-111. Former article IV pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. of Feb. 26, 1996(1), §§ 28A-101—28A-111. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq. 

Sec. 18-101. - Purpose and authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1, et seq. for the purpose of maintaining the health and cleanliness of the city, and to ensure safe and sanitary conditions in private property by establishing a method for enforcing minimum standards. This section is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
Sec. 18-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, structure or property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term does not include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of such property and all persons and entities who have any interest in such dwelling, building or structure, or the property on which it is situated, based on the records of the public officer and of the county courthouse, and based on a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia, and any party who has filed a notice per O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9. 
Public authority means any housing authority officer or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the city, county or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the town. 
Public officer means the building inspector, health department officer, the city manager, or any other city representative approved by the mayor and council, who are authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other officer or officers appointed by the mayor and council for purposes of this article. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, structure or property to bring it into compliance with the applicable regulations and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
Vacancy means the use of a structure or property is discontinued in excess of 30 consecutive days. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 
Sec. 18-103. - Findings and applicability. 
(a)  It is found and declared that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, structures, and properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses and not in compliance with the applicable standard codes or optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes adopted by the city; or in violation of general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. It is further found and declared that where there is a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use. This city should exercise its police power to repair, close or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings or structures and/or cause the repair of such conditions or the cessation of such use in the manner provided in this article. 
(b)  All the provisions hereof may also be applied to private property where there is an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Sec. 18-104. - Unlawful to own structures or property not compliant with this article. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property in the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with this article and all applicable codes in force in the city including such regulations which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner to own any dwelling, building, structure or property which: is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or is otherwise in violation of this article. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
Sec. 18-105. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  When a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use or when it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. The following described action shall then be taken. 
The officer shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, structure or property summons and a complaint containing a notice that a hearing will be held in Municipal Court not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or by attorney, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. 
The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(b)  If, after the hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result or unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, structure, or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, structure, or property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  If the court finds there is a condition or use of real estate other than addressed above, which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation and the court further finds that such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use, the court may order the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure, and the order may require the abatement of the public health hazard or general nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety. 
For the purposes of this Code section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. 
The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
(c)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, improve or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or property, or to abate the nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, structure, or property to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Time during any court stay on abatement shall not count toward said 270 days. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, structure, or property a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)  The amount of the cost of any repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which cost was incurred. Credit for salvaged materials sold, per 18-105(e) below, shall be given. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order in the office of the clerk of the county superior court and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this article. 
The clerk shall record and index such order in the deed records and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing the order with the clerk, and within 90 days of the repair, demolition or closure, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and notice given to the owner and parties in interest and a final settlement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property per O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1, and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. 
The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(e)  If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage and sell reusable materials at private or public sale, and the proceeds of such sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Such sale may be made without public advertisement and bid. The public officer and city shall have no liability related to such sale, including due to defects. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(f)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(g)  The redemption amount shall be the full amount of costs as determined above, plus interest, penalties and costs incurred by the city and the tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien shall be per O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80, 48-4-81. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Abatement procedures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 18-106. - Standards for determination by public officer. 
The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions if he finds that conditions exist in or on such building, dwelling, structure, or property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or of other residents. Such conditions may include without limitation: 
(1)  Dilapidation and non-compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(3)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(4)  Other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, structures, or property unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of such municipality such as: 
a.  Disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness; 
b.  The interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle so that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity of the structural members falls outside of its base so as to create a hazardous condition to the occupants of the structure or the population of the surrounding area; 
c.  Due to their unsafe condition the supporting structure and/or nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls must be replaced; 
d.  The floors or roofs have improperly distributed loads or oversized loads or are so weakened as to be unsafe for their present or intended use; 
e.  The structure has been damaged by wind, fire or other causes so as to imperil the safety or the health of the structure's occupants or of the people of the city; or 
f.  There are abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations, abandoned refrigerators or motor vehicles, or any structurally unsound fences or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation, or any condition which may cause lack of safe ingress or egress to the structure(s); 
(5)  Vacant dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed; or 
(6)  There exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-10. 
Sec. 18-107. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including, among others granted herein, the power to: 
(1)  Investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures, or property therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes, or are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or endanger the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
(2)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(3)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
Sec. 18-108. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall also be served in the following way: 
At least 14 days prior to the hearing, the public officer shall send the complaint and summons via certified mail, return receipt requested, or statutory overnight delivery to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any. 
For any owner or party in interest whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(b)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the county superior court at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and affect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
Sec. 18-109. - Use of revenues, grants and donations to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
The city may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out this article. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-15. 
Sec. 18-110. - Deteriorated structures and premises as nuisances. 
(a)  All structures and/or the surrounding property of the structures which are determined to be in violation of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. In those instances where there is an imminent threat to life or safety, the public officer shall be authorized to immediately post the structure as "unsafe for human habitation." 
(b)  If such finding of the public officer is contested by the occupants of the structure, then the public officer shall request an immediate hearing before the judge of the magistrate court in order to secure an order requiring any occupants of the unsafe structures to vacate. The public officer shall then proceed as set forth in this article. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
Sec. 18-111. - Construction of this article with Charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations; appeal. 
Nothing herein shall abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of the Charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred herein shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. Appeal from the municipal court shall be per O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Amd. of 2-9-04(1), § 1; Amd. of 11-8-04(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-16. 
Secs. 18-112—18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of March 14, 2016, repealed former Art. V, §§ 18-151—18-162, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Dec. 14, 1998, §§ 1—11, 13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-151. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Georgia has in Georgia Code Annotated, Article IX, Section II, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Madison, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 1, § A)) 
Sec. 18-152. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Madison, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 1, § B)) 
Sec. 18-153. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 1, § C)) 
Sec. 18-154. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 1, § D)) 
Sec. 18-155. - Lands to which this ordinance applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Madison, Georgia. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 2, § A)) 
Sec. 18-156. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated February 21, 1975, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Morgan County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 2, § B)) 
Sec. 18-157. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any Development activities. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 2, § C)) 
Sec. 18-158. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 2, § D)) 
Sec. 18-159. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 2, § E)) 
Sec. 18-160. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 2, § F)) 
Sec. 18-161. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Madison, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 2, § G)) 
Sec. 18-162. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Madison, Georgia from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 2, § H)) 
Sec. 18-163. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 18-156. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 8, 1999. [i.e., the effective date of the First floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 8, 1999. [i.e., the effective date of the First floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means ANY structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after March 8, 1999, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 8, 1999. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 6)) 
Sec. 18-164. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 7) 
Secs. 18-165—18-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18-181. - Designation of article administrator. 
The building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 3, § A)) 
Sec. 18-182. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be made to the building inspector on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of section 18-202(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building inspector shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 3, § B)) 
Sec. 18-183. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the building inspector shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-156, then the building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Division 3 of this article. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 18-182(b)(2). 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 18-182(b)(2). 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Building Inspector shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 18-182(b)(1)c. and subsection 18-202(2) or 18-204(2). 
(7)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Building Inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 3, § C)) 
Secs. 18-184—18-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 18-201. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 4, § A)) 
Sec. 18-202. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-201(4), "Elevated buildings". 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection18-183(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (ref. subsection 18-201(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(ii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections18-202(3)a.—c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 18-156, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 18-202(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Division 3 of this article. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 4, § B)) 
Sec. 18-203. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in 18-156, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section18-156, then the building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Division 3 of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (subsections 18-203(2) or (3)) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-201(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 4, § C)) 
Sec. 18-204. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-156, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-201(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 18-182(b)(1)c. and 18-182(b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 4, § E)) 
Sec. 18-205. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater that 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 4, § F)) 
Secs. 18-206—18-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Secs. 18-211. - Granting of variances. 
(a)  The city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Morgan County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction, therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Building Inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Amd. of 3-14-2016, § 1(Exh. A, Art. 5)) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; trash disposal by commercial enterprises, § 58-1; taxation, ch. 70; telecommunications, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-281 et seq.; taxation, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 
Editor's note— An amendment of July 28, 2003, § 1, repealed article II, sections 22-31—22-60, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article II, sections 22-31—22-48, 22-50—22-62. Former article II pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1991, § 4-103; Ord. of 3-19-1998, § 2(1)—(30). The July 28, 2003 amendment becomes effective on Dec. 31, 2003. 

Sec. 22-31. - Occupation tax assessed on business dealings in the city. 
For the year 2004 and thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the incorporated area of the city, including an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation. Registration of payment of such tax shall be displayed conspicuously in the taxpayer's place of business. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or to any officer of the city police department upon request. Payment of occupation tax shall not be a precondition to the operation of any business or practice of any profession in the city, said tax being for raising revenue. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Administrative fee means the approximate reasonable cost of processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities engaging in an occupation, profession, or business, for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, or any other form of business organization, but excludes nonprofit organizations and state, federal or local governments or instrumentalities thereof. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-33. - Administrative and regulatory fees. 
(a)  A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  Regulatory fees may only be imposed in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-34. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Criteria. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the incorporated area of the city, based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner who are employed in the business or practitioner's dominant line of business in the city. An employee who works for the same business or practitioner in more than one county or municipal corporation shall be counted as being employed in the city if the city is the local government entity in which the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(2)  The number of employees of a business or practitioner includes all full-time positions and all full-time position equivalents as follows: 
An employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time position. The average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to determine the number of full-time position equivalents. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the mayor and council of the city: All businesses - $8.00 per employee for up to ten employees. For over ten employees, $80.00 plus $4.00 for each employee over ten employees. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(3)  No occupation tax shall be required from the following: 
a.  Any disabled veteran of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
b.  Any blind person; or 
c.  Any veteran of peace-time service in the United States armed forces who has a physical disability incurred during the period of such service. 
(4)  No occupation tax shall be levied on any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor operating under a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 2-2-8. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-35. - Occupation tax on businesses with no location in the state. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the city. 
(b)  The rate of taxation for businesses taxed under this section is the same as in section 22-34 above. For the purposes of computing the occupation tax on a business described in subsection (a) of this section, the number of employees of the business employed in the city shall be computed based on the number of employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the incorporated area of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-36. - Reduction for businesses commenced after July 1. 
When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax that would have been imposed for the entire year. A practitioner of a profession or occupation who elects as his or her occupation tax the amount described in section 22-38(a)(2) below shall receive no reduction in such amount. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-37. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one fixed location in the city, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. Such business is required to obtain the necessary registration and pay an occupation tax for each location. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-38. - Professionals classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1—18) shall elect as their occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 22-34(b) above. 
(2)  A fee of $200.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 each year. If no election is timely made, the occupation tax shall be imposed as set forth in section 22-34 above. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-39. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state or instrumentalities of the United States, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-40. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue, not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations covered by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-28. All other businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. This article does not apply to state or local authorities or non-profit organizations. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-41. - Return required. 
The owner, proprietor, manager, or secretary of any business subject to the occupation tax for the upcoming calendar year shall, on or before December 31 of the preceding year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth each location at which business is conducted in the city, the line or lines of business that the business conducts at each such location, the business tax identification number, the employees' social security numbers, and the number of employees of the business or practitioner, computed according to the above guidelines, for each line of business at each location. Any omission of federal tax identification number or social security number shall be reported to the state revenue commissioner. Where a business or practitioner has commenced operation after January 1 of the current year, the return shall be filed no later than 30 days after the commencement of such business. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-42. - Failure to file return. 
Any person required by section 22-41 above to file an occupation tax return who fails to file on or before the date required shall be subject to a civil fine by a court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of city ordinances. The fine shall not exceed $200.00, and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-43. - Inspections of books and records; penalty for under-reporting. 
The city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made for the sole purpose of determining the number of employees of the business, and upon demand, relevant books and records shall be made immediately available for such inspection. Failure to comply shall be punishable by a fine by a court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of city ordinances. The fine shall not exceed $200.00, and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. Adequate records relevant to the number of employees of the business shall be kept in the city for examination. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under-reporting, the amount of the deficiency shall be treated as delinquent and shall be subject to the penalties and procedures for delinquent occupation tax amounts provided in sections 22-46 through 22-48 below. This section shall not be construed as requiring any professional or business to divulge information protected under any privilege recognized by the laws of the state, including, but not limited to attorney-client privilege. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-44. - Returns confidential. 
Except in judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, or as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to divulge or make known in any manner gross receipts set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. Information revealing gross receipts shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers retained by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of gross receipts, or the inspection of information revealing gross receipts by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-45. - When tax due; tax registration. 
(a)  Each occupation tax for 2004 and succeeding calendar years thereafter shall be payable January 31 of each year and shall, if not paid by May 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in section 22-46. If any person commences business for the first time in the city after January 1, the tax shall be due and payable 30 days after the date of the commencement of the business, and delinquency shall occur upon nonpayment after 90 days from the due date. 
(b)  The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk upon receipt of all amounts due for the occupation tax. Each such registration shall be for the calendar year the registration was obtained, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-46. - Penalty for delinquency; interest on delinquent tax; other remedies. 
(a)  Should any occupation tax imposed by this article be delinquent, the person liable for the tax shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. 
(b)  Any occupation tax which becomes delinquent shall bear interest from the date of delinquency on the unpaid amount at 18 percent per annum. 
(c)  The city clerk may collect delinquent occupation taxes in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(d)  The court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of ordinances of the city may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax (or regulatory fee), not to exceed $500.00, which may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. Per City of Atlanta v. Barnes, this section 22-46(d) shall not apply to attorneys. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-47. - Registration revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns or permit inspection. 
Upon the failure of any business to timely pay occupation tax or to timely or truthfully make returns, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted under this article shall be automatically revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted for a business for which any part of the occupation tax is unpaid, or to an person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city in accordance with section 22-43. However, nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the operation of any business or practice of any profession in the city, regardless of status of the occupation tax registration for such business or professional. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-48. - Lien for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)  The city clerk and/or designated tax collector, upon any tax or installment becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the amount of said tax and the penalty against the person liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent. The lien shall cover the property in the city of the person liable for said tax, all as provided by the laws of the city and the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. 
(b)  The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of the defendant in the city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the laws of the city and the state, including without limitation O.C.G.A. tit. 48, chs. 3, 4 and 5. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-49. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-50. - City officials; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city's duly designated officers and inspectors have full subpoena powers regarding enforcement hereof. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-51. - Businesses licensed by state. 
Each person subject to the occupation tax which is also licensed by the state shall post the state license conspicuously in its place of business. Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. Title 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1; Amd. of 9-18-17) 
Sec. 22-52. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not subject to occupation tax, registration fees or regulatory fees provided for herein, but may be assessed other types of taxes pursuant to other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-53. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-54. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or part, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-55. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This amendment does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any code or ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior code section chapter 22, article II have not been paid in full. Any parts of ordinances or code sections heretofore and hereinafter passed which provide for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such, or that impose fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided therein, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-56. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to see that the provisions hereof relating to occupation taxes are observed. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-57. - Full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the mayor and council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-58. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 2004, the mayor and city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax set forth herein. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-59. - Public hearing in years of increasing revenue. 
In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the mayor and council shall hold one or more public hearings as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-60. - Exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The mayor and council may by subsequent amendment or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the mayor and council. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-61. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, the specific shall control. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Sec. 22-62. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect on December 31, 2003. 
(Amd. of 7-28-03, § 1) 
Secs. 22-63—22-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BED AND BREAKFASTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 22-91—22-108, 22-110, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Amd. of 7-10-2006, § 1. 
State Law reference— Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq.; local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 22-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. If there should ever arise a discrepancy by an amendment, then the current definition as provided in the official zoning ordinance shall control. 
Bed and breakfast means an owner-occupied single-family dwelling providing lodging or lodging and breakfast for no more than four guest rooms for compensation, operated by the domiciliary, resident, natural person owner with a 50 percent or larger ownership interest, under prescribed conditions of use. The primary use is for a residence as opposed to a business use. 
Operator means the owner, domiciliary, resident, natural person owner with a 50 percent or larger ownership interest. 
Owner-occupied means claimed as the domicile, as well as resided in, by a natural person with 50 percent or larger ownership interest. Evidence of domicile and/or residence shall include but not limited to the 50 percent or larger owner's providing the following evidence that the property is that person's primary residence: 
(1)  He/she sleeps overnight at the property 183 or more nights a year; 
(2)  He/she receives mail at the property as that person's primary address; 
(3)  His/her voter registration is at the property address; 
(4)  Bank account shows the property as his/her address; 
(5)  Vehicles are registered at the property address; and 
(6)  IRS records show the property as his/her primary address. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-92. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to hotels, inns, motels, or other lodging establishments providing rooms to guests for compensation. No bed and breakfast shall be permitted in the city except as in accordance with the minimum requirements and prescribed conditions set forth in the official zoning ordinance. No bed and breakfast shall be operated except as in accordance with the minimum operational standards as set forth in this article. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-93. - Temporary establishments. 
This article shall not apply to a bed and breakfast operated on a temporary basis for charitable purposes or non-profit organizations provided, however, [sections] 22-97 and 22-100 hereof shall apply. Such a bed and breakfast shall be permitted at the reasonable discretion of the city council via formal approval upon written application for no more than four consecutive days and for no more than eight days per calendar year. The fee for such temporary establishments shall be a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and shall be paid upon filing of an application for a temporary license. Any residence offered as lodging for less than 30 days shall be subject to this section. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-94. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bed and breakfast without having first obtained a license. The annual fee for such a license shall be a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charged for the whole or any part of one year, and shall be paid at city hall no later than December 15 of the preceding year or upon the filing of an application for the license. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-95. - Guest register. 
Each operator shall keep a register of all guests of the bed and breakfast. Such list shall be available for inspection by the city or its agents at all reasonable times. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-96. - Materials needed for license application. 
An applicant for a bed and breakfast license shall submit the following materials for review: 
(1)  A completed application form signed by the owner(s). 
(2)  A floor plan for the single-family dwelling unit, specifically denoting square footage of the residence as well as portions of the residence allotted for guest use and illustrating that the proposed operation will comply with all ordinances and regulations of the city and all other governmental agencies or bodies. 
(3)  A plat of survey of the subject real estate by a state registered surveyor which shows all improvements located on the real estate and the distance from the proposed bed and breakfast to the nearest residence with a licensed bed and breakfast. 
(4)  A nonrefundable license application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. This fee is in addition to the annual license fee, which license fee must be paid at the same time and is refundable if the license application is not approved. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-97. - Inspection of premises. 
No bed and breakfast license shall be granted to any applicant until the bed and breakfast premises has been inspected by the appropriate building, fire, and health code officials noting their written findings that the proposed residence and the areas to be used for the accessory purpose are judged to be in safe and satisfactory condition and compliant with all applicable codes. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-98. - License period. 
All licenses granted under this article shall be issued for a period of one year or until December 31 of the year the application is made, whichever date is earlier. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-99. - Financial records. 
An operator shall maintain separate records which show all activities of the bed and breakfast and shall keep a profit and loss statement. All of such documents and related papers shall be available to the city or its agents at all reasonable times. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-100. - Council consideration of license. 
In deciding whether or not to grant, renew, suspend or revoke a license under this article, the council shall consider the following: 
(1)  Compliance by the applicant or license holder with the provisions of this article and all other relevant laws or ordinances, regulations and resolutions of the city and any other governmental body or agency. 
(2)  The character and reputation of the applicant or license holder. 
(3)  The conduct of the business of the applicant or license holder. 
(4)  The actual or proposed effect of the bed and breakfast on nearby properties, including but not limited to traffic, parking, deliveries, noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, glare, electrical interference, pollution, dirt, property values and all other relevant considerations. 
(5)  The actual or proposed effect of the bed and breakfast on the city, including but not limited to, the services and utilities of the city. 
(6)  The profit and loss of the proposed bed and breakfast and the reason for its operation by the applicant or license holder. 
(7)  Conditions of use, and compliance therewith, established as part of granting of a conditional use permit. 
(8)  All other relevant issues, including but not limited to the public health, safety, morals, interest, and convenience. 
The city council, in its reasonable discretion, may consider any and all relevant circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant or license holder, the application or proposed location of the bed and breakfast. If in its reasonable judgment circumstances are such that the grant, suspension, or revocation of the license would or would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for the decision of the city council. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-101. - Site requirements and conditions. 
No bed and breakfast shall be allowed except in accordance with the minimum requirements and prescribed conditions set forth in the official zoning ordinance. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-102. - Minimal operational standards. 
No residence or its premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast operation unless all of the following standards have been met: 
(1)  The bed and breakfast shall be totally operated in the residence and not to any degree in any accessory structure; 
(2)  No visible exterior changes, with the exception of a sign and vegetative landscaping improvements, shall be made to the residence or its premises within six months of the date of application; 
(3)  Indoor lavatories and bathing facilities must be available to all guests; 
(4)  No pets of the guests shall be allowed either inside the residence or on the premises; 
(5)  No cooking by guests shall be allowed; 
(6)  No sale of alcoholic beverages, beer and/or wine to any guest shall be allowed; 
(7)  No more than one nonfamily worker shall be allowed on the premises exclusive of maintenance personnel. All family workers must permanently reside inside the premises; 
(8)  A bed and breakfast shall meet the minimum level of occupation of 24 guest room rentals per annum or average gross room rental revenues of $3,500.00 per annum; and 
(9)  No meals except breakfast may be served to any guest. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-103. - Activities restricted. 
Operation of the bed and breakfast shall remain consistent with and respectful of neighboring residences and shall not extend beyond the operational standards as outlined in this article nor the minimum requirements and prescribed conditions of the official zoning ordinance. No for-profit activity or commercial operations shall be conducted on any portion of the premises with the exception of guest room rental revenues. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-104. - License voided upon sale of real estate. 
A bed and breakfast license shall be immediately voided upon the sale or transfer of the subject real estate. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-105. - Period prior to reapplication for license. 
In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of section 22-100, the applicant shall not reapply for a license for the same premises for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-106. - Discrimination prohibited. 
No owner of a bed and breakfast shall discriminate regarding his guests on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, creed, age, or natural origin. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-107. - Applicability of hotel/motel tax. 
A bed and breakfast shall be subject to the hotel/motel tax of the city. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-108. - Applicability of occupational tax. 
As a residence with only portions thereof periodically used for accessory bed and breakfast operations, a bed and breakfast shall not be subject to an occupational tax. 
(Amd. of 3-28-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 22-109—22-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV-A. - ELECTRIC UTILITY FRANCHISES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of 11-10-08(2), § 1, renumbered former Art. IV as Art. IV-A, to facilitate inclusion of § 2(Exh. A), which added Art. IV-B. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Power to grant franchises or make contract with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5). 

Sec. 22-141. - Granted. 
The authority, right, permission and consent are granted to each electric supplier within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., their successors, lessees and assigns, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this article for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the city as from time to time each such company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for public or private use, and to reenter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as each such company may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of each such company, to ensure safe and efficient service. The foregoing notwithstanding, the company shall not include any entity with whom the city has a written franchise agreement. 
(Code 1991, § 4-105; Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 22-142. - Franchise fees authorized. 
The future use by any electric utility company of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the city for the operation of any of its electric distribution systems, and the grant of the requisite street franchise rights, is expressly conditioned upon payment by that company of franchise fees pursuant to this article; and continued use and occupancy of such city property for that purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful. The city shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this article by appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. 
(Code 1991, § 4-105; Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 22-143. - Terms, conditions. 
The rights, permission and consents contained in this article are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Each electric utility company shall pay to the city on or before the 20th day of each month, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of such company's customers served within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding month. The four percent rate shall be reviewed at the first city council meeting in January of each year and may be changed by majority vote of the mayor and council to such other levels as are allowed or mandated by law. Such a rate change shall take effect on February 1 of the year in which such rate change is approved. The city shall provide the company with written notice of any such rate change. 
(2)  The percentage of gross revenues shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of the company in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. 
(3)  If the city shall grant to any other electric utility the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those contained in this article, including the payment provisions of this article. 
(4)  Each company shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless (including payment of the city's reasonable attorney's fees and court costs) the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, by such company, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting from such activity, for which the city would otherwise be liable; however, the city shall not be indemnified for damages arising from the willful misconduct of the city itself. 
(5)  Each company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power of the city. 
(6)  a.  The grant of rights, permission and consents by the city contained in this article to any company is specifically conditioned upon the payment of all sums due the city from such company in accordance with the rate, conditions and payment dates set forth in subsection (1) of this section; and failure by any company to timely pay the franchise fees shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights granted to such company by this article. 
b.  Each electric utility company's continued use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public places of the city for the purposes stated in this article shall evidence that company's acceptance of the franchise granted by this article and shall render that company liable for payment of all fees required by subsection (1) of this section. In the event of a forfeiture for failure to comply with such requirements, the forfeiting company shall nevertheless remain liable for all sums accrued until such time as the streets are vacated due to such forfeiture. 
(7)  The city clerk shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article, and shall have the power to prepare and provide for the collection of the fees required in this article. 
(8)  All work done by any company upon the streets, alleys and public places of the city shall be done under the supervision of the mayor and council; and any sidewalk, street pavement or other city improvement which may be displaced, obstructed or destroyed by reason of such work shall be properly replaced, reopened or repaired by such company to the satisfaction of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1991, § 4-105; Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 2) 
ARTICLE IV-B. - CABLE FRANCHISE FEES 

Sec. 22-144. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of 5 percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Amd. of 11-10-08(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-145. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes the city clerk, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Amd. of 11-10-08(2), § 2(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 22-146—22-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GARAGE SALES, FLEA MARKETS AND OTHER OUTDOOR SALES 

Sec. 22-176. - Intent and purpose. 
The mayor and council finds, determines and declares that: 
(1)  A garage sale serves as a method by which a residential lessee or homeowner may sell or dispose of unwanted items of personal property and correspondingly provides an opportunity for other persons to purchase bargains; 
(2)  The unregulated allowance of garage sales in the city presents an opportunity for abuse in that some persons may be conducting business activities under the guise of having a garage sale; 
(3)  The existence of nonregulated and recurring garage sales and flea markets causes annoyance to citizens in the city and congestion of the city's streets; 
(4)  This article is adopted for the purpose of prohibiting the infringement of business activities in areas by regulating the term and frequency of garage sales and flea markets so as to prevent the disturbance or disruption of the residential environment throughout the city; 
(5)  This article is not intended to prohibit isolated or casual sales by individuals of household or other personal items; and 
(6)  The provisions and prohibitions contained in this article are adopted not for the purpose of preventing but for the purpose of regulating the garage sales and flea markets in the city for health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(A)) 
Sec. 22-177. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City planned function means an event which is sponsored by the city. 
Exempt organization means a charitable, nonprofit, tax-exempt organization or community service organization, contributions to which are deductible for federal or state income tax purpose. 
Garage sale means and includes all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on residential premises for the purpose of disposing of personal property of the owner or lessee of such residence and shall include but not be limited to all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "back yard," "patio" or "rummage" sale; however, neighborhood owners and/or lessees may participate in any such garage sale so as to authorize multifamily garage sales so long as the owner or lessee of the premises at which the sale is operated is conducting and in charge of the garage sale. 
Indoor flea market means a regular business at which the owner or lessee of the subject real property makes spaces available (all of such space is totally enclosed within a permanent structure) to persons who sell new, consigned and/or used merchandise at retail or wholesale to the public on a permanent basis. An indoor flea market is not included within the definition of the term "garage sale" or "outdoor flea market" as set forth in this section. 
Outdoor flea market means an event, transaction or occurrence at which an owner or sponsor in any areas makes outside space available to persons who sell new, consigned and/or used merchandise at retail or wholesale to the public on a daily, weekend, occasional, temporary or permanent basis. An outdoor flea market is not included within the definition of the term "garage sale" or "indoor flea market" as set forth in this section. 
Personal property means property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his residence or household and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining the residence or household where such garage sale is to be conducted. This term does not include merchandise which was purchased for the purpose of resale or which is obtained on a consignment. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(B)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-178. - Prohibitions. 
No garage sale shall be held or conducted in the city unless it shall be conducted at the residence of the person holding such garage sale and a permit for such sale is obtained from the city manager 48 hours prior to the beginning of the garage sale. Such permit shall be issued free of charge unless the city manager determines that the issuance of the permit would not be in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. An aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the city manager to the mayor and council if such appeal is filed within ten days after receipt by the aggrieved person of the decision of the city manager. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(C)) 
Sec. 22-179. - Outdoor flea market requirements. 
No outdoor flea market shall be operated or conducted in the city unless the license required by the rules and regulations of the city shall have been obtained and the cost paid. This fee shall be a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each entity having a place of sale at an outdoor flea market. If a flea market operator has purchased a license for an indoor flea market, such operator may, instead of a daily fee per entity, purchase an annual license, which shall be a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. No table shall be in excess of 50 square feet, and no furniture except for antique furniture may be sold. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(D)) 
Sec. 22-180. - Indoor flea market requirements. 
No indoor flea market shall be operated or conducted in the city unless the owner or lessee of the premises where such indoor flea market is being operated or conducted obtains a business license from the city for a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(E)) 
Sec. 22-181. - Garage sales; hours of operation; number of sales. 
All garage sales shall be operated or conducted during the daylight hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., for no longer than two consecutive days. No person or group of persons shall hold more than two garage sales during any calendar year. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(F); Amd. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-182. - Display of personal property. 
Personal property offered for sale at a garage sale may be displayed within the residence, in a carport, in a garage, in the front, side or rear yard, or in the driveway. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(G)) 
Sec. 22-183. - Advertising signs. 
(a)  Signs permitted. Only the following signs may be displayed for the purpose of advertising a pending garage sale: 
(1)  Location of signs. Two signs of not more than four square feet each may be displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is to be conducted. 
(2)  Directional signs. Two signs of not more than two square feet each for the purpose of giving direction to the residence where the garage sale is to be or is being conducted provided that permission to erect such signs is received from the owners of the property upon which such signs are to be placed. 
The signs advertising the garage sale as authorized by this section shall not be erected on public property or on public facilities. 
(b)  Erection of signs. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than three days prior to the date such garage sale is to commence. 
(c)  Removal of signs. Signs advertising or giving directions to a garage sale must be removed within 24 hours after the end of a garage sale. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(H)) 
Sec. 22-184. - Responsibility. 
The owner or lessee of the premises upon which a garage sale is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of such sale. No such individual shall allow or permit any loud or boisterous language or conduct on the premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on roads or streets in the area of the premises where the garage sale is being conducted. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire department of the city reasonably necessary to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(I)) 
Sec. 22-185. - Parking; law enforcement. 
The parking of vehicles in the vicinity of a garage sale shall be in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. The police department may enforce such temporary controls as may be necessary to alleviate any special health hazards and/or traffic congestion created by a garage sale. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(J)) 
Sec. 22-186. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect: 
(1)  Persons selling goods or personal property at a judicial or foreclosure sale pursuant to the order of any court of competent jurisdiction or any trustee, executor or administrator conducting an estate sale authorized or required by law. 
(2)  Any person given permission to hold an outdoor sale in a designated area of the city during a city planned function. 
(3)  Any public officials acting in accordance with and pursuant to their duties, powers and responsibilities as public officials. 
(4)  A sale by an exempt organization. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(K)) 
Sec. 22-187. - Violation. 
Any article sold on each day conducted in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(L)) 
Sec. 22-188. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 27-105; Ord. of 12-12-1994(4), § 2(M)) 
Secs. 22-189—22-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— State roadside market incentive program, O.C.G.A. § 2-10-130 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.; exemption from taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 

Sec. 22-221. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the city by the General Assembly, for the purpose of maintaining the health and safety of the city; and the provisions of this article are declared to be necessary for reasons of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(A)) 
Sec. 22-222. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person, whether or not a resident of the city, traveling by foot, by wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, products or provisions, offering or exposing such items for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchase or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer such items from a wagon, automotive vehicle, a railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance; and further provided that one who solicits orders and has a separate transaction, makes deliveries or helps cause to be delivered to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(B)II) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-223. - Application form. 
Applicants for a permit and license under this article must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant. 
(2)  Legal and local address of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  The name and address of the employer of the applicant. 
(5)  The length of time in which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with its license number. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(C)) 
Sec. 22-224. - Issuance of license; fee. 
Upon receipt of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, the city clerk shall issue a peddlers license. This license shall be carried by the person at all times while peddling within the city and may not be used or transferred at any time by or to any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(D)) 
Sec. 22-225. - Use of the streets. 
No peddler shall have an exclusive right to any location or public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations may impede or inconvenience the public. For purposes of this article, the judgment of a police officer exercised in good faith shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(E)) 
Sec. 22-226. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may for good cause be suspended for a period of not more than five days by the chief of police. 
(b)  Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city manager after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as a peddler. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(c)  Notice of a hearing for revocation of a license shall be in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and giving the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for a hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(F)) 
Sec. 22-227. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of any city employee concerning his license shall have the right to appeal to the city council if such appeal is taken within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been received by that person. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(G)) 
Sec. 22-228. - Expiration of license. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 of the year when issued. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(H)) 
Sec. 22-229. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1994(2), § 2(I)) 
Secs. 22-230—22-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STREET VENDORS 

Sec. 22-261. - Purpose and authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the constitution of the state, for the purpose of maintaining the health, safety and welfare of the city, and to ensure that vending operations within the city on city property are conducted in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. The city finds that there exists a need for vending, particularly food vending, during special events. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-101) 
Sec. 22-262. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Special event means events designated by the city council as such. 
Street vendor means any person who sells food or any other merchandise to the public from any location on any public property, including any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way. 
Vending means engaging in any of the activities of a street vendor. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-102) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-263. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise provided for in this article, vending shall be permitted within the city. However, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in such activities without having obtained a valid permit as provided for in this article. 
(b)  Issuance. Any permit issued under this section shall be issued to and in the name of only one individual person who, in addition to any bona fide employees of the permittee, shall engage only in the activity applied for; and the permit shall not be transferable to another person. 
(c)  Refund of fee. The permit fee shall not be refundable. 
(d)  Separate permit for each location. A separate permit shall be required for each separate location at which the street vending business is conducted. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-103) 
Sec. 22-264. - Applications for permit. 
Applications for a permit to engage in vending must be submitted to the city clerk at least 30 days in advance of the date vending activities will propose to commence. All applicable fees for the permit shall be paid by cash, cashier's check or money order prior to the issuance of such permit. The application for a permit to engage in street vending shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  The name, current street address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name, current street address and telephone number of a person who can be contacted if the applicant cannot be located. 
(3)  A description of the merchandise, goods or services to be sold by the vendor. 
(4)  A schedule of the intended days and hours of operation. 
(5)  A description of the display to be used by the vendor, specifying the maximum dimensions of the display with any attachments or extensions, the primary material and manner of construction, and the general appearance as it will be presented to the public. Such description shall be provided in the form of a photograph, blueprint or scale drawing. 
(6)  A declaration holding harmless the city, its agents, employees and assigns, from any and all claims or liability that might arise out of any activity engaged in by the vendor. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-104) 
Sec. 22-265. - Displays. 
(a)  Vending permitted under this article shall not be conducted from any conveyance or in any mode other than from an approved cart, stand or skirted table or as otherwise prescribed in this article. Grocery carts and wood or cardboard boxes are prohibited from being used as displays. 
(b)  Any cart, stand or skirted table shall not be larger than four feet wide by eight feet long and seven feet high, including all attachments, extensions and merchandise. 
(c)  The total weight of a display, plus merchandise, shall not exceed 125 pounds per square foot. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-105) 
Sec. 22-266. - Self-contained vehicular prepared food displays. 
The city may, in its discretion, allow trucks and trailers specifically designed for storage and service of food to be located at city designated sites as set forth in section 22-272. These food displays must meet all health department requirements and other applicable requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-106) 
Sec. 22-267. - Fees; term. 
The fees for a vending permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per day of each special event, except the total fee shall be no more than as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for events of more than five consecutive days. All fees shall be paid at city hall prior to the issuance of a permit. There shall be no refunding of vending permit fees. The permit shall be valid only during designated special events but may be renewed for future special events upon prepayment of the daily fee. Each renewal constitutes a certification as to the continued accuracy of the application. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-107) 
Sec. 22-268. - Grant or denial of permit. 
Not later than 30 working days after the filing of the completed application for a permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit. The permit shall be denied if in the judgment of the city circumstances are such that the granting of the permit would not be in the best interest of the general public. Whenever the city shall deny an application for a permit, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of denial to request a hearing before the mayor and council. The applicant may present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses at that hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-108) 
Sec. 22-269. - Display of permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to fail to display the vending permit prominently. Any vendor of food or food products regulated by the health department must display a food permit in the same manner. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-109) 
Sec. 22-270. - Loud noises. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to cause any loud or offensive noise, including noise for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods or services for sale or distribution. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-110) 
Sec. 22-271. - General requirements. 
(a)  Use of public benches or utility poles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for street vendors to block the use of any public bench with their displays or to use any utility poles, trees or shrubs for displaying or promoting the sale of any goods or merchandise. 
(b)  Endangerment of safety, health and/or welfare prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any street vendor to display goods or merchandise in any manner which would endanger the safety, health and/or welfare of the public. 
(c)  Display of merchandise on ground prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any street vendor to display goods or merchandise on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering, on any street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way. 
(d)  Occupation of public rights-of-way. Except as otherwise provided for in this article, it shall be unlawful for any street vendor to occupy the streets, sidewalks or other public property or rights-of-way in a manner that will cause the open pedestrian way to be less than five feet in width; nor shall any such vendor locate within 20 feet of any crosswalk or driveway. 
(e)  Displays. A display shall not be left unattended at any time by a permittee or employee of the permittee on any street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way. 
(f)  Authority of police to require vendors to relocate. The police department may require any street vendor to move or relocate his display in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(g)  Location where vending prohibited. It shall be unlawful to engage in vending in the city except in such location as allowed by the city. 
(h)  Age of applicant. The applicant shall be no less than 18 years of age. 
(i)  Age of employees. The vendor or an employee age 18 or older must be present at all times. The vendor shall comply with all requirements of O.C.G.A. § 39-2-1 et seq. 
(j)  Attire. Vendors and their employees and helpers shall wear neat, clean clothing that complies with all requirements of law. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-111) 
Sec. 22-272. - Specific permitted locations. 
(a)  Specific potential vending sites located in the city are identified on the map attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived as exhibit "A." Each shows a potential vendor location, which shall not exceed the area described below. The specific sites, as shown on the map, are as follows: 
(1)  Hill Park. 
(2)  Madison-Morgan County Recreation Department parking lot at College and East Avenues. 
(3)  County board of education parking lots. 
(4)  Jefferson Street between Hancock Avenue and the Roger's House, when the street is blocked. 
(5)  Sidewalks as determined by the city to be appropriate. 
(b)  The city has discretion within the parameters set forth in section 22-273 to assign vendors a particular site from the list specified in subsection (a) of this section. As other sites may be identified as suitable for the purposes of this section, the city council may approve further sites recommended by the city manager, which shall be marked and assigned in the same manner as the sites designated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-112) 
Sec. 22-273. - Site designation process. 
The city manager shall have the authority to administer the provisions of this article and to promulgate reasonable administrative rules and procedures in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The assignment of vendor locations shall be compatible with the public interest and use of sidewalk areas and public rights-of-way and shall take into consideration the proximity of existing public and private property (benches, bus stops, loading zones, telephone booths, building entrances and display windows, etc.), proximity to other vendor locations, and the like, to ensure that there will not be pedestrian and street congestion or obstruction and in order to contribute as effectively as possible to the intent of this article. 
(2)  Available spaces shall be assigned using the guidelines of this section, on a first come, first served basis from a waiting list of all approved applicants. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-113) 
Sec. 22-274. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit may be suspended for a period of time or revoked for the following conduct: 
(1)  Violating any federal, state or local law or regulation. 
(2)  Failing to permit any lawfully requested inspection by health officials or to comply with any lawful request of a police officer. 
(3)  Failing to possess and properly display at all times the permits required under this article. 
(4)  Having a display that is not in compliance with this article. 
(5)  Vending in any area other than the space designated by the permit unless approved by the city manager. 
(6)  Leaving any display overnight on any street or sidewalk or failing to remove any display during the hours which it is unattended. 
(7)  Failing to keep the vendor location clear of trash or other debris or failing to pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse remaining at the vendor location at the close of the business day. 
(8)  Offering for sale any merchandise, goods or services other than those approved and identified on the permit. 
(9)  Allowing any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be stored or placed anywhere other than in, on or under the display. 
(10)  Keeping animals of any kind near the vendor location. This prohibition shall not apply to guide dogs. 
(11)  Using a motorized vehicle for the purpose of street vending. 
(12)  Using parking meters, utility poles, trees, shrubs, benches or other public property other than the vendor's approved display to advertise or promote the sale of goods, merchandise or services. 
(13)  Misrepresenting any information required on any application for a permit, to provide the information required by this section, or failing to provide any relevant information sought by the city manager. 
(14)  Violating any provision of this article. 
(b)  If a permit is suspended or revoked, the permittee shall have the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the mayor and council within ten working days of the suspension or revocation. The permittee shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. The suspension or revocation of a permit owner shall not prevent any criminal prosecution that may arise from any violation of this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-114) 
Sec. 22-275. - Construction of this article with Charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or the city to enforce any provisions of the Charter or other ordinances or regulations of the city, nor to prevent or punish violations. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the Charter or by any other laws or ordinances. In the event of any conflicts of this article with any other ordinance, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1996, § 21A-115) 
Secs. 22-276—22-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COMMERCIAL PROPERTY VENDING 

Sec. 22-306. - Purpose and authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the constitution of the state for the purpose of maintaining the health, safety and welfare of the city, and to ensure that vending operations upon privately owned commercially zoned property in the city are conducted in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. The city finds that there exists a need for vending, particularly food vending, during special events. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-101) 
Sec. 22-307. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Occupant means the person who owns or leases the property upon which vending is proposed to be conducted. 
Property means privately owned property zoned as commercial pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance. 
Special event means events designated by the city council as such. 
Vending means engaging in any of the activities of a vendor on property in the city. Vending is only allowed during special events. 
Vendor means a person who sells food or any other merchandise to the public from any privately owned commercially zoned property. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-102) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-308. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in vending activities without having obtained a valid permit as provided for in this article. 
(b)  Issuance. Any permit issued under this section shall be issued to and in the name of only one person who, in addition to any bona fide employees of the permittee, shall engage only in the activity applied for. The permit shall not be transferable to another person. Only the proposed vendor or his authorized agent may apply for such permit. 
(c)  Refund of fee. Any permit fee shall not be refundable. 
(d)  Separate permit for each location. A separate permit shall be required for each separate location at which the vending is sought to be conducted. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-103) 
Sec. 22-309. - Applications for permit. 
Applications for a permit to engage in vending must be submitted to the city clerk at least 30 days in advance of the dates vending activities are proposed to commence. All applicable fees for the permit shall be paid by cash, cashier's check or money order prior to the issuance of such permit. The application for a permit to engage in vending shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, current street address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name, current street address and telephone number of a person who can be contacted if the applicant cannot be located. 
(3)  A description of the merchandise, goods or services to be sold by the vendor. 
(4)  A schedule of the intended days and hours of operation, which must be during a special event. 
(5)  A description of the display to be used by the vendor, specifying the maximum dimensions of the display with any attachments or extensions, the primary material and manner of construction, and the general appearance as it will be presented to the public. Such description shall be provided in the form of a photograph, blueprint or scale drawing. 
(6)  A declaration holding harmless the city, its agents, employees and assigns, from any and all claims or liability that might arise from any activity engaged in by the vendor. 
(7)  Written permission from the owner or lessee of the vending site. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-104) 
Sec. 22-310. - Displays. 
(a)  Vending permitted under this article shall not be conducted from any conveyance or in any mode other than from a city approved cart, stand or skirted table or as otherwise prescribed in this article. Grocery carts and wood or cardboard boxes are prohibited from being used as displays. 
(b)  Any cart, stand or skirted table shall not be larger than four feet wide by eight feet long and seven feet high, including all attachments, extensions and merchandise. 
(c)  The total weight of a display, plus merchandise, shall not exceed 125 pounds per square foot. 
(d)  The display area shall be contained in an area no smaller than 16 feet by 16 feet, or 256 square feet. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-105) 
Sec. 22-311. - Self-contained vehicular prepared food displays. 
The city may, in its discretion, allow trucks and trailers specifically designed for storage and service of food to be located at city approved sites as set forth in section 22-317. These food displays must meet all health department requirements and other applicable requirements. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-106) 
Sec. 22-312. - Fees; term. 
Occupants shall not be charged a fee for a vending permit. All other vendors shall pay a vending permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per day of each special event, except the total fee shall be no more than as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for special events of more than five consecutive days. All fees shall be paid at city hall prior to the issuance of a permit. There shall be no refunding of vending permits. The permit shall be valid only during one designated special event but may be renewed for future special events upon prepayment of the daily fee. Each renewal constitutes a certification as to the continued accuracy of the application. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-107) 
Sec. 22-313. - Grant or denial of permit. 
Not later than 30 working days after the filing of the completed application for a permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit. The permit shall be denied if in the judgment of the city circumstances are such that the granting of the permit would not be in the best interest of the general public. Whenever the city shall deny an application for a permit, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of denial to request a hearing before the mayor and council. The applicant may present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses at that hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-108) 
Sec. 22-314. - Display of permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to fail to display the vending permit prominently. Any vendor of food or food products regulated by the health department must display a food permit in the same manner. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-109) 
Sec. 22-315. - Loud noises. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to cause any loud or offensive noise, including noise for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods or services for sale or distribution. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-110) 
Sec. 22-316. - General requirements. 
(a)  Use of public property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to use any public property for displaying or promoting the sale of any goods or merchandise unless a permit therefor has been obtained under article VII of this chapter. 
(b)  Endangerment of safety, health and/or welfare prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to display goods or merchandise in any manner which would endanger the safety, health and/or welfare of the public. 
(c)  Display of merchandise on ground prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to display goods or merchandise on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering. 
(d)  Displays. A display shall not be left unattended at any time. 
(e)  Authority of police to require vendors to relocate. The police department may require any vendor to relocate the display in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(f)  Age of applicant. The applicant shall be no less than 18 years of age. 
(g)  Age of employees. The vendor or an employee age 18 or older must be present at the vending site at all times. The vendor shall comply with all requirements of O.C.G.A. § 39-2-1 et seq. 
(h)  Attire. Vendors and their employees and helpers shall wear neat, clean clothing that complies with all requirements of law. 
(i)  Food sales. Prior to the sale of food, vendors must meet all county health department requirements. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-111) 
Sec. 22-317. - Site approval process. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the authority to administer the provisions of this article and to promulgate reasonable administrative rules and procedures in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The approval of vending locations shall be compatible with the public interest and shall take into consideration the proximity of existing public and private property (benches, bus stops, loading zones, telephone booths, building entrances and display windows, etc.), proximity to other vending locations, and the like, to ensure there will not be pedestrian and street congestion or obstruction, and in order to contribute as effectively as possible to the intent of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-112) 
Sec. 22-318. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A vending permit may be suspended for a period of time or revoked for the following conduct: 
(1)  Violating any federal, state or local law or regulation. 
(2)  Failing to permit any lawfully requested inspection by health officials or to comply with any lawful request of a police officer. 
(3)  Failing to possess and properly display at all times the permits required under this article. 
(4)  Having a display that is not in compliance with this article. 
(5)  Vending in any area other than the space designated by the permit unless approved by the city in writing. 
(6)  Failing to keep the vending location clear of trash or other debris or failing to pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse remaining at the vending location at the close of the business day. 
(7)  Offering for sale any merchandise, goods or services other than those approved and identified on the permit. 
(8)  Allowing any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be stored or placed anywhere other than in, on or under the display. 
(9)  Keeping animals of any kind near the vending location. This prohibition shall not apply to guide dogs. 
(10)  Using a motorized vehicle for the purpose of vending, except as expressly authorized pursuant to section 22-311. 
(11)  Misrepresenting any information required on any application for a permit; failing to provide the information required by this section; or failing to provide any relevant information sought by the city manager. 
(12)  Violating any provision of this article. 
(b)  If a permit is suspended or revoked, the permittee shall have the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the mayor and council within ten working days of the suspension or revocation. The permittee shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. The suspension or revocation of a permit shall not prevent any criminal prosecution that may arise from any violation of this Code. Noncompliance is deemed to be a misdemeanor offense punishable in the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-113) 
Sec. 22-319. - Construction of this article with Charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or the city to enforce any provisions of the Charter or other ordinances or regulations of the city, nor to prevent or punish violations. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the Charter or by any other laws or ordinances. In the event of any conflicts of this article with any other ordinance, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(1), § 21B-114) 
Secs. 22-320—22-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY VENDING 

Sec. 22-351. - Purpose and authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the constitution of the state for the purpose of maintaining the health, safety and welfare of the city, and to ensure that vending operations upon privately owned residentially zoned property in the city are conducted in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. The city finds that there exists a need for vending, particularly food vending, during special events. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-101) 
Sec. 22-352. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Property means privately owned property zoned as residential pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance in chapter 90. 
Resident means the person who owns or leases the property upon which vending is proposed to be conducted. 
Special event means events designated by the city council as such. 
Vending means engaging in any of the activities of a vendor on property in the city. Vending under this article is only allowed during special events, and only may be engaged in by a resident. Vending is only permitted outdoors. 
Vendor means the seller of food or any other merchandise to the public from privately owned residentially zoned property. Vendors are only permitted to vend on residentially zoned property if they are the owner or lessee of that property. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-102) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-353. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in vending activities without having obtained a valid permit as provided for in this article. Vending may only be engaged in by the resident, on the resident's property. Such vending is only permitted outdoors. 
(b)  Issuance. Any permit issued under this section shall be issued to and in the name of only one resident who, in addition to any bona fide employees of the resident, shall engage only in the activity applied for. The permit shall not be transferable to another person. Only the proposed vendor or authorized agent thereof may apply for such permit. 
(c)  Refund of fee. The permit fee shall not be refundable. 
(d)  One permit for each location. Only one permit shall be granted for a residence at which the vending is sought to be conducted. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-103) 
Sec. 22-354. - Applications. 
Applications for a permit to engage in vending must be submitted to the city clerk at least 30 days in advance of the dates vending activities are proposed to commence. All applicable fees for the permit shall be paid by cash, cashier's check or money order prior to the issuance of such permit. The application for a permit to engage in vending shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, current street address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name, current street address and telephone number of a person who can be contacted if the applicant cannot be located. 
(3)  A description of the merchandise, goods or services to be sold by the vendor. 
(4)  A schedule of the intended days and hours of operation, which must be during a special event. 
(5)  A description of the display to be used by the vendor, specifying the maximum dimensions of the display with any attachments or extensions, the primary material and manner of construction, and the general appearance as it will be presented to the public. Such description shall be provided in the form of a photograph, blueprint or scale drawing. 
(6)  A declaration holding harmless the city, its agents, employees and assigns, from any and all claims or liability that might arise from any activity engaged in by the vendor. 
(7)  A statement that the vending will only be conducted on property owned by the applicant, and upon which the applicant resides. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-104) 
Sec. 22-355. - Displays. 
(a)  Vending permitted under this article shall not be conducted from any conveyance or in any mode other than from a city approved cart, stand or skirted table or as otherwise prescribed in this article. Grocery carts and wood or cardboard boxes are prohibited from being used as displays. 
(b)  Any cart, stand or skirted table shall not be larger than four feet wide by eight feet long and seven feet high, including all attachments, extensions and merchandise. 
(c)  The total weight of a display, plus merchandise, shall not exceed 125 pounds per square foot. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-105) 
Sec. 22-356. - Fees; term. 
Vending permit fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per special event. All fees shall be paid at city hall prior to the issuance of a permit. There shall be no refunding of vending permits. The permit shall be valid only during one designated special event but may be renewed for future special events upon prepayment of the fee. Each renewal constitutes a certification as to the continued accuracy of the application. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-106) 
Sec. 22-357. - Grant or denial of permit. 
Not later than 30 working days after the filing of the completed application for a vending permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit. The permit shall be denied if in the judgment of the city circumstances are such that the granting of the permit would not be in the best interest of the general public. Whenever the city shall deny an application for a permit, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of denial to request a hearing before the mayor and council. The applicant may present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses at that hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-107) 
Sec. 22-358. - Display of permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to fail to display the vending permit prominently. Any vendor of food or food products regulated by the health department must display a food permit in the same manner. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-108) 
Sec. 22-359. - Loud noises. 
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to cause any loud or offensive noise, including noise for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods or services for sale or distribution. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-109) 
Sec. 22-360. - General requirements. 
(a)  Use of public property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to use any public property, including public road right-of-way, for displaying or promoting the sale of any goods or merchandise, unless a permit has been obtained under article VII of this chapter. 
(b)  Endangerment of safety, health and/or welfare prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to display goods or merchandise in any manner which would endanger the safety, health and/or welfare of the public. 
(c)  Display of merchandise on ground prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to display goods or merchandise on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering. 
(d)  Displays. A display shall not be left unattended at any time. 
(e)  Authority of police to require vendors to relocate. The police department may require any vendor to relocate the display in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(f)  Age of vendor. The vendor shall be no less than 18 years of age. 
(g)  Age of employees. The vendor or an employee age 18 or older must supervise the vending site at all times. The vendor shall comply with all requirements of O.C.G.A. § 39-2-1 et seq. 
(h)  Attire. Vendors and their employees and helpers shall wear neat, clean clothing that complies with all requirements of law. 
(i)  Signs. No signs are allowed except two double-sided signs placed upon the vendor's property, and one additional sign at the display. No sign shall exceed 22 inches by 28 inches. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-110) 
Sec. 22-361. - Site approval process. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the authority to administer the provisions of this article and to promulgate reasonable administrative rules and procedures in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The approval of vending locations shall be compatible with the public interest and shall take into consideration the proximity of existing public and private property (benches, bus stops, loading zones, telephone booths, building entrances and display windows, etc.), proximity to other vending locations, and the like, to ensure there will not be pedestrian and street congestion or obstruction, and in order to contribute as effectively as possible to the intent of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-111) 
Sec. 22-362. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A vending permit may be suspended for a period of time or revoked for the following conduct: 
(1)  Violating any federal, state or local law or regulation. 
(2)  Failing to permit any lawfully requested inspection by health officials or to comply with any lawful request of a police officer. 
(3)  Failing to possess and properly display at all times the permits required under this article. 
(4)  Having a display that is not in compliance with this article. 
(5)  Vending in any area other than the space designated by the permit unless approved by the city in writing. 
(6)  Failing to keep the vending location clear of trash or other debris or failing to pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse remaining at the vending location at the close of the business day. 
(7)  Offering for sale any merchandise, goods or services other than those approved and identified on the permit. 
(8)  Allowing any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be stored or placed anywhere other than in, on or under the display. 
(9)  Using a motorized vehicle for the purpose of vending. 
(10)  Misrepresenting any information required on any application for a permit, failing to provide the information required by this section, or failing to provide any relevant information sought by the city manager. 
(11)  Violating any provision of this article. 
(b)  If a permit is suspended or revoked, the vendor shall have the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the mayor and council within ten working days of the suspension or revocation. The vendor shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. The suspension or revocation of a permit shall not prevent any criminal prosecution that may arise from any violation of this Code. Noncompliance is deemed a misdemeanor offense punishable in the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-112) 
Sec. 22-363. - Construction of this article with Charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or the city to enforce any provisions of the Charter or other ordinances or regulations of the city, nor to prevent or punish violations. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the Charter or by any other laws or ordinances. In the event of any conflicts of this article with any other ordinance, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1996(2), § 21C-113) 
Secs. 22-364—22-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SIDEWALK CAFES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A), set out provisions intended for use as Art. X, §§ 22-1—22-13. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. X, §§ 22-381—22-393. 

Sec. 22-381. - Purpose and authority. 
This article shall apply to the establishment, operation, and maintenance of all outdoor cafes within the City of Madison on public sidewalks. The purpose of article is to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of the city for the benefit of businesses and citizens located there, and no right of individuals or individual businesses are created therein, and to create an aesthetic ambiance which will attract tourists to the Madison area. Further, this article is designed to insure the primary purpose of the public rights-of-way by maintaining the efficiency of the pedestrian path for both safety and convenience. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the constitution of the state, for the purpose of maintaining the health, safety and welfare of the city, and to ensure that sidewalk cafe operations within the city on public property are conducted in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-382. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access zone means that portion of the public sidewalk reserved for continuous unobstructed pedestrian traffic and ingress/egress to businesses and structures lining the public rights-of-way. 
Amenity zone means that portion of public sidewalk for siting of municipal streetscape elements, such as street trees, street lights, benches, trash cans, sign posts, etc.; approved sidewalk cafe areas; and designated street vending locations. 
Appearance zone means that portion of the sidewalk as approved for downtown beautification or business enhancement, including planters and benches, product display and sidewalk signs, tables and chairs, and literature racks. 
License means the sidewalk cafe license issued for the lawful use of the public property, specifically sidewalks, by restaurants. 
Licensee means the holder of a sidewalk cafe license under the terms and provisions of this ordinance. 
Manager means the city manager, or his designee. 
Obstacle means any object or item whether situated upon or hanging over the right-of-way, including but not limited to noticeable changes in grade or paving materials. 
Restaurant means a commercial establishment characterized by table service where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. The term encompasses cafes, grills, and lunch counters but excluding without limitation drive-in and drive-thru restaurants, as well as temporary, mobile, and free-standing food service vendors. For the purposes of this article only, the term shall also encompass confectionary and dessert shops. 
Restaurant facade means the front of the building, specifically the elevation containing the primary entrance of the restaurant, unless otherwise determined by the manager. 
Public property means property owned, leased, or maintained by the City of Madison including but not limited to streets, byways or rights-of-way, sidewalks, parking lots, lots of record with or without structures, parks, and easements. 
Sidewalk means that portion of the right-of-way improved for use by pedestrians located between the curb line or the edge of an improved roadway and the adjacent property line. 
Sidewalk cafe means the use of a sidewalk cafe area for the service of food and beverage. 
Sidewalk cafe area means the area within the amenity zone for placement of cafe furnishings on the public sidewalk and of operation of a sidewalk cafe as an extension and incidental activity of a city-licensed restaurant. Sidewalk frontage means the length of frontage along the property line of that portion of any building occupied by the licensed restaurant to which the sidewalk cafe is incidental. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-383. - Exceptions. 
Outdoor dining areas on private property are not encompassed herein but are addressed in the official zoning ordinance and other city development regulations. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-384. - License required and fee; license non-transferable and expiration. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to operate a sidewalk cafe in the city without having first obtained a license or to fail to comply with all sections of this article. A sidewalk cafe license is valid for one year from January 1 to December 31. A new license shall be procured each year, which shall be the responsibility of the license holder. The application fee for the license shall be the fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and shall be paid at city hall upon the filing of an application for the license no later than December 15 of the preceding year. 
No license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. Licenses will expire upon transfer of ownership, change in use of facility, and on December 31 of each year, unless revoked or suspended prior to expiration. The issuance of the license shall not be construed, interpreted, or considered to grant or convey any property rights, any lease holder rights, or any interest in the public right-of-way. The provisions of this article are subject to change and amendment by the city from time to time. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-385. - Items needed for license application; notification. 
An applicant for a license shall submit the following items for review: 
(1)  A completed application form; 
(2)  A copy of a valid city occupational/business license to operate a restaurant in front of which the sidewalk cafe is proposed to be located; 
(3)  A copy of the current certificate of insurance in the amounts and categories required by section 22-390 of this article; 
(4)  A scaled drawing identifying at a minimum the following: 
a.  The restaurant footprint; 
b.  The width of the sidewalk frontage, known as the restaurant facade and the distance between the restaurant facade and the curb in front of the restaurant facade; 
c.  The dimensions of the proposed sidewalk cafe; 
d.  The distance between the proposed sidewalk cafe and the nearest obstacle around the perimeter of the sidewalk cafe; and, 
e.  The quantity, design, and materials of the proposed cafe furnishings for the sidewalk cafe. 
(5)  A nonrefundable license application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall process applications, ensure site sufficiency based upon the application materials in section 22-385 and observing considerations of section 22-386. The applicant shall not change, increase, or decrease the sidewalk cafe or modify its parameters as outlined in the application without written authorization from the manager. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-386. - Consideration of license. 
In deciding whether or not to grant, renew, suspend, or revoke a license under this article, the manager shall consider the following: 
(1)  Compliance by the applicant or license holder with the provisions of this article and all other relevant laws or ordinances, regulations and resolution of the city and any other governmental body or agency; 
(2)  Payment record and status of occupation tax, alcohol license fees, or other monies owed by the applicant or restaurant submitting the license application; 
(3)  The character and reputation of the applicant or license holder; 
(4)  The conduct of the restaurant of the applicant or license holder; 
(5)  The actual or proposed effect of the sidewalk cafe on the primary purpose and use of the public right-of-way, including but not limited to the efficiency and clearance of the pedestrian access zone; on-street parking; vehicular travel lanes; loading/unloading areas; hydrants and utility access; crosswalks and accessibility ramps; driveways and alleys; transit or bus service stops; and intersection visibility; 
(6)  The actual or proposed effect of the sidewalk cafe given the proximate right-of-way area; sidewalk dimensions, materials, and existing condition; obstacles and obstructions; street signs; streetscape elements such as street trees, street lights, benches, trash cans, sign posts, etc.; and proximity of other sidewalk cafes; 
(7)  The actual or proposed effect of the sidewalk cafe on nearby properties, including but not limited to the impact upon adjoining property owners and/or tenants as well as the proximity of nearby sensitive uses such as residential uses, healthcare facilities, lodging establishments, public buildings and restrooms, parks, and other areas which may be impacted by heightened pedestrian activity and traffic, noise, odor, smoke, litter, or property values and all other relevant considerations; 
(8)  All other relevant issues related to the public health, safety, welfare, morals, interest, and convenience. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-387. - Location by zoning district. 
No sidewalk cafe license shall be allowed except in areas as provided within the current official zoning ordinance. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-388. - Incidental seating limitations. 
Seating in the sidewalk cafe area shall not exceed 30 percent of the seating in the restaurant to which the sidewalk cafe is incidental. No sidewalk cafe seating authorized herein shall be used for calculating seating requirements pertaining to the location of, applications for, or issuance of a license to operate a restaurant or to sell alcohol, nor shall sidewalk cafe seating be used to claim any exemption from any other requirements of any city, county or state codes, ordinances and/or laws. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-389. - Conditions for operation. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, a sidewalk cafe operating in the city shall comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  Pedestrian clearance. A minimum of five feet shall be reserved at all times for continuous unobstructed pedestrian traffic along the public sidewalk. This reserved access zone shall not be encroached upon even if it precludes a sidewalk cafe. Additionally, a minimum of one foot of unobstructed space shall be reserved at all times between any sidewalk cafe perimeter and the nearest obstacle, including but not limited to streetscape elements and the curb. 
(2)  Limitation on area. The area in which a sidewalk cafe is operated shall be located in the amenity zone, limited to the width of sidewalk frontage of the licensed restaurant, and limited to the depth defined by the existing street tree islands. Only the approved sidewalk cafe area shall be used, and said area shall not be modified without the written consent of the manager. 
a.  The determination of whether and to what extent the sidewalk cafe interferes with the considerations outlined in section 22-386 shall be made by the manager at the time of application based on the characteristics of each proposed site. 
b.  For corner locations or where extreme right-of-way limitations exist, the manager may consider alternative areas of the same size or less in the immediate proximity for sidewalk cafe locations provided that [sub]section 22-389(1) is met. 
c.  To allow for maximum sidewalk cafe potential in the city and where obstacles prevent the sidewalk cafe from utilizing the full width of the sidewalk frontage, the manager at his reasonable discretion may consider an extension of the sidewalk cafe equal to the area unable to be used because of the obstacle provided: the adjacent area is not a clear passage area as per [sub]section 62-4(2), the adjacent area is not currently licensed as a sidewalk cafe area or a street vending location, and all other provisions of this ordinance are met. The manager may also take into consideration the basis, not fact, of any objections proffered by an adjoining property or business owner(s). In no instance shall a sidewalk cafe area extension exceed 55 feet from the primary service entrance. 
(3)  Cafe furnishings. Cafe furnishings shall be limited to tables, chairs, umbrellas, and cigarette receptacles, which are subject to the manager's reasonable approval. Only approved furnishings shall be located in the sidewalk cafe, and said furnishings shall not be modified without written consent of the manager. 
a.  Design. All furnishings shall be fire-retardant or manufactured of fire resistant material. Tables and chairs shall be metal and either black or dark green in color. Umbrellas shall be sized appropriately to be at least the same diameter as the table and not protrude beyond the side cafe area, shall be anchored with a weighted base, and shall be color coordinated with the restaurant to which the sidewalk cafe is incidental. 
b.  Condition. Cafe furnishings are to be kept clean, attractive, sanitary, safe, operable, in good repair, and in structurally sound condition at all times. If the manager judges any furnishing to be non-compliant with this section, said furnishing is subject to immediate removal by the licensee. 
(4)  Sanitation. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the restaurant to which the sidewalk cafe license is issued to maintain the area covered by the license in a clean, neat, and orderly manner at all times. The area shall be clear of litter, food scraps, soiled dishes and other debris, including but not limited to cigarette butts. The licensee shall daily remove from the public right-of-way grease, stains, food spots, etc. caused by the operation of the sidewalk cafe. 
a.  It shall also be the responsibility of the license holder to wash the sidewalk surface on which the sidewalk cafe is located no less often than once weekly and pressure wash upon request by the manager. 
b.  Licensee shall sweep the sidewalk and collect debris prior to pressure washing and shall maintain records of the date sidewalk was pressure washed and by whom, and such records shall be open to inspection by the city. Pressure washing shall be conducted using water only and the use of cleaning agents is prohibited. 
(5)  Service and activity privileges. The following service privileges are also extended as part of the sidewalk cafe license: 
a.  Beverage and food. Any sidewalk cafe that serves beverages must also provide food service. No outside service of food or beverages is permitted after 11:00 p.m. and all outside consumption shall cease at 11:30 p.m. Each table shall have a provide a posting provided by the city to inform patrons of relevant downtown ordinances. 
1.  Sidewalk cafes are considered part of the restaurant premises and operated as an extension and incidental activity of a restaurant including both food and beverage service, provided that the restaurant to which the sidewalk cafe is licensed maintains valid business and pouring licenses under the applicable Georgia law and the regulations of the city and maintains compliance with all sections of this article. 
2.  Sidewalk cafes are exempt from any restrictions on open containers upon the restaurant obtaining a permit from the state department of revenue. However, all alcoholic beverages shall be served in clear containers (e.g. no beer bottles, taps, kegs, coolers, etc.). If a restaurant prefers not to decant a wine bottle, then said bottle shall be fully obscured by placement within an opaque serving vessel or opaque cloth. 
3.  If an alcoholic beverage is served to a patron, the patron must be advised that he is not allowed to leave the premises of the sidewalk cafe area with the alcoholic beverage, except to go inside the restaurant to which the sidewalk cafe is incidental. Patrons shall not walk from one establishment to another with an alcoholic beverage. 
b.  Glass containers. The city reserves the right to suspend the privilege of using glass containers, including other types of ceramic serving vessels or plates, within the sidewalk cafe during any permitted special events or when streets are closed. The use of such containers will be revoked if an incident jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of customers or the general public. 
c.  Smoking. Sidewalk cafes may be designated as outdoor smoking areas for the restaurant provided that an approved cigarette receptacle is proposed and located with the cafe furnishings. 
d.  Specific limitations. Licensees must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  No encroachment at any time into the access zone provided for pedestrian travel and areas reserved for ingress, egress, and circulation. 
2.  No relocation, alteration, or modification to the right-of-way, sidewalk surface, or streetscape elements. 
3.  No furnishings used in connection with a sidewalk cafe shall be attached, chained or in manner affixed to any tree, post, sign or other fixture or surface. 
4.  No overnight storage, parking, or leaving any items on the sidewalk except for approved furnishings, which may be kept in the sidewalk cafe area at the licensee's risk. No use of the sidewalk cafe areas to stock or store tables, chairs, or other items not in use. 
5.  No exposed flames or use of oil or torches. Small votives, where the flame is fully surrounded by a non-flammable container, are permitted. 
6.  No use of streetscape elements such as public trash cans by licensee for either the sidewalk cafe or the restaurant. 
7.  No use of the sidewalk cafe area to place, display, or sell items other than food or beverages. 
8.  No signage in the sidewalk cafe area, upon furnishings, or on serving vessels. 
9.  No extension of electrical cords to provide music, lighting, etc. to the sidewalk cafe areas. Nor shall a licensee shall allow sound or a device which produces a loud noise or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device in violation of the city noise regulations. The city reserves the right to decrease noise levels of businesses if affecting public activities in the area. 
10.  No food preparation shall be allowed on the sidewalk. There shall be no cooking, storage, cooling or refrigeration or other equipment in the sidewalk cafe area. 
11.  No sublicense of the sidewalk cafe area. No licensee shall, nor shall a licensee allow others, to use the sidewalk cafe area to place displays, vend, distribute information or display goods, or other activities other than those specifically permitted in this article. 
e.  Violations. Any violation of the above requirements, or state or local laws, can result in suspension or revocation of the license. Repeated offenses may result in denial of subsequent sidewalk cafe license applications. 
(6)  Removal of furnishings. The manager at his reasonable discretion may require temporary removal for cleaning or special circumstances. If such temporary removal(s) exceeds 30 days during a calendar year, the city shall apply a prorated credit to the licensee's account for each additional day the sidewalk cafe is subject to removal. The licensee shall not be entitled to any refund for the removal period nor shall the city be responsible for any costs associated with the removal or return of sidewalk cafe furnishings. 
a.  Temporary removal for cleaning. All tables and chairs of a sidewalk cafe shall be removed from the public sidewalk as notified by the city for right-of-way cleaning. The licensee shall be responsible for removing all sidewalk cafe furnishings at least one day prior to the dated identified by the manager. 
b.  Suspension or modification of operation. The manager shall have the authority to require any sidewalk cafe operating in an area created by this section to suspend operation and/or clear such area, or to move or modify the location or operation of the sidewalk cafe without prior notice or prior hearing when in the reasonable discretion of the manager any such use, occupation, or obstruction may interfere with special circumstances such as: 
1.  Any permitted special event; 
2.  Any street, sidewalk, or utility construction; 
3.  Any emergency situation; or 
4.  The protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
c.  Failure to remove furnishings. Under [sub]section 22-389(6)a. and b. and section 22-391, failure to remove all furnishings and other items associated with the operation of the sidewalk cafe shall result in a removal of such furnishings and other items by the manager. The licensee shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the city for the removal and storage of such furnishings and other items. 
(7)  Additional conditions. The manager may, at his reasonable discretion under this article, place additional reasonable conditions upon the issuance of approval in order to insure the protection of the public rights-of-way and the rights of all adjoining property owners and the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-390. - Liability and insurance. 
(a)  Except for actions arising out of the City of Madison's sole negligence, the license agrees to indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the city and its officers, officials, representatives, agents, and employees, from any and all claims, liability, damages, or causes of action which may arise out of the license or licensee's service or activity regarding the sidewalk cafe area. 
(b)  The licensee agrees to maintain during the entire license period, at its own expense, the following: 
(1)  Commercial general liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The city must be named as an additional insured on this policy, and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy reflecting compliance with this requirement. 
(2)  Workers' compensation and employer's liability as required by the State of Georgia. 
(3)  All policies must be issued by companies authorized to do business in the State of Georgia and listed on the U.S. Treasury Circular 570. 
(4)  The city must receive 30 days written notice prior to any cancellation, non-renewal, or material change in the coverage provided. 
(5)  The license must provide an original certificate of insurance as evidence that the above requirements have been met prior to the issuance of the license. 
(6)  All proper permits required by the Morgan County Health Department. 
(c)  The licensee is responsible for immediate and proper workmanlike repair of any damage to public property caused by the sidewalk cafe. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-391. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
The approval of a sidewalk cafe license is conditional at all times. Said license may be revoked or suspended up to 12 months by the manager if it is found that: 
(1)  Any necessary business or health permit/license/certificate has been suspended, revoked, or cancelled. 
(2)  The licensee does not have insurance as described in section 22-390. 
(3)  The licensee has violated this article or any other city or state regulation. 
(4)  The licensee has a history of violations of this article of two or more within a two-year period. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-392. - Fines for violators. 
The following minimum fines shall be imposed for violations of this article: 
(1)  First citation: $100.00 fine. 
(2)  Second citation (within one-year period): $250.00 fine and a seven-day suspension of sidewalk cafe operation. 
(3)  Third citation (within one-year period): $500.00 fine and a thirty-day suspension of sidewalk cafe operation. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-393. - Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Any person or entity receiving a license hereunder agrees to comply with all the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and all other applicable regulations as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 22-394—22-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of 2-27-2012(2), § 1, repealed Art. XI, §§ 22-411—22-423, which pertained to development impact fee and derived from Amd. of 4-27-09, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A). 

Secs. 22-411—22-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PAWNSHOPS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-451. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Employee: Any person who works in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis. regardless of whether remuneration is received. 
Pawnbroker: Any person who works in a pawnshop, as a manager or owner or both. 
Pawnshop: Any business that takes or receives by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any kind as security for any debt or engagement redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale or default. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 
Sec. 22-452. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The city police department shall see that the provisions hereof are observed and enforced. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-453. - Employees. 
It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to assure there is compliance herewith. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-454. - Character of person connected with pawn business. 
No owner, employee, pawnbroker, or any person connected with a pawnshop for which a license or permit is sought, shall have been convicted of any crime involving felony, burglary. robbery, or a violation of the "Family Violence Act." 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-455. - Annual permit. 
(a)  Before operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop, any person must first file an application with the city police department for a permit to operate or be employed in the pawnshop. 
(1)  The application shall be made on an annual basis. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, is paid to the city. 
(3)  The application shall state the address of the pawnshop. 
(4)  The application shall contain the full name, address, and phone number of any employee or pawnbroker. The application may contain, as prescribed by the city council, any additional information that will be pertinent to the pawnshop and/or pawnbroker. 
(b)  The chief of police or any other officer of the city designated by the city council shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report to the chief of police whether such applicant has been convicted of a criminal offense as indicated in this section. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-456. - Records of transactions. 
Every pawnbroker shall, consistent with O.C.G.A 44-12-132, maintain a permanent pawn record book of each one of its pawn transactions, in which an accurate description of each item of pawned property (per 44-12-132 "Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase, or sale:") pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop. This pawn record book will be accessible, un-redacted, for personal inspection, to the city police department, upon the request of the city police department, within a 24-hour time period, except 48 hours when there is an intervening Sunday, to impede the sale of stolen property and to aid the police in recovering stolen items. 
Every pawnbroker shall maintain said permanent pawn record book(s) in such a form wherein each day's entries in such pawn record book(s) or a separate form containing the same information ("form") shall be either printed, photocopied, or scanned, or photographed, on a daily basis (either the same evening or the next morning by 11:00 a.m., pawnbroker's choice). Such printout, photocopy, or scan, or photograph (pawnbroker's choice) of that day's pawn record(s) or form can upon request of the city police department, be provided by text, fax, or by email or by hard copy (pawnbroker's choice), to the police department as a legible daily copy, of each pawn transaction that occurred during the 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the day covered by the pawn record book(s) entries, to impede the sale of stolen property and to aid the police in recovering stolen items. Such daily copy, upon request of the city police department, shall be provided either the same evening or by the next morning by 11:00 a.m. (pawnbroker's choice). 
This process will facilitate the police department comparing said printout/photocopy/scan/photograph or form side by side with the police department's list of stolen items. The police department shall destroy same (printout/photocopy/scan/photograph or form) after six months from receipt thereof. 
As to pawn transfers of goods from pawnbrokers back to individuals who pledged them, the printout/photocopy/scan/photograph or form shall not be required to be provided to the police department, but at the pawnbroker's election can be provided if it is part of the record that is printed, photocopied, scanned or photographed. 
Each of these pawn record book entries shall contain an accurate description of each item of property pledged, traded or otherwise sold/pawned to the pawnshop, and shall be made at the time of each pawn transaction, to impede the sale of stolen property and to aid the police in recovering stolen items, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale to the pawnshop, of pawned property. 
(2)  Name, address, (and telephone number if available) of the customer making said pledge, trade or pawn sale. 
(3)  A description of said pawn customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight. 
(4)  The driver's license number of said pawn customer or some other state issued identification card which contains a photograph of said pawn customer. 
(5)  A photo or in the alternative a description (pawnbroker's choice) of the pledged or purchased pawned property, which provides any serial, model and other identifying number, if reasonably available, and by any identifying marks inscribed thereon (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). 
(6)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought by the pawnshop. 
(7)  The price paid by the pawnshop or the amount loaned. 
(8)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn (30 days per state law). 
(9)  If payment by the pawnshop is made by check, the number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan. 
(10)  The signature of the customer. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A; Amd. of 8-8-2016, Exh. A; Amd. of 6-12-2017, Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. 44-12-132 (quoted in preamble to this amendment). Pawnmart, Inc. v. Gwinnett County. 279 Ga. 19 (2005), and 44-12-133 et seq. Also see Columbus, Covington, and Athens-Clarke County regulations, used as source documents. Also see Calhoun, Dublin, Gwinnett County, and Lawrenceville regulations. 
Sec. 22-457. - Waiting period for disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop, who makes a pawn loan on pledged goods, or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said pawned goods, shall hold said pawned goods per state law, before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Non-pledged pawned goods, bought under this section, shall be held for at least seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise, to impede the sale of stolen property and to aid the police in recovering stolen items. 
This section shall be interpreted consistently with O.C.G.A. 44-12-132 and not be interpreted inconsistently with O.C.G.A. 16-11-173. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A; Amd. of 6-12-2017, Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. 44-12-138, also see Case and Local Governments cited above. 
Sec. 22-458. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under 18 years of age. Any such attempt by any person under the age of 18 to pawn, trade, purchase or sell to the pawnbroker shall be immediately reported to the city police department for further investigation. Pawnbroker can sell non- firearms related items to persons under 18 to the extent allowed by state law. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 44-123-137. 
Sec. 22-459. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or employed by a pawnbroker's license or permit, to report to the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent any article or goods sold or pawned to him/her if he/she shall have a reason to believe that the article(s) or goods was stolen or lost when presented by seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his/her employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the chief of police or his/her duly authorized agent shall be done upon demand, consistent with all requirements of law. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-460. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to violate any of the provisions of this article. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city council for conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, may upon conviction, have the license to conduct business revoked. This revocation is optional and in addition to penalties authorized elsewhere in this Code. 
(b)  Per state law, it shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to: 
(1)  Make any false statements in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law while acting as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop. 
(4)  Fail to provide documentation requested by the chief of police and/or city council. 
(5)  Fail to present any items or documentation of sold items requested in compliance with state law by the chief of police and/or city council. 
(c)  Persons who violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The intent hereof is to address individual violations. The intent is not to create a habitual violator felon. State law shall govern. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A; Amd. of 8-14-2017, Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. 44-12-137. 
DIVISION 2. - PAWNBROKER REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 22-461. - Purpose. 
(a)  To establish and prescribe requirements for pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals and gems to comply with. 
(b)  To establish and define the role of the police department in regulating pawn shops and dealers in precious metals and gems. 
(c)  To implement and incorporate by reference Georgia law which pertains to establishment and operation of pawn shops and businesses dealing in precious metals or gems. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-462. - Scope. 
This procedure is applicable to and shall be followed by all pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals and gems. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-463. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the term: 
Dealer in precious metals or gems means: 
(1)  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives. or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
(2)  A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledgor or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property, including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this Code section, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. "Pledged goods" shall not include choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1, § 44-12-130 et seq. 
Sec. 22-464. - Responsibilities. 
The Madison Police Department including the chief of police will ensure that all requirements established in this ordinance are adhered to in accordance with Georgia law. It will be the responsibility of the code enforcement officer of the police department to deal directly with the pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals and gems. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-465 - Procedures: 
(a)  Registration. 
(1)  All Pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals will be required to register with the chief of police. The registration will consist of completing a sworn notarized application form, "Registration to deal in precious metals and gems." 
(2)  Pay the initial registration fee of $25.00. 
(3)  Renew registration each year by completing the registration form and paying a $10.00 renewal fee. 
(4)  Comply with all State Law and with City of Madison codes, regulations and fees for a business license within the city limits of Madison. 
(5)  The registration shall contain the name, address, and age of the dealer together with the names, addresses, and ages of all other persons having an ownership interest or actually employed in the business other than publicly held corporations. 
(6)  No person shall be eligible to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems if any employee or stockholder, other than stockholders owning less than ten percent of the outstanding shares of a publicly held corporation, has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state or the United States. This subsection shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten years have expired from the date of completion of the felony sentence. 
(7)  All registrations shall contain the address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises. 
(8)  Each dealer shall be required to notify the police chief within seven calendar days of any change of address of the dealer or business or any change of ownership in the business. As to any notification of the chief of police, a copy of the change of address or ownership in the business shall be transmitted to the sheriff of the county within seven days of the notification. 
(b)  Records retention. Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase, or sale: 
(1)  The date of the transaction; 
(2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; 
(3)  The name, age, and address of the customer; a description of approximate height and weight of the customer (or a photo of said customer); and the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other similar identification card; 
(4)  A clear and accurate identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks which have been inscribed thereon; 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn ticket; 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; 
(7)  If payment is made by check, the number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan; 
(8)  The maturity date of the transaction (as per state law); and 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
A permanent record book will be provided by the chief of police to each pawnbroker and dealer in precious metals. This record book complies with Georgia law and contains the aforementioned information. 
(c)  Transactions (purchased or pledged) in precious metals or gems. 
(1)  Each transaction in precious metals or gems shall be entered in the same permanent record book provided by the chief of police. A separate log book is not required. 
(2)  The receipt of precious metals and gems form shall be filled out for each transaction of precious metals or gems. 
(3)  All information is required to be filled out, to include the normal, reasonable and customary step of obtaining a thumbprint of the customer on the top copy. The top copy shall be turned in to the code enforcement officer; the middle copy shall be kept by the business; the back copy shall be given to the customer. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 43-37-2. 
Sec. 22-466 - Additional instructions, forms, log book. 
(a)  Any forms provided to the chief of police are the property of the city police department and will be issued as needed. It is prohibited for any person other than the chief of police or his designee to destroy or dispose of any such form, until four or more years from the creation of the record, unless otherwise required by governing law to be destroyed on a different schedule, in which case the governing schedule shall be adhered to. Any such forms shall be maintained in a locked container under the supervision of the appropriate law enforcement officer of the county or municipality and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
(b)  Each receipt of precious metals and gems form shall be "approved or prescribed by the appropriate law enforcement officer." The business will be responsible for any form issued to or used by the business. 
(c)  The appropriate law enforcement officer of the municipality may, in his discretion, authorize any person who demonstrates theft of precious metals or gems by the presenting of an incident report or other similar document to inspect the reports in an effort to locate stolen property. 
(d)  When the transaction log book has been completely filled, it shall be retained by the business for a period of four years from the date of the last entry, per State Law. "The record of each pawn or purchase transaction provided for in Code sections 44-12-132 and 44-12-133 shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years." A new log book will be issued by the code enforcement officer. 
(e)  Entries shall appear in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. 
(f)  Said book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time, to impede the sale of stolen property and to aid the police in recovering stolen items. 
(g)  Requirements have been established for errors made in the transaction log book. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. If an error is made on a form, write VOID across the form and turn it in with all properly filled out receipts to the code enforcement officer. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A; Amd. of 6-12-2017, Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. §§ 43-37-3, 4; 44-12-134. Also see Case and Local Governments cited above. 
Sec. 22-467. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems or any agent or employee of a dealer in precious metals or gems who makes purchases of precious metals or gems or of goods made from precious metals or gems to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in the registration provided for in O.C.G.A § 43-37-2; 
(2)  Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record book as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-37-3; 
(3)  Make any false entry in such permanent record book; 
(4)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; 
(5)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent record book, or any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
(6)  Sell, exchange, or remove from the legal possession of the buyer, or to alter the form of, any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased by remounting, melting, cutting up, or otherwise altering the original form until at least seven calendar days have elapsed from the time of purchase or acquisition; 
(7)  Fail to make the written report as required in O.C.G.A. § 43-37-4; 
(8)  Purchase any precious metals or gems from any person under 17 years of age, per state law (O.C.G.A. § 43-37-6 (a)(8)); 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals or gems without first registering pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-37-2. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals or gems; 
(11)  If the appropriate law enforcement officer of the county or municipality has probable cause to believe that precious metals or gems have been stolen, he may give notice in writing to the dealer to retain the precious metals or gems for an additional 15 days; and it shall be unlawful for the dealer to dispose of the property unless the notice is revoked in writing within the 15-day period; 
(12)  Any violations of O.C.G.A. 43-37 (Dealers in Precious Metals and Gems) and O.C.G.A.§ 44-12-130 et. seq. (Pawnbrokers) are misdemeanors and shall be dealt with accordingly in the Municipal Court of Madison, Georgia. Other requirements in this divisiomn shall be treated as a violation of city ordinances and dealt with in the Municipal Court of Madison, Georgia, subject to appeal rights per City Code and state law. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 43-37-6. 
Sec. 22-468. - Incorporation by reference. 
This division incorporates by reference all applicable state law provisions and thus does not address every subsection of O.C.G.A. 43-37-4 or O.C.G.A. Title 44, Chapter 12 entitled "Rights in Personalty," including without limitation the section on pawnbrokers at 44-12-130 et seq. This Ordinance is designed to define the role of the Madison Police Chief and the Madison Police Department in dealing with pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals and gems who operate a business within the city limits of Madison, Georgia. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
Sec. 22-469. - Exemptions. 
This division shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. 
(Amd. of 8-10-2015(1), Exh. A) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § § 43-37-7. 
Chapter 24 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment of August 12, 2002, § 1(Exh. A), repealed and reenacted ch. 24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, ch. 24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1991, § 20-101(A—C); Amd. of January 8, 2001(2), Exhibit A; Amd. of March 13, 2000. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 24-1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24-2. - Purpose, authority, and enactment 
The mayor and council of the city find that the historical and cultural heritage of the municipality is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the people of the city and of the public generally. Further, the city acknowledges that the municipality's cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds are uniquely precious and vulnerable thus deserving of devoted stewardship; that the city is richly blessed with the heritage and history of its people who are now deceased; that many native pioneers and early residents were integral to the community's development; and that the resting places and memorials of those who have passed are valuable to current and future generations and are within the heart of the Madison Historic District. 
Therefore, with the intent of establishing a commission for the purpose of caring for and managing the municipality's cemeteries, graveyards, and burying grounds, as herein defined; protecting and safeguarding the municipality's cemeteries; and regulating the use of such areas for the utility, education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the municipality; the mayor and council of the city of hereby ordain and enact into law the cemetery chapter. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-3. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all land, buildings, structures and improvements within the boundaries delineated on the map entitled "Designated City Cemetery Areas" which is herein attached as "Exhibit A" of an amendment of August 12, 2002. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-4. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Cemetery Ordinance." 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-5. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
(1)  Archeologist means any person who is a member of or meets the criteria for membership in the Society of Professional Archaeologist and can demonstrate experience in the excavation and interpretation of human graves or any person who is employed by the state or by any county or municipal governing authority as an archeologist. 
(2)  Burial means the disposition of human remains by earthen burial in a grave. 
(3)  Burial object means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such term also means any inscribed or uninscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, wall, stoneware, vegetation, pottery or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
(4)  Burial rights means the deeded interest to a lot or space designated for interments. 
(5)  Burial space means a single space within a lot designed for the interment of one human body. 
(6)  Cemetery means all land in and owned by or under the supervision of the city devoted to the interment of human remains, either burial park for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof, and all land hereafter acquired by the city for such purpose. 
(7)  City means the City of Madison, Morgan County, Georgia. 
(8)  City care means the cemetery lot maintenance performed by the city including the trimming of vegetation, preservation of graves and the removal of rubbish for all time thereafter; city care does not include work on monuments, markers, structures or other landscape elements or other unusual care. 
(9)  Commission means the Madison Cemetery Stewardship Commission created and established pursuant to section 24-46 of this chapter. 
(10)  Cremains means the cremated remains of a human body. 
(11)  Crypt means a wholly or partially underground structure of suitable stone for the entombment of human remains or cremains. 
(12)  Descendant means a person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with O.C.G.A. 19-1-1 et seq., as amended. 
(13)  Disinterment means the removal of the buried remains of a deceased person, the casket, if any, and the burial receptacle, if any, from the ground. 
(14)  Foundation means the base upon which a marker, monument or mausoleum is installed. 
(15)  Funeral procession means multiple vehicles traveling closely in an orderly fashion from a church or chapel to graveside burial site. 
(16)  Interment means the permanent disposition of the remains of a deceased human being by cremation, inurnment, entombment or burial. 
(17)  Lot means the subdivision of land within a cemetery for the interment of one or more person(s). 
(18)  Marker means a grave marker upon the lot to identify individual graves. Also known as a grave marker, headstone, etc. 
(19)  Mausoleum means a stone or other suitable structure for the aboveground entombment of the dead. 
(20)  Monument means a memorial erected on a lot principally to identify the family name. 
(21)  Person means any individual, partnership, association, society, organization or corporation. 
(22)  Remains means the bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
(23)  Vault means a prefabricated receptacle for a casket or human remains usually placed below ground. 
(24)  Visitor means any person or group of persons who enter the cemetery. 
Secs. 24-6—24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY CARE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 24-26. - Power of mayor and council. 
The mayor and city council shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Provide, own and furnish, in and near the city, cemeteries for the burial of the dead; 
(2)  Regulate and control the interments in such cemeteries; 
(3)  Exercise police control and to care for such cemeteries; and, 
(4)  Guarantee city care to lots in such cemeteries. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-27. - Administration. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for management of all municipal cemeteries. All record registration and fee payment shall be made to the city clerk's office. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-28. - Fees. 
Fees for the municipal cemeteries shall be those established by the mayor and council and listed in the adopted schedule of fees. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-29. - Sale proceeds. 
All proceeds from cemetery sales will be placed in a separate fund. None of the principal shall be expended under any circumstances. The proceeds of the interest generated therefrom will be used solely for the upkeep of city cemeteries. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 24-30—24-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERY STEWARDSHIP COMMISSION 

Sec. 24-46. - Creation of the commission. 
The title of the commission shall be the "Madison Cemetery Stewardship Commission" (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission"). The commission shall have authority as established in Sections 203 and 204 hereof or as directed by the mayor and council of the city, shall be considered a part of the planning and development functions of the city government, and shall be administered by the staff of the city clerk's office and the planning and development department. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-47. - Membership of the commission; number, appointment, terms, and compensation. 
The commission shall consist of seven members, who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in funerary history, architecture, management, preservation, landscape architecture, archeology or a related field. At least five commissioners shall be registered voters of the city and one shall be a liaison member of the historic preservation commission. Commission members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the city and shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be four members for two-year terms and three members for three-year terms. Commission members shall serve without compensation and are subject to all applicable municipal policies and code of ethics. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-48. - Powers of the commission; general. 
The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Perform cemetery management activities as an official agency of the city care program as assigned by the cemetery administrator; 
(2)  Advise and work with cemetery administrator to establish best maintenance measures regarding cemeteries and to establish additional programs or standards as may be necessary to augment the municipality's city care; 
(3)  Prepare and maintain an inventory and conduct surveys of all burial objects, lots and/or features within a cemetery; 
(4)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to cemeteries as the mayor and council or the commission itself may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of this chapter; 
(5)  Recommend to the mayor and council the restoration or preservation of any cemetery or features therein; 
(6)  Provide volunteer labor and/or services as well as funds for unique care of the cemetery as necessary, including on an as needed basis private or family markers that may be abandoned, desecrated, neglected, unmarked or threatened; 
(7)  Conduct educational or special programs regarding cemetery preservation as a means of increasing public awareness and support; 
(8)  Establish appropriate and necessary liaisons and contacts with other appropriate boards, commissions, departments, organizations, and municipalities within the county, region and state; 
(9)  Establish procedures within the municipal planning and development department, with the aid of cemetery experts as may be necessary, regarding the review of zoning actions involving property immediately adjacent to city cemetery areas; provide recommendations to the county planning commission on all zoning actions within the purview of this article; and assist the building inspections department regarding the enforcement of all such stipulations and conditions; 
(10)  Consult with cemetery experts in the historic preservation division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc., the Association for Gravestone Studies or other consultants and professionals as necessary for the purposes of this chapter; 
(11)  Seek out state and federal funds for cemetery stewardship and make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired; 
(12)  On behalf of and for the city, the commission may receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of property, provided that the commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent and that such funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds; and, 
(13)  Promote the acquisition by the city of additional cemeteries as necessary. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-49. - Same—Rules of procedure. 
The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business; shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-50. - Same—Cemetery regulations. 
The commission shall adopt regulations for the management, care and use of municipal cemeteries. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt and amend rules of procedure without amendment to this chapter. Such regulations and rules of procedure shall become effective after review and approval by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-51. - Conflict of interest. 
At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member shall abstain from voting or discussion of the project, other than answering direct questions. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-52. - Records of the commission. 
A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The commission shall keep a copy of all cemetery surveys, planning studies, rules and regulations applicable to cemeteries. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-53—24-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS, APPEALS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 24-71. - Generally. 
Cemetery regulations, as formulated by the cemetery stewardship commission in accordance with section 24-50, shall apply to all designated municipal cemetery areas. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-72. - Old Cemetery and New Cemetery. 
No person, other than those having vested rights in Old Cemetery or New Cemetery as herein described and as depicted on the designated city cemetery area map, shall be permitted to bury their dead in Old Cemetery or New Cemetery. No further grave plots will be sold by the city in Old Cemetery or New Cemetery. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-73. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any action of the commission may appeal to the mayor and council. The appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten business days after the commission's decision has been made. Appeals from decisions of the city may be taken to the Superior Court of the county in the manner provided by law for convictions of municipal ordinance violations, namely, via petition for writ of certiorari. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 24-74. - Penalties. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as provided by local law for the punishment of violations of other validly enacted ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 24-75—24-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 24-91. - Affirmation of existing local ordinances. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with the existing city building code, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Amd. of 8-12-02, 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIC AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for libraries, archives and arts and sciences programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § 11, ¶ III(a)(10). 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOURS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An Amd. of Feb. 10, 2003, § 1, repealed article II, sections 26-31—26-38, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article II, sections 26-31—26-39. Former article II pertained to tours of homes and derived from the Code of 1991, § 27-103; Ord. of 12-12-1994(5), § 2(A)—(I). 

Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
Administrator means the city manager, or his/her designee, who shall be the administrator for the receipt and processing of applications for a permit for a private organization or group of private persons to hold a tour for private purposes. 
Group tour means scheduled touring of historic buildings, sites, gardens, or grounds for a fee or donation by groups not to exceed combined capacity of two large buses. 
Group tour operator means an individual or a group of individuals of three or less acting as a unit who shall be the sponsor and organizer of a group tour. 
Private organization means any firm, partnership, corporation, association or group of individuals more than three in number, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Private purpose means any purpose not commanded or directed by statute, ordinance or other regulation to be performed by the state, county, city or other governmental entity. 
Tour means any event incorporating scheduled public visitation of buildings, sites, gardens, etc. for a fee with average visitation exceeding 1,000 persons. 
Tour management means the private organization who shall be the sponsor and organizer for the tour. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1; Amd. of 12-9-2013, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 26-32. - Tour management permit required; fee. 
Tour management must purchase a tour management permit prior to the tour. The tour management permit shall be good for the duration of the tour. The tour management permit fee shall be in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees. The grant of a permit shall create a privilege, not a right. There is no fee required for non-profit organizations. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1; Amd. of 12-9-2013, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 26-33. - Tour permit required; fee. 
Tour management must obtain a tour permit for each event. Tours planned for consecutive calendar days, regardless of multiple itineraries, shall constitute a single event. The tour permit fee shall be in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees ($3,000.00 per event). There shall be no charge for non-profit organizations either owning or operating a property in the city that is open to the public on a regular basis. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1) 
Sec. 26-34. - Permit application. 
(a)  A tour permit must be applied for at least 60 days prior to the proposed beginning date of the event. Permit applications will be processed in the order received. Tour management may elect to establish a date reservation up to three years prior to the event by submitting a written request with a refundable registration deposit ($100.00). 
(b)  Each application shall contain at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Name of the tour management organization; 
(2)  Name and contact information for the organization's primary contact; 
(3)  Name and contact information for the organization's tour coordinator; 
(4)  Proposed date(s) and time(s) for the event, including multiple tour itineraries; 
(5)  Proposed list of homes, buildings, sites, etc., including street address and property owner names; 
(6)  Proposed headquarters, tour routes, and parking locations; 
(7)  Proposed list of vendors, including type of sales and location; and 
(8)  Any additional information which the administrator may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article. 
(c)  Any application, permit and registration fees, as established in the schedule of fees, shall accompany the application. 
(d)  After examining the application and receiving the advice and assistance of any other public official and municipal department as may be necessary, and taking into account prior experiences involving the same or similar activity, the administrator shall notify the tour coordinator of additional services reasonably necessary to provide for, among other, cleanup before and after the tour, additional leaf and limb pickup, special first aid or medical resources, security for vehicles, special traffic considerations, temporary toilet facilities, and similar special and extraordinary services. A deposit for such additional services shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1) 
Sec. 26-35. - Limitations. 
(a)  No more than three tours permits shall be issued within a calendar year. 
(b)  No tour permit shall be issued for more than four consecutive days. 
(c)  A minimum of 60 days shall be required between tours. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1) 
Sec. 26-36. - Regulations. 
(a)  Tour management's tour coordinator shall meet with the administrator at least 60 days prior to the tour to discuss coordination efforts for city administration and services and finalize such no less than 30 days prior to the event. 
(b)  Tour management shall have 911 emergency services numbers and 911 emergency service information published in the tour literature. 
(c)  Tour management shall be financially responsible for fees incurred by the city for additional services occasioned by the permitted tour, as referenced in subsection 26-34(d). Failure to reimburse the city for such expenses shall be grounds for denial of any subsequent permit requested by the tour management organization. 
(d)  Tour management shall provide an indemnification and hold harmless agreement acceptable to the city attorney. 
(e)  Tour management shall provide proof of insurance, maintained at all times during the permitted event a policy or policies of comprehensive general public liability insurance, including personal injury and property damage coverage, in the amount of not less than $500,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person, not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence of bodily injury or death, and not less than $500,000.00 for property damage. All such insurance shall be underwritten by an insurance company which appears in the U.S. Department of the Treasury Circular 570. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1) 
Sec. 26-37. - Sales and vending. 
(a)  No yard sales shall be permitted during the tour by any person in any way at all associated with the tour. 
(b)  Vending shall be only permitted during the tour provided that the tour management organization requests mayor and council to designate the tour as a special event. If the event is not a designated special event, vending shall only be permitted when conducted by or sponsored by tour management provided that: 
(1)  Vending permits are required, in accordance with chapter 22 of the Code; 
(2)  Locations for vending are limited to tour headquarters or tour itinerary sites with no more than one additional non-itinerary site as approved by the administrator; 
(3)  Sales items, other than concessions, are limited to plants grown or handmade items constructed by either the tour management organization or the vendor sponsored by the tour management organization; and, 
(4)  Signs are limited to those outlined in section 26-38. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1) 
Sec. 26-38. - Parking. 
(a)  All tour parking shall be solely at the following locations, provided that tour management secure written permission from the landowner: 
(1)  Billups Avenue (which the administrator may elect to make one-way during tours, i.e. eastbound); 
(2)  Morgan County Courthouse parking lots on Hancock Street; 
(3)  Baptist-Methodist Church parking lot at South Main Street and Central Avenue; 
(4)  Madison-Morgan County Cultural Center parking lot on Foster Street; 
(5)  Avado parking deck at the end of Hancock Street; and, 
(6)  Any additional locations as approved by the administrator. 
(b)  Tour management shall provide parking diagrams within its tour literature. 
(c)  Tour management is encouraged to provided shuttle service from the parking lots. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1) 
Sec. 26-39. - Signs. 
(a)  The following signs are allowed in conjunction with each tour: 
(1)  One on-site identification sign for tour headquarters; 
(2)  One on-site tour identification sign per site per street frontage; 
(3)  Route directional signs on public right-of-way, as approved by the administrator; 
(4)  One on-site parking identification sign per parking lot; 
(5)  Parking directional signs on public right-of-way, as approved by the administrator; 
(6)  Two on-site vendor signs per site, either attached to the display or in its immediate proximity; 
(7)  Two additional signs on the public right-of-way, as approved by the administrator. 
(b)  No tour-related sign shall be larger than three square feet. 
(c)  No sign shall be erected more than two days prior to the tour and all signs shall be removed two days after the tour. 
(d)  Upcoming tour exception. No more than three on-site tour identification signs pre-advertising the next upcoming tour are allowed, provided that the such signs shall be no larger than three square feet, erected no more than 30 days in prior to the tour, and removed two days after the tour. 
(Amd. of 2-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 4-26-05, § 1) 
Sec. 26-40. - Group tour operators and group tours. 
Group tours operators shall obtain an annual city occupational tax certificate, which shall constitute a group tour operator license. No more than five group tour operator licenses shall be issued per year. Group tour operators shall report at the time of licensing the number and size of group tours for the preceding year and shall be licensed to sponsor and operate group tours under the following conditions: 
(a)  Group tour operators shall obtain a group tour permit and remit the permit fee. 
(b)  A group tour permit shall be valid for the operation of ten (10) group tours per year that include limited touring of historic residences and unlimited touring of non-residential use properties. Group tours operated on consecutive calendar days shall constitute a separate group tour. Group tours shall not be operated on the same days as tours permitted by sections 26-33 and 26-34. No individual residence shall be on tour in excess of ten days per year, as the mayor and council consider any greater number to be potentially inconsistent with the residential use and character of the home and the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Group tour operators shall be present on premises for all group tours and shall maintain a tour log listing location, date and time of each tour and the number of tourists present for each tour. 
(d)  Group tour tourism of historic residences in residential areas is intended only for historic touring, not commercial activity. The grant of a permit for an historic residence shall create a privilege, not a right. The following requirements apply for touring historic residences; 
(1)  Shall only be scheduled and operated during daylight hours, except each individual residence may have up to three candlelight tours per year, during non-daylight hours, to conclude by 9:00 p.m.; 
(2)  Shall specifically exclude special event activity, including but not limited to weddings, receptions, parties, meetings, seminars, conventions, shows, sales, and other such forms of assembly; 
(3)  Shall allow, only on permitted group tour dates, the incidental sale of homeowner produced or designed goods or those that directly relate to the historic significance of the premises to group tours participants in compliance with state and city law; 
(4)  Shall not allow display of tour-related signs; 
(5)  Shall not allow sale or service of alcoholic beverages; 
(6)  Vending, vendors and peddlers are prohibited; 
(7)  The owner of the tour house shall be on the premises at all times during the tour. Such person shall be responsible for seeing that the provisions above are complied with; 
(8)  Violations. Should the city manager serve notice of violation of any of the foregoing requirements, the notice shall advise the alleged violator of the time and location of a hearing at a council meeting and the right to present evidence publicly and be represented by counsel. The hearing shall be informal. Should the mayor and council order the suspension or revocation of a license or permit or should the alleged violator fail to appear, the suspension or revocation shall take effect at the closing of the hearing. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the mayor and council may seek a writ of certiorari from the superior court specifying the grounds. Such writ shall be obtained within 30 days after the filing of the decision of the mayor and council. 
(e)  As feasible and safe, premises visited by group tours shall have unloading/loading space on premises sufficient to accommodate tour-related vehicles; otherwise, said vehicles shall be allowed 15 minutes to unload passengers before moving to a designated tour parking area as per subsection 26-38(a) until the end of the group tour at that premises. 
(f)  Group tours sponsored or operated by the city or on its behalf shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 12-9-2013, § 2(Exh. B); Amd. of 7-14-2014(2)) 
Secs. 26-41—26-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC ARTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 26-91. - Purpose and establishment. 
In support and furtherance of its determination that superior and diverse cultural assets and attractions in a city and its built environment are vital to the quality of life of its citizens and vital to the economic success of its businesses; and in recognition of the need for a comprehensive public art policy that improves and enhances the cultural assets and public spaces within the city, the mayor and council hereby establish to advise on cultural affairs and aesthetic development within the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 6-11-18, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 26-92. - Title; authority. 
(a)  The title of the commission shall be the "Madison Public Arts Commission" (hereinafter referred to as the "commission"). 
(b)  The commission shall have authority as established in section xx-xx, shall be considered a part of the planning and development functions of the city government, and shall be administrated by the staff of the planning and development department. 
(Amd. of 6-11-18, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 26-93. - Membership; appointment and terms; compensation. 
(a)  Composition and expertise. The commission shall consist of seven members, who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in public art, visual art, architecture, environmental design, music, performance, or literary art. All seven members of the commission must be residents of the city or affiliated with a business or a non-profit organization located within the city. 
(b)  Appointment and terms. Commission members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the city and shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be four members for two-year terms and three members for three-year terms. 
(c)  Compensation. Commission members shall serve without compensation. 
(Amd. of 6-11-18, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 26-94. - Powers of the commission; general. 
The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Expand community awareness and appreciation of the value of art; 
(2)  Advise the city council and staff on art-related issues; 
(3)  Assist the city and other organizations and businesses in the funding and selection of artists for public works of art; 
(4)  Develop art master plans, policies, and other program elements; 
(5)  Serve in an advisory capacity to other organizations and businesses pursuing public art projects; 
(6)  Hold predevelopment meetings with applicants seeking plan review from the city for development, to encourage and assist in the creation and funding of public art projects. The commission may make this a requirement of local permitting procedures prior to issuance of any construction related permit. The commission's actions shall be advisory only; 
(7)  Prepare an annual report to the city council on the commission's activities; 
(8)  Solicit temporary and/or permanent displays of art in city facilities and outdoor spaces; and 
(9)  Assist with other public art initiatives, as appropriate. 
(Amd. of 6-11-18, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 26-95. - Rules of procedure. 
The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business; shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(Amd. of 6-11-18, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 26-96. - Code of ethics and conduct. 
Each member of the commission shall adhere to the Code of Ethics contained in O.C.G.A., § 45-10-3, the Code of Ethics and Conduct contained in section 2-1 of the City of Madison Code of Ordinances. 
(Amd. of 6-11-18, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 26-97. - Records of the commission. 
A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The commission shall keep a copy of all surveys, planning studies, rules and regulations applicable to public art. 
(Amd. of 6-11-18, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or their imminent threat, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons for stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out these functions. 
(Code 1991, § 9-111(1)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Office of emergency management director. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the incorporated cities within the county, there is established the county emergency management agency. The chairman of the county commissioners, with concurrence of the mayors of the incorporated cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment by the governor a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the county and the cities in the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 30-31. Such plan will be in accordance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Code 1991, § 9-111(2)) 
Sec. 30-33. - County emergency management agency. 
(a)  The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments, and the emergency functions are assigned as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 1991, § 9-111(3)) 
Sec. 30-34. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman of the county board of commissioners, jointly with the mayors of the affected cities, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, vice-chairman/mayor pro tem, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 1991, § 9-111(4)) 
Sec. 30-35. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county and cities in the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county and city officers and employees. 
(Code 1991, § 9-111(5)) 
Sec. 30-36. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 9-111(6)) 
Chapter 34 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court judge, § XVIII. 
State Law reference— Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts and magistrate courts to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 

Sec. 34-31. - Creation. 
There is established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Madison, Georgia, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city and to punish for a violation of such laws and ordinances. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by state laws, to subpoena witnesses, to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to try all offenses occurring within the territorial limits of the city, including traffic cases, which, under state laws, are placed within the jurisdiction of city courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all amendatory laws. The presiding officer of such court shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and shall be known as the judge of the municipal court. The court shall be convened at city hall or such other place within the city as designated by the judge of the municipal court, with the approval of the mayor. 
(Code 1991, § 5-101) 
Sec. 34-32. - Judge. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, shall be at least 25 years of age, and shall have practiced law for at least three years. The mayor and city council shall provide for the compensation for the judge. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall have authority to appoint standby associate judges to serve in the absence of the judge. Any standby associate judge shall possess the qualifications set forth in subsection (a) of this section for the judge of the municipal court and have the same powers granted to the judge of the municipal court. 
(Code 1991, § 5-201) 
Sec. 34-33. - Sessions of court. 
(a)  A regular session of the municipal court shall be held once each month at a fixed hour on a fixed day as may be determined by the judge; provided, that any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
(b)  The municipal court may hold special sessions of court when, in the judge's opinion, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons before the next regularly scheduled session of court. 
(Code 1991, § 5-202) 
Sec. 34-34. - Clerk of court. 
(a)  There shall be a clerk of court who shall be appointed or removed by the city manager. 
(b)  The clerk of court shall: 
(1)  Prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket that will show the name of the person for whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued and to whom it was delivered; 
(2)  Be the custodian of the seal of the court and have authority to certify copies of all official records of the court and to maintain the proper books of accounts, including receipts and disbursements, which the court may maintain; and 
(3)  Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by the judge. 
(Code 1991, § 5-203) 
Sec. 34-35. - Rules. 
The municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of the superior courts as far as they are legally applicable to those courts and a sound construction of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 5-204) 
Sec. 34-36. - Practice. 
The city shall have the opening and conclusion of each case, unless the defendant introduces no evidence; then he shall be entitled to the conclusion. The city shall announce first whether ready for trial and, if not ready, shall be held to as strict a showing for a continuance as the defendant. The rules of evidence shall be the same as in the superior court, as far as applicable to the case on trial. 
(Code 1991, § 5-205) 
Sec. 34-37. - Persons charged with offense; summons and trial. 
Any person who is charged with an offense against any of the provisions of this Code, or any ordinances of the city, shall be informed by summons in writing served on him of the nature and cause of his accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his behalf; shall have a speedy trial; shall be confronted with the witnesses against him and have the privilege of cross examination as in the superior courts of the state. The same rules as to examination of witnesses and the evidence adduced as obtained in such courts, as far as they are applicable to city courts, shall be applicable to cases before the municipal court. The party accused shall have the privilege of defending himself, by counsel or by himself, or both, whichever shall seem proper to him. No one shall be condemned, fined or punished without a chance of being heard in his defense. 
(Code 1991, § 5-206) 
Sec. 34-38. - Form and execution of summons. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of court in all cases where complaint is made or information given of any violation of this Code or ordinances of the city, whether the party is to be confined in jail or not, to issue a summons directed to the accused requiring such offender to appear in municipal court to answer such charge, which summons shall set forth the offense, and the time and place of trial; bear test in the name of the judge of the municipal court; be signed officially by the clerk of court or the chief of police; and directed to the chief of police or any police officer of the city to be executed, which police officer shall execute the summons by serving a copy on the accused or leaving it at his place of residence. 
(Code 1991, § 5-207) 
Sec. 34-39. - Witness—Subpoena. 
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the clerk of court shall issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, and bearing test in the name of the judge of the municipal court, which subpoena shall be served as other summons by any police officer. 
(Code 1991, § 5-208) 
Sec. 34-40. - Same—Defaulting. 
If any person summoned as a witness shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend a trial, or render at the time a sufficient excuse in the judgment of the municipal court, the defaulting witness shall be liable to a fine not to exceed $100.00; and, if the cause shall be continued on account of the witness's absence, the court may issue an attachment against such witness requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. Any police officer, by virtue of such attachment, shall arrest and confine the person, so as to have him before the court at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. 
(Code 1991, § 5-209) 
Sec. 34-41. - Continuances. 
Where the ends of justice require it, cases may be continued. All continuances shall be addressed to the sound legal discretion of the municipal court under the rules governing the superior courts of this state. 
(Code 1991, § 5-210) 
Sec. 34-42. - Plea of guilty in absence of defendant. 
Any party against whom any complaint is lodged or information given may file a plea of guilty under such regulations and upon such terms as the municipal court may prescribe; and, if such party cannot attend the trial, the court may pass such order or sentence in the case as if the party were personally present. 
(Code 1991, § 5-211) 
Sec. 34-43. - Persons implicated to be tried. 
If on the trial of any cause before the municipal court it appears that any other person besides the one on trial has violated a provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, he may then and there be tried if present unless the case is continued for legal cause. 
(Code 1991, § 5-212) 
Sec. 34-44. - Contempt of court. 
The municipal court judge may punish for contempt a person who disobeys an order of the court or who obstructs or interferes with the proceedings of the court or the enforcement of its orders. 
(Code 1991, § 5-213) 
Sec. 34-45. - Docket. 
A docket shall be kept in the office of the clerk of court on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged with a violation of this Code or any city ordinances, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction; and, at the trial of all cases in the municipal court, the clerk of court shall record opposite the statement of the case the punishment administered and the date; and the clerk of court shall enter, under the municipal court judge's sentence, the final disposition of the case, that is, whether the fine, if any was collected and the date of such collection, and when and to whom such amounts were turned over by the clerk of court. 
(Code 1991, § 5-214) 
Sec. 34-46. - Enforcement of penalties against corporations. 
Whenever a corporation shall violate any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, a warrant shall issue against such corporation for violating such provisions; and the clerk of court shall issue a copy of such warrant, which shall be served by the chief of police or any police officer of the city upon any officer of the corporation in the city; and the police officer serving such copy shall at the time notify such person upon whom such service is made of the time and place of trial, and shall make an entry of such service upon the warrant, showing the time of service and upon whom the service was made, and return the warrant to the municipal court, and docket the case, which case shall stand for trial in the order which other cases against individuals for violation of ordinances of the city are tried. If on the trial the defendant corporation fails to appear, or appearing fails to plead, the judge of the municipal court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty, and trial shall proceed as though the defendant has appeared and pleaded. Upon conviction of any corporation, there shall be rendered judgment against it for the fine imposed by the presiding officer, together with all costs of prosecution, upon which judgment the clerk of court shall issue an execution against the defendant, which shall be levied and collected by the chief of police as tax executions in favor of the city are allowed by law to be levied and collected. 
(Code 1991, § 5-215) 
Sec. 34-47. - Appearance bond—Security requirement, maximum amount. 
The chief of police, a member of the police department, the municipal court judge, the sheriff of the county, or his deputy may take bond, with security or without security, at their discretion, in a sum not exceeding $3,000.00 per charge for the appearance of any party accused or suspected of being guilty of a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, to stand to and abide by his trial before the municipal court, and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in such court. 
(Code 1991, § 5-216) 
Sec. 34-48. - Same—Failure or refusal to give; subsequent confinement or guard. 
If either party or witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required of them, or either of them, such person so failing or refusing may be confined to the county jail, or other place in the county as may be directed by the municipal court judge, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(Code 1991, § 5-217) 
Sec. 34-49. - Same—Forfeiture for failure to appear; service of rule. 
All bail taken under this article shall be special bail, and the power of the security over the principal shall be the same as in the special bail. Upon the failure of any principal to appear in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, or by a witness to appear and testify, the judge shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond to show cause on a day named in the rule, not to be less than ten days from the passage of such rule, why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. A copy of such rule shall be served upon the principal and security by any officer or member of the police force at least five days before the time set for hearing the rule. 
(Code 1991, § 5-218) 
Sec. 34-50. - City jail construction and staffing. 
(a)  In every case in which any court within the city shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of the state or any ordinance of the city, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fee. 
(b)  At the time of posting a bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of the state or an ordinance of the city, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted; and in every case in which any court within the city shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be paid over as provided under subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Such sums required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund or O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 concerning the judges of the probate courts retirement fund. 
(d)  The sums provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk of court or court officer charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid over to the county by the tenth day of the month following the month in which such sums are collected. Such sums paid over to the county shall be placed by the county board of commissioners into a special account to be known as the county jail fund. 
(e)  Moneys collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended by the county solely and exclusively for constructing, operating and staffing county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities of the county, or for the purpose of contracting for such facilities with other cities, the state, counties or other political subdivisions as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § III, ¶ I. The county jail fund and moneys collected pursuant to this section to be placed in the county jail fund may be pledged as security for the payment of bonds issued for the construction of county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities of the county. 
(Code 1991, § 5-219) 
Chapter 36 - DOWNTOWN BUSINESS COUNCIL 

Sec. 36-1. - Creation. 
It has been determined by the mayor and council that there is a need for revitalization and redevelopment of Downtown Madison to develop and promote trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities, and to promote the general welfare of the community and the state by creating a climate favorable to the location of new industry, trade and commerce, and the further development of existing industry, trade and commerce within the city. The creation of a downtown business council will benefit the public good and general welfare of the community. It is in the public interest and is vital to the public welfare of the citizens of the city to revitalize and redevelop the downtown area of the city. Accordingly, after thorough investigation, the mayor and council have determined that it is desirable and necessary that the downtown business council be reactivated immediately, in order to fulfill the needs expressed above. Therefore, be it ordained by the mayor and council, and it is hereby resolved, that there is hereby determined and declared to be a present and future need for a downtown business council to function in the city. There is hereby activated in the city a public body corporate and politic known as the "Madison Downtown Business Council." 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-2. - Reconstituted council; membership. 
The mayor and council acknowledge that pursuant to the ordinance of July 14, 1986, there has been in operation over the years a downtown business council. Membership of the council shall consist of all persons owning property or operating businesses within the downtown area as outlined in section 36-9. It is the purpose of the amendment to reconfirm and reconstitute the Madison downtown business council. The downtown business council shall support the continued prosperity of Downtown Madison as both a strong economic engine for the community and as a vital core of the surrounding residential environs. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-3. - Board; composition; qualifications. 
The leadership of the downtown business council shall be known as the "Main Street Advisory Board." The board shall be composed of between seven and 11 members, all of whom have a demonstrated interest in the support, promotion and continued prosperity of Downtown Madison as a vital community center. A majority of the board must be registered voters in the city, and must be members of the downtown business council. Board members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the city, who shall consider during selection the following; business or professional background, including a knowledge of finance and/or personnel matters; commitment to spending the time necessary to be a properly oriented, educated, and participating board member, with an emphasis on board members growing in their service; recognition of both sexes and significant racial or ethnic population; and commitment to the principles of this chapter and a desire to have Downtown Madison succeed and improve. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-4. - Board terms and initial appointments. 
Board members shall serve two-year terms. However, to insure staggered terms, the following appointments will be from one year only, from June, 2003 to June, 2004: (1) Kemp Crawford, (2) Rob Hanselman, (3) Joe Houston, and (4) Weyman Hunt. The following persons shall serve a full two-year term, from June, 2003 to June, 2005; (5) Mark Argo, (6) Davis Bell, (7) Faye Craft, (8) Terrell Gerrard, (9) June Royal, and (10) Barbara Voyles. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-5. - Board member's oath. 
Each board member, before assuming the duties of his/her office, shall sign the following oath, which shall be retained with the records of the board: "I, _______, citizen of Morgan County, Georgia, do solemnly swear that I will, to the best of my ability, without favor or affection to any person and without any unauthorized financial gain or compensation to myself, faithfully and fairly discharge all of the duties and responsibilities that devolve upon me as a member of Main Street Advisory Board, during the term of my service as such member." 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-6. - Compensation. 
Board members shall receive no compensation, but may be reimbursed by resolution of the board for actual expenses in performing their duties. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-7. - Conflict of interest. 
Even the appearance of impropriety is to be avoided. No board member shall accept a gift, payment, or other benefit in exchange for any consideration on any matter before the board. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-8. - Role of the Main Street advisory board. 
The Main Street advisory board serves at the pleasure of the mayor and council. The Main Street office is responsible for administration of the activities and functions of the Main Street advisory board. The Main Street advisory board and its staff shall be financed and insured by the city. The functions of the Main Street advisory board shall be performed in harmony with the responsibilities and activities of the various municipal board and committees. The board is advisory in nature, and shall make no decisions, nor shall it order any directives. Instead, it shall make recommendations, and provide advice, consistent with the needs of the city. The board shall organize itself, carry out its responsibilities, and exercise its powers, in strict accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-9. - Jurisdiction. 
The downtown area over which the board shall exercise jurisdiction shall be that geographical area described in exhibit "B" attached to the ordinance from which this chapter derives and made a part hereof by reference. Said area shall be concurrent with the boundaries established by resolution of the downtown development authority on March 12, 1984, as amended, and generally reflect the boundaries of the special tax district-central business district created by the mayor and council on November 13, 1995, as amended. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-10. - General goals. 
As part of its general mission of promoting trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities for the public good and the continued prosperity of Downtown Madison, the downtown business council and the Main Street advisory board shall also strive to accomplish the following goals: 
(1)  Advocate the maintenance of the downtown commercial area ("downtown") as the center of the city business community. 
(2)  Provide leadership and coordination for various initiatives located in downtown. 
(3)  Assist the promotion of downtown as a destination for residents and visitors. 
(4)  Support the preservation of downtown's historic integrity and small town character. 
(5)  Comment on downtown revitalization and redevelopment efforts, including studies and reports, and recommendations to the mayor and council. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-11. - Specific functions of the board. 
In order to meet the above stated goals of the board, it shall perform the following specific functions: 
(1)  Work with the Main Street director and other municipal offices to accomplish the above stated goals. 
(2)  Serve as a sounding board for downtown initiatives, including verbal and written feedback and reports to the mayor and council in regard to proposed downtown initiatives. 
(3)  Serve as a conduit between the city council and the downtown business council for information pertinent to downtown. 
(4)  Serve as a conduit for information between Main Street staff and various committees associated with the downtown business council and with the board. 
(5)  Provide a forum for discussion of issues in regard to downtown. 
(6)  Gather information regarding downtown issues and initiatives, including discussion thereof at board meetings and presentation thereof to the mayor and city council. 
(7)  Host workshops or lectures advantageous to the downtown community. 
(8)  Serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council regarding downtown issues, including provision of recommendations to the city council and to the various committees and staff associated with downtown. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-12. - Regular meetings and records of the board. 
(a)  Regular meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of state law, including without limitation the Open Meetings Act. Notice of the meetings shall be via posting of the agenda at a public location at city hall, and via verbal or written notification to the local press. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of board meetings in accordance with this chapter and state law. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-13. - Rules of procedure. 
The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, including provision for regular meetings, called meetings, election of officers, rules of attendance, appointment of committees, etc. These rules of procedure, or subsequent amendments thereto, shall become effective after review and approval by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-14. - Ethics. 
Board members shall put loyalty to the highest moral principles and to country above loyalty to persons, party; uphold the federal and state constitutions, laws, and legal regulations and never be a party to their evasion; never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, and never accept, for self or family, favors or benefits under circumstances which might be reasonably construed as influencing performance of duties; make no private promises of any kind binding upon the duties of office, since a member has no private word which can be binding on public duty; engage in no business, directly or indirectly, inconsistent with the best interest of the city; never use information obtained confidentially in the performance of duties as a means for making private profit; expose corruption wherever discovered; and uphold these principles, ever conscious that public office is a public trust. Staff for the board shall at all times adhere to the city's ethics policy. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-15. - No adverse affect. 
The action taken by the mayor and council herein is not intended in any way to adversely affect, replace or supplant any public corporation or any industrial development, downtown development or other authority previously created. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Sec. 36-16. - Effectiveness. 
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the mayor and council. From and after such adoption the downtown business council and the Main Street advisory board shall be deemed reconstituted and reactivated. 
(Amd. of 5-12-03, § 1) 
Chapter 37 - DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 37-1—37-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE PREVENTION 

Sec. 37-31. - Purpose. 
The City of Madison is dedicated to providing a healthy, safe working environment. In meeting these goals, it is our policy to: (1) assure that employees are not impaired in their ability to perform assigned duties in a safe, productive, and healthy manner; (2) create a workplace environment free from the adverse effects of drug abuse and alcohol misuse; (3) prohibit the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of controlled substances; and (4) encourage employees to seek professional assistance when alcohol or drug dependency adversely affects performance of assigned duties. 
The purpose of this article is to assure worker fitness for duty and to protect our employees and the public from the risks posed by the misuse of alcohol and use of prohibited drugs. This article is also intended to comply with all applicable Federal [laws]. 
Regulations governing workplace anti-drug and alcohol programs in the transit industry. The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) of the U.S. Department of Transportation has published 49 CFR Part 655, as amended, that mandates urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing for safety-sensitive positions and prohibits performance of safety-sensitive functions when there is a positive test result. The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) has also published 49 CFR Part 40, as amended, that sets standards for the collection and testing of urine and breath specimens. In addition, the Federal government published 49 CFR Part 29, "The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988," which requires the establishment of drug-free workplace policies and the reporting of certain drug-related offenses to the FTA. This article incorporates those requirements for employees performing safety-sensitive functions. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 37-32. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article applies to all city employees, including without limitation, those who perform safety-sensitive functions and all contractors who perform safety-sensitive functions. The City of Madison employees that do not perform safety-sensitive functions are also covered under this article under the sole authority of the City of Madison. This article applies to off-site lunch periods or breaks when an employee is scheduled to return to work. Visitors, vendors, and contractor employees are governed by this article while on city premises and will not be permitted to conduct city business if found to be in violation of this article. 
A safety-sensitive function is any duty related to natural gas or public safety or the safe operation of mass transit service, including the operation of a revenue service vehicle (whether or not the vehicle is in revenue service), dispatch, maintenance of a revenue service vehicle or equipment used in revenue service, security personnel who carry firearms, and any other employees who hold a commercial driver's license. 
All employees, including without limitation those who perform safety-sensitive functions, are hereafter described as "covered employees." Covered employees of the City of Madison include fire department employees, public safety department, heavy equipment operators, the building inspector and any employees who hold a commercial driver's license. 
Covered employees also include employees of the city (or any contractor engaged by the city) who perform work on a pipeline or an operation, maintenance or emergency-response function regulated by the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), as provided in 49 CFR 192, 193, 195. Such employees include but are not limited to the following employees: 
(1)  Utility clerks (receive emergency calls); 
(2)  Gas superintendent; 
(3)  Gas department foreman; 
(4)  Gas department laborers; 
(5)  Gas department backhoe operators; 
(6)  Gas department assistant supervisor; 
(7)  Gas department meter readers. 
(b)  Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accident means an occurrence associated with the operation of a vehicle even when not in revenue service, if as a result: 
(1)  An individual dies; 
(2)  An individual suffers a bodily injury and immediately receives medical treatment away from the scene of the accident; or 
(3)  One or more vehicles incur disabling damage as the result of the occurrence and is/are transported away from the scene by a tow truck or other vehicle. For purposes of this definition, "disabling damage" means damage which precludes departure of any vehicle from the scene of the occurrence in its usual manner in daylight after simple repairs. Disabling damage includes damage to vehicles that could have been operated but would have been further damaged if so operated, but does not include damage which can be remedied temporarily at the scene of the occurrence without special tools or parts, tire disablement without other damage even if no spare tire is available, or damage to headlights, taillights, turn signals, horn, mirrors or windshield wipers that makes them inoperative. 
Adulterated specimen means a urine specimen containing a substitute that is not a normal constituent or containing an endogenous substance at a concentration that is not a normal physiological concentration. 
Alcohol means the intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or other low molecular weight alcohols contained in any beverage, mixture, mouthwash, candy, food, preparation or medication. Expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as measured by an evidential breath testing device. 
Aliquot means a fractional part of a specimen used for testing alcohol concentration; it is taken as a sample representing the whole specimen. 
Canceled test means a drug test that has been declared invalid by a medical review officer. A canceled test is neither positive nor negative. 
Confirmatory drug test means a second analytical procedure to identify the presence of a specific drug or metabolite which is independent of the initial test and which uses a different technique and chemical principle from that of the initial in order to ensure reliability and accuracy. 
Confirmatory validity test means a second test performed on a different aliquot of the original urine specimen to further support a validity test result. 
Covered employee means an employee who performs a safety-sensitive function, including an applicant or transferee who is being considered for hire into a safety-sensitive function (See Attachment A for a list of covered employees), and other employees, applicants, or transferee that will not perform a safety-sensitive function but fall under the ordinance of the company's own authority. 
Evidentiary breath testing device (EBT) means a device approved by the NHTSA for the evidential testing of breath at the 0.02 and the 0.04 alcohol concentrations. Approved devices are listed on the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) conforming products list. 
Initial drug test means an immunoassay test to eliminate "negative" urine specimens from further consideration and to identify the presumptively positive specimens that require confirmation or further testing. 
Invalid result means the result reported by a laboratory for a urine specimen that contains an unidentified adulterant, contains an unidentified interfering substance, has an abnormal physical characteristic, or has an endogenous substance at an abnormal concentration that prevents the laboratory from completing testing or obtaining a valid drug test result. 
Limit of detection (LOD) means the lowest concentration at which an analyte can be reliably shown to be present under defined conditions. 
Medical review officer (MRO) means a licensed physician (medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy) responsible for receiving laboratory results generated by the drug testing program who has knowledge of substance abuse disorders and has appropriate medical training to interpret and evaluate an individual's confirmed positive test result, together with his/her medical history, and any other relevant bio-medical information. 
Negative dilute means a drug test result which is negative for the five drug/drug metabolites but has a specific gravity value lower than expected for human urine. 
Negative test result means the verified presence of the identified drug or its metabolite below the minimum levels specified in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. An alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 BAC is a negative test result. 
Non-negative test result means a urine specimen that is reported as adulterated, substitute, invalid, or positive for drug/drug metabolites. 
Oxidizing adulterant means a substance that acts alone or in combination with other substances to oxidize drugs or drug metabolites to prevent the detection of the drug or metabolites or affects the reagents in either the initial or confirmatory drug test. 
Performing (a safety-sensitive function) means a covered employee is considered to be performing a safety-sensitive function and includes any period in which he or she is actually performing, ready to perform, or immediately available to perform such functions. 
Positive test result means a verified presence of the identified drug or its metabolite at or above the minimum levels specified in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. A positive alcohol test result means a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.04 BAC or greater. 
Prohibited drug means identified as marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, or phencyclidine at levels above the minimum thresholds specified in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. 
Revenue service vehicles means all transit vehicles that are used for passenger transportation service or that require a CDL to operate. Include all ancillary vehicles used in support of the transit system. 
Safety-sensitive functions means employee duties identified as: 
(1)  The operation of a transit revenue service vehicle even when the vehicle is not in revenue service. 
(2)  The operation of a non-revenue service vehicle by an employee when the operation of such a vehicle requires the driver to hold a commercial drivers license (CDL). 
(3)  Maintaining a revenue service vehicle or equipment used in revenue service. 
(4)  Controlling the movement of a revenue service vehicle; and 
(5)  Carrying a firearm for security purposes. 
Substance abuse professional (SAP) means a licensed physician (medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy) or licensed or certified psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor (certified by the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors Certification Commission or by the International Certification Reciprocity Consortium/Alcohol and other Drug Abuse) with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of drug and alcohol related disorders. 
Substituted specimen means a urine specimen with creatinine and specific gravity values that are so diminished that they are not consistent with normal human urine. 
Test refusal means the following are considered a refusal to test if the employee: 
(1)  Fails to appear for any test (excluding pre-employment) within a reasonable time, as determined by the employer, after being directed to do so by the employer. 
(2)  Fails to remain at the testing site until the testing process is complete. 
(3)  Fails to provide a urine or breath specimen for any drug or alcohol test required by Part 40 or DOT agency regulations. 
(4)  In the case of a directly observed or monitored collection in a drug test, fails to permit the observation or monitoring of provision of a specimen. 
(5)  Fails to provide a sufficient amount of urine or breath when directed and it has been determined, through a required medical evaluation, that there was no adequate medical explanation for the failure. 
(6)  Fails or declines to take a second test the employer or collector has required. 
(7)  Fails to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by the MRO as part of the verification process or as directed by the DER as part of the "shy bladder" or "shy lung" procedures. 
(8)  Fails to cooperate with any part of the testing process (e.g., refuses to empty pockets when so directed by the collector, behaves in a confrontational way that disrupts the collection process). 
(9)  If the MRO reports that there is verified adulterated or substituted test result. 
(10)  Failure or refusal to sign Step 2 of the alcohol testing form. 
(11)  Failure to follow the observer's instructions during an observed collection, including instructions to raise clothing above the waist, lower clothing and underwear, and to turn around to permit the observer to determine if you have any type of prosthetic or other device that could be used to interfere with the collection process. 
(12)  Possess or wear a prosthetic or other device that could be used to interfere with the collection process. 
(13)  Admit to the collector or MRO that you adulterated or substituted the specimen. 
Verified negative test means a drug test result reviewed by a medical review officer and determined to have no evidence of prohibited drug use above the minimum cutoff levels established by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). 
Verified positive test means a drug test result reviewed by a medical review officer and determined to have evidence of prohibited drug use above the minimum cutoff levels specified in 49 CFR Part 40 as revised. 
Validity testing means the evaluation of the specimen to determine if it is consistent with normal human urine. Specimen validity testing will be conducted on all urine specimens provided for testing under DOT authority. The purpose of validity testing is to determine whether certain adulterants or foreign substances were added to the urine, if the urine was diluted, or if the specimen was substituted. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Attachment A is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 37-33. - Education and training. 
Every covered employee will receive a copy of this chapter and will have ready access to the corresponding federal regulations, including 49 CFR Parts 655 and 40. In addition, all covered employees will undergo a minimum of 60 minutes of training on the signs and symptoms of drug use, including the effects and consequences of drug use on personal health, safety, and the work environment. The training also includes manifestations and behavioral cues that may indicate prohibited drug use. 
All supervisory personnel who are in a position to determine employee fitness for duty will receive 60 minutes of reasonable suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, and performance indicators of probable drug use and 60 minutes of additional reasonable suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance indicators of probable alcohol misuse. Under the City of Madison's own authority, supervisory personnel will also be trained on how to intervene constructively and how to effectively integrate an employee back into his/her work group following intervention and/or treatment. Information on the signs, symptoms, health effects, and consequences of alcohol misuse is presented in Attachment B of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Attachment B is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 37-34. - Prohibited substances. 
"Prohibited substances" addressed by this article include the following: 
(1)  Illegally used controlled substances or drugs. The use of any illegal drug or any substance identified in Schedules I through V of Section 202 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. 812), as further defined by 21 CFR 1300.11 through 1300.15, is prohibited at all times, unless a legal prescription has been written for the substance. This includes, but is not limited to: marijuana, amphetamines, opiates, phencyclidine (PCP), and cocaine, as well as any drug not approved for medical use by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration or the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Illegal use includes use of any illegal drug, misuse of legal prescribed drugs, and use of illegally obtained prescription drugs. The medical use of marijuana, or the use of hemp related products, those which cause drug or drug metabolites to be present in the body above the minimum thresholds, is also a violation of this article. Federal Transit Administration drug testing regulations (49 CFR Part 655) require that all covered employees be tested for marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, opiates, and phencyclidine as described in subsection 37-36(h) of this article. Illegal use of these five drugs is prohibited at all times and, thus, covered employees may be tested for these drugs anytime they are on duty. 
(2)  Legal drugs. The appropriate use of legally prescribed drugs and non-prescription medications is not prohibited. However, the use of any substance which carries a warning label that indicates mental functioning, motor skills, or judgment may be adversely affected must be reported by the covered employee to his/her supervisor. In addition, covered employees must obtain a written release from the attending physician releasing the person to perform their job duties anytime they obtain a performance altering prescription. 
(3)  Alcohol. The use of beverages containing alcohol (including any mouthwash, medication, food, candy) or any other substances such that alcohol is present in the body while performing safety-sensitive job functions is prohibited. An alcohol test can be performed on a covered employee under 49 CFR Part 655 just before, during, or just after the performance of safety-sensitive job functions. Under the City of Madison authority, an alcohol test can be performed anytime a covered employee is on duty. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 37-35. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Manufacture, trafficking, possession, and use. Covered employees are prohibited from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of illegal drugs on city premises, in city vehicles, in uniform or while on city business. Covered employees who violate this provision will be subject to disciplinary action under the city personnel ordinance. Law enforcement shall be notified when criminal activity is reasonably suspected. 
(b)  Intoxication/under the influence. Any covered employee who is reasonably suspected of being intoxicated, impaired, under the influence of a prohibited substance, or not fit for duty shall be temporarily suspended from safety-sensitive functions pending an investigation and verification of condition. Covered employees found to be under the influence of a prohibited substance or who fail to pass a drug or alcohol test shall be immediately removed from duty and be subject to disciplinary action. A drug or alcohol test is considered positive if the individual is found to have a quantifiable presence of a prohibited substance in the body above the minimum thresholds defined in 49 CFR Part 40. 
(c)  Alcohol use and/or possession. No covered employee may report for duty or remain on duty when his/her ability to perform assigned safety-sensitive functions is adversely affected by alcohol or when his/her breath alcohol concentration is 0.4 or greater. No covered employee shall use or possess alcohol while performing safety-sensitive functions, or just before or just after performing a safety-sensitive function. Covered employees shall not use alcohol within four hours before reporting for duty, or during the hours they are on call. Violation of these provisions is prohibited and punishable by disciplinary action, pursuant to the city personnel ordinance. 
(d)  Compliance with testing requirements. All covered employees will be subject to urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing as a condition of employment. All testing shall be performed in compliance with all applicable federal requirements. Any covered employee who refuses to comply with a request for testing shall be immediately removed from duty. Refusal includes failure to provide a sufficient urine specimen, saliva sample, or breath sample without a valid medical explanation, as well as a verbal declaration, obstructive behavior, or physical absence resulting in the inability to conduct the test. 
The following are also considered a refusal to test if the employee: 
(1)  Fails to appear for any test within a reasonable time, as determined by the employer, after being directed to do so by the employer; 
(2)  Fails to remain at the testing site until the testing process is complete; 
(3)  Fails to provide a urine or breath specimen for any drug test required by this part or DOT agency regulations; 
(4)  In the case of a directly observed or monitored collection in a drug test, fails to permit the observation or monitoring of provision of a specimen; 
(5)  Fails to provide a sufficient amount of urine or breath when directed, and it has been determined, through a required medical evaluation, that there was no adequate medical explanation for the failure; 
(6)  Fails or declines to take a second test the employer or collector has required; 
(7)  Fails to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by the MRO as part of the verification process, or as directed by the DER as part of the "shy bladder" or "shy lung" procedures; 
(8)  Fails to cooperate with any part of the testing process (e.g., refuse to empty pockets when so directed by the collector, behave in a confrontational way that disrupts the collection process); 
(9)  MRO reports that there is verified adulterated or substituted test result. 
Drug tests can be performed anytime a safety-sensitive employee is on duty. An alcohol test can be performed when the safety-sensitive employee is actually performing a safety-sensitive duty, just before, or just after the performance of a safety-sensitive duty. 
Any covered employee who is suspected of providing false information in connection with a test, or who is suspected of falsifying test results will be required to undergo an observed collection. Any of the above violations will be cause for immediate removal from duty, and shall also be cause for disciplinary action pursuant to the city personnel ordinance. 
(e)  Treatment requirements. All employees shall use the available resources for treatment of alcohol misuse and drug abuse problems. The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be paid by the employees or their insurance provider. Employees who make self-referrals (i.e., no management intervention or positive test results) will be allowed to take accumulated sick leave and vacation leave to participate in the prescribed rehabilitation program. Employees that test positive will be referred to the substance abuse professional designated by the city for assessment. Treatment is required for those who test positive. Any treatment obtained shall be paid for by the employee or their insurer. 
(f)  Notice of criminal drug conviction. All covered employees must notify the city system of any criminal drug conviction. The notice must be given in writing within five days after such conviction. Failure to comply with this provision shall be cause for disciplinary action pursuant to the city personnel ordinance. 
(g)  Proper application of the ordinance. The city is dedicated to assuring fair and equitable application of this article. Therefore, all aspects of this article shall be enforced in an unbiased and impartial manner, and in compliance with all applicable federal regulations. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 37-36. - Testing procedures. 
(a)  Alcohol and drug testing shall be conducted in a manner to assure a high degree of accuracy and reliability and using techniques, equipment, and laboratory facilities which have been approved by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Service (DHHS). All testing will be conducted per 49 CFR Part 40. The city recognizes its employees' privacy rights, and testing will be done per privacy requirements. Immediately prior to testing, employees shall be told the test is required by federal regulations. 
(b)  The drugs that will be tested for include marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. Urine specimens will be collected using the split specimen collection method described in 49 CFR Part 40. Each specimen will be accompanied by a DOT Chain of Custody and Control Form and identified using a unique identification number that attributes the specimen to the correct individual. An initial drug screen will be conducted on the primary urine specimen. For those specimens that are not negative, appear to be substitute, or adulterated, a confirmatory gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) test will be performed. The test will be considered positive if the amounts present are above the minimum thresholds in 49 CFR Part 40. Attachment C lists the minimum thresholds for each drug and/or its metabolites. 
The test results from the laboratory will be reported to a medical review officer. A medical review officer (MRO) is a licensed physician with detailed knowledge of substance abuse disorders and drug testing. The MRO will review the test results to ensure the scientific validity of the test and to determine whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for a confirmed positive test result, substitution or adulteration. The MRO will contact the employee; notify the employee of the positive, substitute, or adulterated laboratory result; and provide the employee with an opportunity to explain the confirmed test result. The MRO will subsequently review the employee's medical history/medical records to determine whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for a positive, substitute or adulterated laboratory result. If no legitimate medical explanation is found, the test will be verified positive, substitute, or adulterated and reported to the company program manager. If a legitimate explanation is found, the MRO will report the test result as negative. 
The split specimen will be stored at the initial laboratory until the analysis of the primary specimen is completed. If the primary specimen is negative, the split will be discarded. If the primary is positive, the split will be retained for testing if so requested by the employee through the medical review officer. 
(c)  Observed collections. 
(1)  Consistent with 49 CFR part 40, collection under direct observation (by a person of the same gender) with no advance notice will occur if: 
a.  The laboratory reports to the MRO that a specimen is invalid, and the MRO reports to program manager that there was not an adequate medical explanation for the result; or 
b.  The MRO reports to program manager that the original positive, adulterated, or substituted test result had to be cancelled because the test of the split specimen could not be performed. 
(2)  The program manager may direct a collection under direct observation of an employee if the drug test is a return-to-duty test or a follow-up test. 
(3)  The collector must immediately conduct a collection under direct observation if: 
a.  The collector is directed by the program manager to do so; or 
b.  The collector observes materials brought to the collection site or the employee's conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a specimen; or 
c.  The temperature on the original specimen was out of range; or 
d.  The original specimen appeared to have been tampered with. 
(d)  Employee requested testing. Any covered employee who questions the results of a drug test my request that the split sample be tested. This test must be conducted at a different DHHS-certified laboratory. The test must be conducted on the split sample that was provided by the employee at the same time as the original sample. The split sample testing will occur regardless of up-front payment, but the city reserves the right to seek reimbursement from the employee. The method of collecting, storing, and testing the split sample will be consistent with 49 CFR Part 40. The employee's request for a split sample test must be made to the medical review officer within 72 hours of notice of the original sample verified test result. Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted if the delay was due to documentable facts that were beyond the control of the employee. 
An initial drug screen will be conducted on each urine specimen. For those specimens that are positive, a confirmatory gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) test will be performed. The test will be considered positive if the amounts present are above the minimum thresholds in 49 CFR Part 40. 
(e)  Alcohol testing procedures. 
(1)  Tests for breath alcohol concentration will be conducted utilizing a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)-approved Evidential Breath Testing device (EBT) operated by a trained Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT). Alcohol screening tests may be performed using a non-evidential testing device which is also approved by NHSTA. If the initial test indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater, a second test will be performed to confirm the results of the initial test. The confirmatory test must occur on an EBT. The confirmatory test will be conducted at least 15 minutes after the completion of the initial test. The confirmatory test will be performed using a NHTSA-approved EBT operated by a trained BAT. The EBT will identify each test by a unique sequential identification number. This number, time, and unit identifier will be provided on each EBT printout. The EBT printout, along with an approved alcohol testing form, will be used to document the test, the subsequent results, and to attribute the test to the correct employee. The test will be performed in a private, confidential manner per 49 CFR Part 40. The procedure will be followed as prescribed, to protect the employee and to maintain the integrity of the alcohol testing procedures and validity of the test result. 
(2)  An employee who has a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater will be considered a positive alcohol test and in violation of this article. The consequences of a positive alcohol test are described in this article. Even though an employee who has a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.02 to 0.039 is not considered positive, the employee shall still be removed from duty for at least 24 hours, or for the duration of the work day, whichever is longer and will be subject to the consequences described in this article. An alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 will be considered a negative test. 
(3)  The city affirms the need to protect individual dignity, privacy, and confidentiality throughout the testing process. If at any time the integrity of the testing procedures or the validity of the test results is compromised, the test will be canceled. Minor inconsistencies or procedural flaws that do not impact the test result will not result in a cancelled test. 
(4)  The alcohol testing form (ATF) required by 49 CFR Part 40 as amended, shall be used for all FTA required testing. Failure of an employee to sign step 2 of the ATF will be considered a refusal to submit to testing. 
(f)  Tests for breath alcohol concentration. These will be conducted utilizing a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)-approved testing device operated by a trained technician. If the initial test indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.02 to .039, a second test will be performed to confirm the results of the initial test. The confirmatory test will be performed using a NHTSA-approved evidential breath testing device (EBT) operated by a trained breath alcohol technician (BAT). A covered employee who has a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater but less than 0.04 will be removed from his/her position for 24 hours, unless a retest results in a concentration measure of less than 0.02. An alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater is a positive alcohol test and in violation of this article and the requirements in 49 CFR Part 655 for covered employees. 
(g)  Removal from safety-sensitive function. Any covered employee that has a confirmed positive drug or alcohol test will be immediately removed from any safety-sensitive function, informed of educational and rehabilitation programs available, and referred to a substance abuse professional (SAP) for assessment. A positive drug and/or alcohol test is cause for disciplinary action pursuant to the city personnel ordinance. 
(h)  Pre-employment testing. All covered employees will be subject to urine drug testing and breathe alcohol testing as a condition of employment. All testing shall be performed in compliance with all applicable federal requirements. If the test is canceled, the employee must reschedule, take and pass the test before being hired. Any covered employee who refuses to comply with a request for testing shall be immediately removed from duty. Refusal includes failure to provide a sufficient urine specimen, saliva sample, or breathe sample without a valid medical explanation, as well as a verbal declaration, obstructive behavior, dilution of a specimen, or physical absence resulting in the inability to conduct the test. When the laboratory reports that a specimen is negative dilute, an immediate re-collection is required. Should the second test be negative dilute, no additional testing is required, and it is considered a negative test result. Any of the above violations will be cause for immediate removal from duty, and also disciplinary action per the city personnel policies. Failure of a pre-employment drug test will disqualify an applicant for employment for a period of 120 days. A substance abuse professional's certification of the absence of drug dependency that meets with the approval of the city, and negative pre-employment drug tests, will be required prior to further consideration for employment. The cost for assessment and any subsequent treatment will be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
In addition, FTA requires all safety-sensitive employees, who have been off duty for 90 or more days for any reason, to successfully pass a pre-employment drug test prior to the performance of a safety-sensitive function. A pre-employment/pre-transfer test will also be performed anytime an employee's status changes from an inactive status in a safety-sensitive position to an active status in a safety-sensitive position (i.e., return from Worker's Comp., return from leave of absence). 
(i)  Reasonable suspicion testing. All city covered employees may be subject to urine and/or breath testing when there are reasons to suspect drug or alcohol use is adversely affecting job performance. A determination of reasonable suspicion for drug or alcohol testing must be based on specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations of appearance, speech, behavior and/or odors of the covered employee. Further evidence of reasonable suspicion includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Physical signs and symptoms consistent with prohibited substance use or alcohol misuse. 
(2)  Evidence of the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of controlled substances, drugs, alcohol, or other prohibited substances. 
(3)  Occurrence of a serious or potentially serious accident that may have been caused by prohibited substance abuse or alcohol misuse. 
(4)  Fights, assaults, and violations of established safety, security, or other operating procedures. 
Reasonable suspicion referrals must be made in writing by a supervisor who has received at least 60 minutes training to detect the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use, and who reasonably concludes that an employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his/her work performance due to possible prohibited drug or alcohol use. Alcohol testing must be done just before, during or just after a covered employee's performance of a safety-sensitive function, and must be accomplished within eight hours of a reasonable suspicion determination. If testing is not done within eight hours, test attempts shall cease, and a written report explaining the failure to test shall be made. Drug testing may be done anytime a covered employee is on duty. 
(j)  Post-accident testing. All covered employees must undergo urine and breath testing if they are involved in an accident while performing a safety-sensitive function. Covered employees whose performance could have contributed to the accident must be tested. A post-accident test will be conducted unless the employee's actions can be completely ruled out as a contributing factor to the accident. Following an accident, the covered employees will be tested as soon as possible, but no later than eight hours after the accident for alcohol testing and 32 hours after the accident for drug testing. After such times have elapsed, no further testing shall be attempted and the reasons for any failures to test shall be recorded. Any covered employee involved in an accident must refrain from alcohol use for eight hours following the accident or until he/she undergoes a post-accident alcohol test. Any safety-sensitive employee who leaves the scene of the accident without justifiable explanation prior to submission to drug and alcohol testing will be considered to have refused the test and shall be subject to discipline under the city personnel ordinance. 
As soon as practicable following an accident involving the loss of human life, The city shall conduct drug and alcohol test on each surviving covered employee operating the mass-transit vehicle at the time of the accident. Post accident drug and alcohol testing of the operator is not required under this section if the covered employee is tested under the fatal accident testing requirements of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration rule 49 CFR 389.303(a)(1) or (b)(1). 
The city shall also drug and alcohol test any other covered employee whose performance could have contributed to the accident, as determined by the employer using the best information available at the time of the decision. 
As soon as practicable following an accident not involving the loss of human life in which the mass-transit vehicle is involved, the city shall drug and alcohol test each covered employee operating the mass-transit vehicle at the time of the accident unless the employer determines, using the best information available at the time of the decision, that the covered employee's performance can be completely ruled out as a contributing factor to the accident. The employer shall also drug and alcohol test any other covered employee whose performance could have contributed to the accident, as determined by the employer using the best information available at the time of the decision. 
If an alcohol test is required by this section is not administered within two hours following the accident, the employer shall prepare and maintain on file a record stating the reason the alcohol test was not promptly administered. If an alcohol test required by this section is not administered within eight hours following the accident, the employer shall cease attempts to administer an alcohol test and maintain and record of why the test was not administered. Records shall be submitted to FTA upon request of the administrator. 
(k)  Random testing. 
(1)  All covered employees will be subject to random, unannounced testing. The selection of employees shall be made by a scientifically valid method of randomly generating an employee identifier from the appropriate pool of safety-sensitive employees. 
(2)  The dates for administering unannounced testing of randomly selected employees shall be spread reasonably throughout the calendar year, day of the week and hours of the day. 
(3)  The number of employees randomly selected for drug/alcohol testing during the calendar year shall be not less than the percentage rates established by federal regulations for those safety-sensitive employees subject to random testing by federal regulations. The current random testing rate for drugs established by FTA equals 25 percent of the number of covered employees in the pool and random testing rate for alcohol established by FTA equals ten percent of the number of covered employees in the pool. 
(4)  Each covered employee shall be in a pool from which the random selection is made. Each covered employee in the pool shall have an equal chance of selection each time the selections are made. Employees will remain in the pool and be subject to selection, whether or not the employee has been previously tested. There is no discretion on the part of management in the selection. 
(5)  Covered transit employees that fall under the federal transit administration regulations will be included in one random pool maintained separately from the testing pool of employees that are included solely under the city's authority. 
(6)  Random tests can be conducted at any time during an employee's shift for drug testing. Alcohol random tests can be performed just before, during, or just after the performance of a safety-sensitive duty. However, under the city's authority, a random alcohol test may be performed anytime the covered employee is on duty. Testing can occur during the beginning, middle, or end of an employee's shift. 
(7)  Employees are required to proceed immediately to the collection site upon notification of their random selection. 
(l)  Return to duty and follow-up testing. A negative drug and alcohol test is a requirement for return to duty. All covered employees who have returned to duty after removal for alcohol or drug use will be required to undergo frequent, unannounced random urine and/or breath testing. The testing will be performed for a period of five years, with a minimum of six tests to be performed the first year. Such testing shall also be performed after a substance abuse professional determines a covered employee needs help resolving drug or alcohol problems. Random alcohol tests may be conducted just before, during, or just after the performance of safety-sensitive functions. Random drug tests may be conducted anytime a covered employee is on duty. Random alcohol and drug tests may be conducted anytime a covered employee is on duty. 
(m)  Employee requested testing. Any employee who questions the results of a required drug test may request that the split sample be tested. This test must be conducted at a different DHHS-certified laboratory. The test must be conducted on a split sample that was provided by the employee at the same time as the original sample. All cost for such testing is paid by the employee unless the result of the split sample test invalidates the results of the original test. 
The method of collecting, storing, and testing the split sample will be in compliance with the requirements of 49 CFR Part 40, as amended. The employee's request for a split sample test must be made to the medical review officer within 72 hours of notice of the original sample verified test result. Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted if the delay was due to documentable facts that were beyond the control of the employee. The medical review officer (MRO) is Dr. Miguel Cossio, 1075 South Main St., Madison, Georgia 30650, (706) 342-0449; the drug testing for all DOT employees will be preformed by Morgan Memorial Hospital, 1077 South Main Street, Madison, Georgia 30650; the drug testing of samples for all DOT employees will be performed by Quest Diagnostics, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia (770-452-1590). 
(n)  Grievance and appeal. The consequences specified by 49 CFR Part 40.149(c) for a positive test or test refusal are not subject to arbitration. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Attachment C is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 37-37. - Professional evaluation. 
Any covered employee who tests positive for the presence of illegal drugs or alcohol above the minimum thresholds set forth in 49 CFR Part 40, as amended, will be referred for evaluation by a substance abuse professional (SAP). A SAP is a licensed or certified physician, psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol-related disorders. The SAP will evaluate each employee to determine what assistance, if any, the employee needs in resolving problems associated with prohibited drug use or alcohol misuse. Evaluation by a SAP or participation in the city's employee assistance program does not shield an employee from disciplinary action or guarantee employment or reinstatement with the city. 
If a covered employee is allowed to return to duty, he/she must first properly follow the rehabilitation program prescribed by the SAP and have negative return-to-duty drug and alcohol tests. Thereafter, the employee shall be subject to unannounced follow-up testing for a period of one to five years. The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be paid directly by the employee or employee's insurance provider. Employees will be allowed to take accumulated sick leave and vacation leave to participate in the prescribed rehabilitation program. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 37-38. - Drug and alcohol abuse prevention contact persons. 
Any questions regarding this article should be directed to David Nunn, City Program Manager. 
The entity with knowledge of and experience in diagnosis and treatment of drug and alcohol abuse is the entity designated by the city as the substance abuse professional (SAP), which is Northeast Georgia Employee Assistance Program, 1435 Oglethorpe Avenue, Athens, Georgia 30606. 
The alcohol testing for all DOT employees will be performed by Morgan Memorial Hospital, 1077 South Main Street, Madison, Georgia 30650, via contract with Quest Diagnostics, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia (770-452-1590), a qualified and approved laboratory that has agreed to comply with all applicable local, state and federal requirements for alcohol testing. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 37-39. - Employee assistance program. 
City shall provide educational materials to employees before alcohol and drug testing is started under this article, in conformity with 40 CFR § 199.239. Employee organizations will be given written notice of these materials. Such materials will include this article and may include information about the effect of alcohol misuse and signs of an alcohol problem. Education shall also include intervention, evaluation and resolution of alcohol problems. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 37-40. - Disclosure of information. 
(a)  The city will securely maintain all testing information, including results and other related records, and shall not disclose that information except as required by law. Test results will not be placed in personnel files. 
(b)  The city shall release information regarding a covered employee's record as directed by specific, written consent from the employee authorizing release of the information to an identified person. 
(c)  A covered employee is entitled, upon written request, to obtain copies of any records pertaining to his/her use of prohibited substances, including any records pertaining to test results. 
(d)  The city may disclose information that is required to be maintained to the decision maker in a lawsuit, grievance, or other proceeding initiated by or on behalf of the employee tested. 
(e)  When requested by the National Transportation Safety Board as part of an accident investigation, the city shall disclose information related to its administration of drug and alcohol tests following the accident investigation. 
(f)  Records shall be made available to subsequent employers upon receipt of written request from the covered employee. 
(g)  The city shall disclose data for its drug and alcohol testing program and any other information pertaining to its anti-drug program when requested by the secretary of transportation or any DOT agency with regulatory authority over the city. 
(h)  To be considered for employment, all applicants will be asked to give consent to the City of Madison for a background check of the applicant's previous DOT covered employer over the past two years. The information requested will include; 
(1)  Alcohol test results of 0.04 or higher alcohol concentration. 
(2)  Verified positive drug tests. 
(3)  Refusals to be tested (including verified adulterated or substituted drug test results). 
(4)  Other violations of DOT agency drug and alcohol testing regulations. 
(5)  With respect to any employee who violated a DOT drug and alcohol regulation, documentation of the employee's successful completion of DOT return-to-duty requirements (including follow-up tests). 
(6)  Attached hereto as Attachment B is information about the adverse consequences of alcohol use. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— Attachment B is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 37-41. - Record maintenance. 
The city and the laboratory performing the testing will maintain the following testing records: 
(1)  Records related to the testing process, including calibration documentation, documentation of training, documents generated in connection with decisions to administer reasonable suspicion tests, documents generated in connection with decisions to administer post accident tests, and documents verifying existence of a medical explanation for the inability of covered employees to provide adequate breath or saliva for testing; 
(2)  Records related to test results, including the city's copy of test forms, the results of the tests, documents related to the refusal of any covered employee to submit to a required test, and documents presented by a covered employee to dispute test results; 
(3)  Records related to other violations outlined in this article, and records of procedures to be followed if a test shows alcohol concentration of .02 or more or use of an illegal drug; 
(4)  Records related to referrals and evaluations, including, but not limited to, determinations by a SAP of an employee's need for assistance, and records of an employee's compliance with a SAP's recommendation if the city requires the employee to follow said recommendations; 
(5)  Records related to annual testing data and "missed test" information. The city shall submit testing data and "missed test" information as required by federal law; 
(6)  Records related to education and training, including material on alcohol and drug abuse awareness, a copy of this article, documentation of compliance with the requirements regarding information disclosure, documentation of training regarding reasonable suspicion determinations, and certification that training conducted under this article complies with the requirements of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 37-42. - Record retention. 
(a)  The following records will be retained for a minimum period of five years: Records of positive drug tests and alcohol tests with results of .02 or greater; documentation of refusals to take required tests; calibration documentation, including records of the results of external calibration checks; employee referrals and evaluations; management information system (MIS) annual report data; and documents pertaining to "missed tests"; 
(b)  The following records will be retained for a minimum period of two years: Records related to the collection process, training records, inspection and maintenance records of all equipment used in employee testing, documentation of compliance with the quality assurance procedure for all equipment used for testing, and training and proficiency testing records of each technician used in employee testing; 
(c)  The following records will be retained for a minimum period of one year: Records of employee alcohol test results showing an alcohol concentration below .02 grams and negative drug test results. 
(Amd. of 2-25-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-24-08(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; unfit buildings, § 18-101 et seq.; historic preservation, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 50; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; junked motor vehicles, § 78-101 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A), repealed the former Art. II, §§ 38-31—38-39, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Amd. of 7-30-04(2), § 1; Ord. of 2-11-02(2), Exh. A. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9. 

Sec. 38-31. - Purpose and authority. 
This article will be known as "Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted August 13, 2018, renamed § 38-31 from "purpose and authority" to "title." 
Sec. 38-32. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 38-34(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 38-33(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-33. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 38-34(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-34. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of 38-34(b), (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPS. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 38-34(b), (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in C. 15, 16 and 17, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 38-34(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single—family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 38-34(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-35. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Madison, Georgia, without first obtaining a permit from the planning department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the planning department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 38-35(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 38-34(b), (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 38-34(c)(15)—(17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 38-35(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 38-34(b), (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by 38-34(c)(15)—(17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per 38-35(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A)); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-36. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city building official will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to Code section 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A)); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-37. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 38-35(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A)); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-38. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A)); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-39. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Morgan County. 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A)); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-40. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 13 th day of August, 2018. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Amd. of 3-22-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-13-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 38-41—38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 2-12-01(1), § 1, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 38-41—38-46. To preserve the style of numbering of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 38-51—38-56. See Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 38-51. - Findings and purpose. 
It is essential that the quality of the city public drinking water be insured. It is therefore necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the city and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. 
Groundwater resources are contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
The main objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect the groundwater by prohibiting land uses that generate dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect the groundwater by limiting density of development; and 
(3)  Protect the groundwater by ensuring that the development that occurs within groundwater recharge areas shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 38-52. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically described herein, all words or phrases, whether capitalized or not, in this article shall have their usual and customary meanings. The use of the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the present tense includes the future; the use of shall means the action is mandatory; and, the use of may or should means the action is optional. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Development permit includes all development requests, including but not limited to: all building permits, all zoning actions, preliminary and final subdivision plat applications, and certificates of appropriateness. 
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility). 
Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map means maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater recharge areas to pollution. The groundwater pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. These maps are incorporated herein by reference. 
Groundwater Recharge Area District means all lands within the City of Madison that are indicated as "most significant groundwater recharge areas…" on the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 20 (1992 edition), which document is incorporated herein by reference. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas means those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 20 (1992 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, chemical natural and form of the rock, soil type, and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves, and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. These maps are incorporated herein by reference. 
Cross reference— Chapter 90—Zoning 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 38-53. - Groundwater recharge area protection district. 
(a)  Establishment of district. A Groundwater Recharge Area District is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Madison, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 20 (1992 edition) . Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. The Groundwater Recharge Area Protection District may also be represented, in addition to other water-related protection districts, as part of the Water Protection Overlay (WPO) District is indicated on the City of Madison Zoning Map —Overlay Version. 
(b)  Determination of pollution susceptibility. Within the Groundwater Recharge Area District, each groundwater recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20 (1992 edition) . 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 38-54. - Groundwater recharge area protection standards. 
(a)  No construction may proceed on building, manufactured home or any structure to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resource (DHR) Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter DHR Manual), and subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(c)  New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)  All new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(e)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(f)  The handling, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (EPD) and in conformance with any local fire code requirements. 
(g)  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal and state requirements. 
(h)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
(i)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 38-55. - Exemptions. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in sections 38-54(b) and (c) of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 38-56. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Permit requirements. No development plan will be approved by the mayor and council unless the permit, request or plan is in compliance with the groundwater recharge area protection standards listed in section 38-54 of this article. 
(b)  Enforcement. The city or its designee, agent, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the city deems necessary. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure by city or its designee. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(c)  Site plan requirements. Applications for a development permit within the Groundwater Recharge Area District shall include a site plan, with the exception of certain exempted activities identified in subsection (7). The following information is required for all site plans: 
(1)  A map shall, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways; water, wastewater, and storm water facilities; and utility installations. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. 
(7)  The following activities and development are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels; 
b.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously city approved and permitted development; and, 
c.  Construction of accessory buildings, such as sheds, or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the city or its designee. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall automatically expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall automatically expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the city or its designee. 
(f)  Review procedures. A review is conducted by the county planning commission. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. The review period shall include the preparation of findings by the building and zoning administrator or his designee. The county planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of the permit application. The county planning commission must transmit its recommendation to the city mayor and council within 60 days. If the county planning commission fails to submit its recommendations within the 60 day period, it is deemed to have recommended approval of the permit application. 
The city mayor and council shall vote on the permit application. The City of Madison Mayor and Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Within seven days of its decision, the city mayor and council or its designee shall notify the applicant. If the city mayor and council fails to act on the application within 60 days of the submission to city mayor and council by the county planning commission, the application is deemed to have been approved. 
(g)  Denial. If the permit is denied by the city mayor and council, then the same permit application cannot be considered until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the permit by the city mayor and council. 
(h)  Judicial review. Based on any proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the mayor and council may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the City of Madison, Georgia. 
(i)  Amendments. This article may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Assessment relief. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(1), § 1) 
Sec. 38-57—38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 2-12-01(2), § 1, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 38-51—38-56. To preserve the style of numbering of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 38-61—38-66. See Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 38-61. - Findings and purpose. 
In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the City of Madison, Georgia and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering waters resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
The purpose of this article is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the city; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This article shall apply to the portions of the Madison/Lake Oconee Intake which occurs within the jurisdiction of the city is herein identified as a water supply watershed, and as shown on the Water Supply Watersheds of Morgan County, Georgia Map. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 38-62. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically described herein, all words or phrases, whether capitalized or not, in this article shall have their usual and customary meanings. The use of the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the present tense includes the future; the use of shall means the action is mandatory; and, the use of may or should means the action is optional. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas specified in section 38-74 of this article. 
Impervious surface means a man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed containing one hundred (100) square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed that contains less than one hundred (100) square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water Supply Watershed Protection District means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake as indicated by the Northeast Georgia Regional Development Center on the Water Supply Watersheds of Morgan County, Georgia (2000 edition), which document is incorporated herein by reference. 
Cross reference— Chapter 90—Zoning 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 38-63. - Water supply watershed protection district. 
The Water Supply Watershed Protection District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the Madison/Lake Oconee Intake. The boundary of this overlay is defined by the ridgeline of the respective watershed, the boundary of a radius of seven miles upstream of the respective public water supply intake, or by the political boundaries of the city where those boundaries occur within the watershed. This water supply watershed does not contain a reservoir. An intake for the city is located on Lake Oconee. The boundary shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watersheds of Morgan County, Georgia (2000 edition); the map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. The Water Supply Watershed Protection District may also be represented, in addition to other water-related protection districts, as part of the Water Protection Overlay (WPO) District is indicated on the City of Madison Zoning Map —Overlay Version. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 38-64. - Water supply watershed protection standards. 
The following regulations shall apply to the Water Supply Watershed District identified on the adopted map as a large water supply watershed without a reservoir. The following limitations on permissible uses shall apply to the Water Supply Watershed District in addition to the limitations on land use prescribed by the underlying zoning district. 
(1)  New facilities, located within seven miles of a water supply, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention and the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(2)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 38-65. - Exemptions. 
Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas are exempted from the permit and site plan requirements of this article, in accordance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission or the state department of agriculture; and 
(2)  Shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 38-66. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Permit requirements. Within the Water Supply Watershed District, no land-disturbing activity, construction or other development, other than certain exempted activities identified within, may be conducted without a permit from the city and must be in full compliance with the terms of this article and all other applicable government regulations, including but not limited to the Subdivision Regulations, chapter 66, and the Zoning Ordinance, chapter 90. All activities that are not permissible as of right or as conditional uses shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Temporary emergency permit. Not withstanding the provisions of this article or any other law to the contrary, the city or its designee may issue a temporary emergency permit through oral or written authorization, provided a written permit is accomplished within five days, if in its sole discretion it deems that an unacceptable threat to life or severe loss of property will occur if a temporary emergency permit is not granted. The temporary emergency permit may be terminated at any time without process upon a determination by the city that the action was not or is no longer necessary to protect human health or the environment. 
(c)  Pre-application conference; application requirements. A pre-application conference is strongly encouraged between the applicant and the city or its designee and can be scheduled at the request of the applicant. The purpose of the meeting is to review local land use restrictions, permit requirements, and site plan requirements. An applicant must file for approval of the site plan. The application shall be filed with the planning department and shall include: 
(1)  A letter requesting approval of the site plan; 
(2)  Payment of the herein below listed applicable fee to defray the city's expenses: 
a.  Minimum fee of $150.00 for three (3) or less lots in the proposed subdivision, or 
b.  Fee of $150.00 plus $30.00 per lot in excess of three (3) lots in the proposed subdivision, but not exceeding a total fee of $850.00; and 
(3)  Four copies of the site plan. 
(d)  Site plan requirements. Applications for a development permit within the Water Supply Watershed Protection District shall include a site plan, with the exception of certain exempted activities listed in subsection (8) below. The following information is required for all site plans: 
(1)  A map shall, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways; water, wastewater, and storm water facilities; and utility installations. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. 
(7)  A stormwater prevention plan submitted to and approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, may meet the requirements of subsection (b). 
(8)  The following activities and development are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels; 
b.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously city approved and permitted development; and 
c.  Construction of accessory buildings, such as sheds, or additions to single-family residences. 
(e)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the city or its designee. 
(f)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall automatically expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall automatically expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the city or its designee. 
(g)  Review procedures. A review is conducted by the county planning commission. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. The review period shall include the preparation of findings by the building and zoning administrator or his designee. The county planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of the permit application. The county planning commission must transmit its recommendation to the city mayor and council within 60 days. If the county planning commission fails submit its recommendations within the 60 day period, it is deemed to have recommended approval of the permit application. 
The city mayor and council shall vote on the permit application. The city mayor and council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Within seven days of its decision, the city mayor and council or its designed shall notify the applicant. If the city mayor and council fails to act on the application within 60 days of the submission to city mayor and council by the county planning commission, the application is deemed to have been approved. 
(h)  Denial. If the permit is denied by the city mayor and council, then the same permit application cannot be considered until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the permit by the city mayor and council. 
(i)  Judicial review. Based on any proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the mayor and council may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(j)  Amendments. This article, and the Water Supply Watershed District, may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(k)  Assessment relief. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 38-67—38-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WETLANDS PROTECTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 2-12-01(3), § 1, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 38-61—38-65. To preserve the style of numbering of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 38-71—38-75. See Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 38-71. - Findings and purpose. 
The wetlands within the City of Madison, Georgia, are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the state. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. It is therefore necessary for the city to insure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities that may adversely affect wetlands. 
The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this article is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-72. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically described herein, all words or phrases, whether capitalized or not, in this article shall have their usual and customary meanings. The use of the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular; the present tense includes the future; the use of shall means the action is mandatory; and, the use of may or should means the action is optional. Where other terms or words require definition, the same may be defined in the latest edition of the 1987 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Manual; any definition found therein is incorporated herein by reference. 
Best management practices means the method to be utilized by the applicant for the utilization and care of the subject property as detailed in the latest edition of the State of Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Functions means the beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including: Storage, conveyance and attenuation of floodwater and stormwater; protection of water quantity and quality, educational, historical and archeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic and recreational amenities. 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Department of the Interior Fish & Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the City of Madison, Georgia. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity that will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Silviculture means the art of producing, reproducing and growing a forest of distinctive stand of trees. 
Wetland means an area inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the corps. 
Wetlands Protection District means wetlands within the city that are indicated on the Generalized Wetlands Map. The Generalized Wetlands Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon or attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this article. The Generalized Wetlands Map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetlands boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the land owner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-73. - Wetlands protection district. 
(a)  Establishment of district. The Wetlands Protection District is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Department of the Interior Fish & Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps. This map shall be referred to as the Generalized Wetlands Map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. The Wetland Protection District may also be represented, in addition to other water-related protection districts, as part of the Water Protection Overlay (WPO) District is indicated on the City of Madison Zoning Map —Overlay Version. 
(b)  Wetlands delineation. The Generalized Wetlands Map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City of Madison, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-74. - Wetlands protection district standards. 
(a)  [Wetland Protection District constitution.] The Wetland Protection District shall constitute an overlay zoning district that supplements the zoning ordinance, chapter 90. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the Wetlands Protection District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. (The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.) 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the Unites States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(c)  Prohibited Uses. The following uses are not permitted within the Wetlands Protection District: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; and 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-75. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Permit requirements. No regulated activity will be permitted within the Wetlands Protection District without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a Wetlands Protection District boundary, as determined by the building and zoning administrator or his/her designee using the Generalized Wetlands Map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(b)  Temporary emergency permit. A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the building and zoning administrator or his/her designee for the following reasons: 
(1)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication, or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to the building and zoning administrator and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to insure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized; 
(2)  Temporary water-level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations, provided that they are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected; 
(3)  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provision of section 38-74 of this article; and 
(4)  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(c)  Site plan requirements. Applications for development permits within the Wetland Protection District shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(d)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the mayor and council. The mayor and council may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this article. 
The city may require a bond up to the larger of $5,000.00 or $1,000.00 per acre of project area and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of condition of any such bond, the mayor and council or its designee may collect such bond or institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall automatically expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall automatically expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the building and zoning administrator or his/her designee. 
(f)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the city and will be reviewed within 45 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by city mayor and council. Filing fees of the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determinations as deemed necessary by the building and zoning administrator. All fees required in this article are in addition to all other fees required to be paid by any federal, state or local government. 
(g)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the building and zoning administrator. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the building and zoning administrator. 
(3)  If the building and zoning administrator discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the board of commissioners shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(h)  Suspension; revocation. The building and zoning administrator or his/her designee may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The building and zoning administrator or its designee shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(i)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the city mayor and council may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city mayor and council. 
(j)  Amendments. This article, and the Generalized Wetlands Map, may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar to wetlands becomes available. 
(k)  Assessment relief. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Ord. of 2-12-01(3), § 1) 
Secs. 38-76—38-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATERING 

Sec. 38-80. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, this limitation shall not create any limitation on the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in [O.C.G.A.] § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with [O.C.G.A.] § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Amd. of 12-13-2010(2), Exh. A) 
Sec. 38-81. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use herein. 
(b)  The city police and city manager shall be the enforcement authority for this article. They may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this article may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Amd. of 12-13-2010(2), Exh. A) 
Chapter 42 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The list of properties located in the Madison Historic District, together with the names of owners of such properties, is maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; fire safety requirements for historic buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24; historic landmark or district designation procedure, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26; certificates of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; certification as rehabilitated historic property for purposes of preferential assessment, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.2; landmark historic property for purposes of ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Purpose, authority and enactment. 
The mayor and council find that the historical and cultural heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people of the city and of the public generally. Therefore, pursuant to the authority conferred by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1976, as amended, (16 USC 470 et seq.) and by the Georgia Historic Preservation Act of 1980, as amended, (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-21 et seq.), and for the purposes of establishing a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of historic properties and historic districts, having a special historical and cultural interest or value; protecting and safeguarding the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such properties and districts; stabilizing and improving the property values of such properties and districts to retain and attract residents and to encourage restoration and rehabilitation efforts; protecting and enhancing the city's attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business and industry thereby provided; strengthening the economy of the city; enhancing the opportunities for federal and state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal and state law; seeking to participate in federal and state programs that provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of such properties and districts; fostering civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; promoting the use of such properties and districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city; all in accordance with the city's adopted comprehensive plan, as amended, the mayor and council hereby ordain and enact into law this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 102) 
Sec. 42-2. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all land, buildings and structures within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 103) 
Sec. 42-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a place, district, site, building, structure, object or work of art located within a designated historic district. 
Commission means the historic preservation commission created and established pursuant to article II of this chapter. 
Design review process means the procedure set forth in article IV of this chapter for the consideration, assessment and decision of applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
Designation means a decision by the mayor and council wherein a property or district proposed for preservation is located to designate such property or district as a "historic property" or as a "historic district" and thereafter to preclude all material changes in appearance of such property or within such district prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material; the type and style of all windows, doors and signs; and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape which affect the historic character of the property or the development of the site, including but not limited to parking areas, driveways, walkways, fences, wall, landscaping, signs or other permanent landscape elements; and other appurtenant environmental fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Historic (in terms of the designation criteria set forth in subsection 42-56(3)c) means properties or a place, site, building, structure, object or work of art within historic districts generally of 50 years old or older. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the mayor and council as a historic district pursuant to the designation criteria established in subsection 42-56(3)a.2. 
Historic preservation jurisdiction means the area within the incorporated limits of the city. 
Historic property or landmark means an individual place, site, building, structure, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the mayor and council as a historic property or landmark pursuant to the designation criteria established in subsection 42-56(3)a.1. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or of any place, district, site, building, structure, object or work of art within a historic district, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic property; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation; 
(4)  Advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structures within a designated historic district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements or other appurtenant environmental features. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of such property and all individuals, associations and corporations who have an interest of record in the county where the property is located in a place, site, building, structure or work of art, including executors, administrators, guardians and trustees. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 105) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-4. - Penalties. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. Each day that work is conducted without a certificate of appropriateness, each day that work does not comply with an issued certificate of appropriateness, or each day that work is not initiated to remedy a lack of minimum maintenance and repair constitutes a separate violation and is subject to the penalties set forth for such violations. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 603) 
Sec. 42-5. - Affirmation of existing local ordinances. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with the existing city building code, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. Designated historic properties and historic districts shall constitute the historic preservation (HP) overlay zone within the context of the city zoning ordinance, and the specific provisions, regulations and guidelines adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be considered more restrictive and govern the established overlay zone. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 701) 
Secs. 42-6—42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 42-26. - Title; authority. 
(a)  The title of the commission shall be the "Madison Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter referred to as the "commission"). 
(b)  The commission shall have authority as established in sections 42-28 and 42-29, shall be considered a part of the planning and development functions of the city government, and shall be administrated by the staff of the planning and development department. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 201) 
Sec. 42-27. - Membership; appointment and terms; compensation. 
(a)  Composition and expertise. The commission shall consist of seven members, who shall reside within the historic preservation jurisdiction and shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture, historic preservation, landscape architecture, archeology or a related field. 
(b)  Appointment and terms. Commission members shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall serve two-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be four members for one-year terms and three members for two-year terms. 
(c)  Compensation. Commission members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 202) 
Sec. 42-28. - General powers. 
The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Perform historic preservation activities as an official agency of the city's historic preservation program; 
(2)  Prepare an inventory and conduct surveys of all properties within its respective historic preservation jurisdiction having the potential for designation; 
(3)  Recommend to the mayor and council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(4)  Recommend to the mayor and council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure or work of art as a historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and recommend such certificates of appropriateness to the mayor and council in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; 
(6)  Recommend to the mayor and council the restoration or preservation of any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(7)  Promote the acquisition by the city of conservation easements in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1—44-10-8; 
(8)  Conduct an education program on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction; 
(9)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the mayor and council or the commission itself may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of this chapter; 
(10)  Consult with historic preservation experts in the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources, the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc., or other historic preservation consultants and professionals as necessary for the purposes of this chapter; 
(11)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated as such pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26 and article III of this chapter; 
(12)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction of the National Register of Historic Places and the state register of historic places; 
(13)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired; and 
(14)  On behalf of and for the city, the commission may receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of property, provided that the commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent and that such funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 203) 
Sec. 42-29. - Rules of procedure. 
The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business; shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt and amend rules of procedure without amendment to this chapter. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall serve as a reference in the determination of the order of business at all meetings. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 204) 
Sec. 42-30. - Conflict of interest. 
At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member shall abstain from voting or discussion of the project, other than answering direct questions. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 205) 
Sec. 42-31. - Records. 
A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. The commission shall keep a copy of all historic resource surveys, planning studies, designation reports, design review criteria and applications for certificates of appropriateness and recommendations of action. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 206) 
Secs. 42-32—42-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND DISTRICTS 

Sec. 42-56. - Preliminary procedures. 
No ordinance designating any property as a historic property and no ordinance designating any district as a historic district nor any amendments thereto may be adopted by the mayor and council nor may any property be accepted or acquired as historic property by the mayor and council until the following preliminary procedural steps have been taken by the commission: 
(1)  Preliminary research and/or historic resource surveys. The commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the historic and cultural significance of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or works of art within its jurisdiction prior to designation. The commission shall compile and collect information or conduct historic resource surveys as necessary. 
(2)  Designation nominations. The commission shall identify historic properties and historic districts eligible for designation and shall periodically review all properties within its jurisdiction for such eligibility. Historic properties and historic districts may also be nominated by historical societies, neighborhood associations and property owners. The commission shall review all designation nominations for eligibility, utilizing the established designation criteria. 
(3)  Designation criteria: historic properties and historic districts. 
a.  Eligibility. 
1.  Historic property. A property shall be eligible for designation if it is a place, site, building, structure or work of art which constitutes an example which is: 
i.  An outstanding representative of its era; 
ii.  One of the few remaining of a past architectural style or building form; 
iii.  Associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the municipality, county, state or region; or 
iv.  Of natural or artistic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
2.  Historic district. A district shall be eligible for designation if it constitutes a geographically definable area, urban or rural, which contains places, sites, buildings, structures or works of art, or a combination thereof which: 
i.  Have special character or special historical or cultural interest or value; 
ii.  Represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
iii.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visually perceptible section of the municipality. 
b.  Physical boundary. For historic properties, the physical boundary of the historic property shall include all places, sites, buildings, structures or works of art, as well as any adjacent area, necessary for the proper appreciation of the historic property. For historic districts, the physical boundary of the historic district shall delineate a geographically definable area, urban or rural, and encompass all places, sites, buildings, structures or works of art, or a combination thereof in such area, including both historic and nonhistoric properties in such area. 
c.  Status. Historic districts, and in some instances historic properties, include multiple places, sites, buildings, structures, or works of art, which shall be classified by age, historic (more than 50 years old) or nonhistoric (less than 50 years old), and evaluated in terms of compatibility, integrity and condition. The commission shall periodically update and revise the status of all properties within its jurisdiction. 
(4)  Designation reports. The commission shall prepare formal designation reports when recommending the designation of historic properties or historic districts. These reports shall be used to educate the community and to provide a permanent record of the designation. The report will follow the guidelines for nominations to the National Register of Historic Places and shall consist of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of significance; 
c.  A map of the proposed boundary; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(5)  Notification of the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources. The commission shall provide designation reports to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources or its successor, which will be allowed 30 days to prepare written comments concerning the designation report. 
(6)  Recommendation to the mayor and council. The commission shall make a formal recommendation and provide a designation report to the mayor and council regarding specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 301) 
Sec. 42-57. - Designation ordinance requirements. 
Ordinances adopted by the mayor and council to designate historic properties or historic districts shall be subject to the following requirements and the designation procedure as set forth in this section: 
(1)  Physical boundary. Designation ordinances shall require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city to provide notice of such designation in addition to other notice requirements specified by this section and within section 42-58. 
(2)  Property description. Designation ordinances shall describe each historic property to be designated, and for a historic district, shall include a description of the boundaries of the district with a list of each property located in such district. 
(3)  List of owners. Designation ordinances shall set forth the name of the owner of the historic property, and for a historic district, shall set forth the name of the owner of each property located in such district. 
(4)  Design review process: certificate of appropriateness. Designation ordinances shall require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in the exterior appearance of the designated historic property or of any place, site, building, structure or work of art located within the designated historic district. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 302) 
Sec. 42-58. - Designation procedure. 
(a)  Public hearing and predesignation public notice. The commission and the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed designation ordinance. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues of the official organ of the county, and written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject properties. Notices shall be published and mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A letter sent via the United States Postal Service to the last known address of the owners of the subject properties shall constitute legal notification under this chapter. 
(b)  Action by mayor and council. Following the public hearing, the mayor and council may adopt the designation ordinance as prepared, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the proposal. 
(c)  Post-designation public notice. Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance, the owners of each designated historic property and the owners of each place, site, building, structure or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the mayor and council, which notice shall apprise the owners and occupants of the design review process and the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the exterior appearance of a designated historic property or a property within a designated historic district. 
(d)  Notification of other agencies. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies with the city of the designation ordinance, including the building official and local historical and cultural organizations. 
(e)  Moratorium pending designation. If a historic property or historic district is being considered for designation by ordinance, the commission shall notify the city who shall suspend the work status and issue no building, construction or demolition permits for the subject property or properties for a period of four months from the initiation of a designation report. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 303) 
Secs. 42-59—42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh. A),repealed former Art. IV, §§ 42-81—42-90, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Dec. 14, 1998, §§ 401—409, 601. 

Sec. 42-81. - Certificate of appropriateness requirement. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in appearance of the historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art within the historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless and until completing the design review process, specifically obtaining a certificate of appropriateness which has been submitted to, approved, and issued by the commission. Local governments shall notify the commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-82. - Application for certificate of appropriateness. 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness is required prior to any material change in appearance. Design review applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be submitted by the deadline set by the commission. Applications shall be accompanied by such elevations, drawings, photographs or plans as may be required by the commission and the fee established by resolution of the mayor and council. The commission shall not approve applications for demolition without reviewing at the same time post-demolition plans. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-83. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider changes having no effect on exterior architectural features nor interior arrangement, unless and except where interior features and arrangement impact the structural integrity of the building. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-84. - Conceptual review; preliminary proposal. 
All proposals for new construction shall be presented to the commission for conceptual review and recommendations prior to submitting a design review application for certificate of appropriateness. Preliminary proposals for conceptual review shall be accompanied by such elevations, drawings, photographs or plans as may be required by the commission and the fee established by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-85. - Administrative review: identified items; application modifications. 
To expedite the design review process, the commission may identify within its rules of procedure items and application modifications which qualify for administrative review. Applications may be submitted at any time and shall be accompanied by such elevations, drawings, photographs or plans as may be required by the commission and the fee established by resolution of the mayor and council. Administrative review shall be limited to proposed work which constitutes either an identified administrative review item which clearly and distinctly complies with the established design criteria or a minor modification to a previously approved application for certificate of appropriateness which clearly and distinctly complies with the established design criteria. The administrative review shall follow the procedure set forth within the commission's adopted rules of procedure. All administrative review decisions shall be reported to the commission at the next regular meeting. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-86. - Public hearings: notification. 
At least seven days prior to reviewing a design review application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the application and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. For such public hearings, the commission shall publish notice of the pending application in the official organ of the county and shall post notice in the form of a sign in a conspicuous place on the property in question. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-87. - Criteria. 
When considering applications for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall evaluate the proposed material change in appearance for any substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historical, or architectural significance and value of the designated historic property or designated historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance; architectural style; general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the architectural features involved; and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the immediate neighborhood. The commission shall also be guided by the most current edition of The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, along with any other design guidelines, criteria and policy statements adopted by the commission. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-88. - Decision on application. 
(a)  Deadline for decision. The commission shall approve or reject a complete application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a designated historic property or of a building, structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district. Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. This deadline may be extended with consent of the applicant. 
(b)  Types of decision. 
(1)  Approval. When considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historical or architectural significance and value of the designated historic property or designated historic district. 
(2)  Approval with conditions. If the commission identifies elements of a proposed material change in appearance which are not in compliance with the design review criteria, the commission may make recommendations or set such conditions and/or changes which render the application for a certificate of appropriateness in compliance, thereby avoiding a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historical or architectural significance and value of the designated historic property or designated historic district. If the applicant agrees to such conditions and/or changes, the commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  Denial. When considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall deny the application for a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance is not in compliance with the design review criteria and will have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historical or architectural significance and value of the designated historic property or designated historic district. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-89. - Alternative action for unusual circumstances. 
Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provision, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the owner's or occupant's own making. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-90. - Notification of decision. 
(a)  Applicant. The commission shall provide notification of each decision, in writing, to each applicant. In the event that the commission rejects an application, the commission shall state its reasons for doing so within the notification. 
(b)  Mayor and council. The commission shall provide a list of decisions to the mayor and council, and in instances of denials, shall provide to the mayor and council a copy of the notification of the applicant. 
(d)  Building official. The commission shall provide a list of decisions to the building official or his designee. In cases where a material change in appearance would require a building permit, the denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official or his designee or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits, and in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-91. - Certificate of appropriateness—scope; expiration and renewal; failure to comply; amendments. 
(a)  Scope. A certificate of appropriateness shall be limited to those elements presented to and approved by the commission. Approval of other elements whether related or unrelated to the project presented shall not be implied. 
(b)  Expiration; renewal. A certificate of appropriateness shall be void if work does not commence within six months of the date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall permit work in compliance thereof for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. A renewal for a period of six months may be obtained upon submission of a request by the owner and issuance of written approval by the commission. 
(c)  Failure to comply with certificate of appropriateness. All work performed pursuant to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate and any amendments or modifications shall require review. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the building official or his designee shall issue a stop work order, and all work shall cease. No person, firm or corporation shall undertake any work on such project as long as such stop work order shall continue in effect. Violations of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 42-4. 
(d)  Amendments or modifications. Change work items or changes to approved plans must be submitted and approved prior to beginning work on any aspect of that plan. The owner may submit a new application for a certificate of appropriateness or request administrative review of such modifications which meet the criteria set forth in section 42-85. 
(e)  Failure to apply for a certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained prior to any material change in the appearance, including but not limited to new construction, addition, restoration, rehabilitation, renovation, remodeling, alterations, site changes, demolition or relocation. In the event work is performed without a certificate of appropriateness, the building official or his designee shall issue a stop work order and all work shall cease. No person, firm or corporation shall undertake any work on such project as long as such stop work order shall continue in effect. The owner shall submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the material change in appearance. At the next meeting, the commission shall review the application without prejudice, as if no work had been completed. Violations of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 42-4. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Sec. 42-92. - Same—appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any action of the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such action to the mayor and council. The appeal must be filed with the city clerk within 30 days after the decision is rendered or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 30 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission to act. The city council may approve, modify or reject the decision made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. In determining abuse of discretion, the city council shall rely on the record of the commission including the commission's findings and decision. An abuse of discretion may be found where the record contains no evidence to support the decision of the commission. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from convictions of municipal ordinance violations, namely, via petition for writ of certiorari. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2016, § 1(Exh.A)) 
Secs. 42-93—42-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES 

Sec. 42-111. - Ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on an historic property, to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a change in the design, material, texture or the exterior appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 501) 
Sec. 42-112. - Standards of minimum maintenance and repair. 
The commission and the city shall further insure that all designated historic properties and places, sites, buildings, structures and works of art within designated historic districts are kept free from the following structural defects and conditions which threaten the deterioration or loss of such properties. Owners shall maintain their structures as to not endanger the property by permitting the following conditions which jeopardize structural integrity: 
(1)  Foundations. Deteriorated or inadequate foundations jeopardize structural integrity. All foundations shall support the structure as originally constructed, and at all points shall be free of holes, wide cracks and buckling. 
(2)  Structural members. Defective or deteriorated floor supports, or any structural members of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety jeopardize structural integrity. Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration jeopardize structural integrity. Structural members of ceilings and roofs, or other horizontal structural members, which sag, split or buckle due to defective materials or deterioration or are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety jeopardize structural integrity. Interior staircases shall be maintained in good repair. 
(3)  Exterior surfaces and materials. Floors, exterior walls and roofs having holes, wide cracks and loose, warped, protruding or rotting boards or any other condition admitting moisture or other elements jeopardize structural integrity. Exterior surfaces exposed to the weather shall be repaired and weatherproofed, where appropriate, to protect them from further deterioration. Masonry joints shall be maintained. Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration, or are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety jeopardize structural integrity. 
(4)  Weather protection and ventilation. Lack of weather protection, any fault or defect in the building which renders it structurally unsafe or not weathertight jeopardizes structural integrity. Windows, exterior doors and exterior siding shall be watertight. Exterior flashing, including that at chimneys, doors, and windows, shall be maintained in good repair. Downspouts and gutters shall be maintained so that rain runoff is directed away from the structure. Foundation and attic vents shall be maintained to ventilate the crawl and attic spaces. 
(5)  Stairways, porches and appurtenances. Exterior staircases, porches and appurtenances thereto shall be maintained in good repair. 
(6)  Rodent and termite infestation. Structures shall be free of wood boring insects and rodent infestation. 
(7)  Security and utilities. Buildings which are no longer occupied shall be properly secured to prevent intrusion, and all utilities shall be properly connected or disconnected. 
(8)  Dependencies and additional site features. Ancillary structures and accessory buildings shall be maintained in good repair. Tree limbs shall be trimmed away from the building, and tree roots shall be cleared away from all foundations. Soil erosion and soil deposition shall not be allowed to endanger any structures. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 502) 
Sec. 42-113. - Failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair. 
Owners shall not allow historic properties and places, sites, buildings, structures or works of art within designated historic districts to deteriorate by failing to provide minimum maintenance and repair. The failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair not only adversely impacts the historic and cultural value of the historic community, but due to decay, deterioration and structural defects, jeopardizes structural integrity and poses additional safety hazards. The purpose of this section is to require an owner to engage in the minimum maintenance and repair necessary to correct decay, deterioration, structural defects and safety problems. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 503) 
Sec. 42-114. - Monitoring of condition. 
The commission and the city shall monitor the condition of all designated historic properties and places, sites, buildings, structures and works of art within designated historic districts. The commission shall report all failures to provide minimum maintenance and repair to the building official of the city. Such conditions as those outlined in section 42-112 shall constitute a failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 503.1) 
Sec. 42-115. - Condition assessment. 
Upon notification by the commission, the building official or his designee shall be authorized to enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections regarding conformity to the requirements hereunder. Such entry shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to any persons in possession. The city may appoint and affix the duties of such agents, designees and employees as reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The building official shall prepare a condition assessment for the commission. 
Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 503.2) 
Sec. 42-116. - Notice and remedy time allowance. 
If the commission finds a failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair, nonconformity with section 42-112, the commission will give notice as described in this section and set forth the steps necessary to remedy the situation. Notice shall be served upon the owner and all parties in interest. The owner of the property will have 30 days from receipt of such notice to respond in writing and outlining his intentions and steps being taken to remedy the situation. The owner of the property will have 60 days from the receipt of such notice to begin the steps necessary to remedy the situation, and shall have 180 days from receipt of the notice to complete the work, unless such time shall be extended due to the expense and/or complexity of the repairs. In no event shall such extension exceed 180 additional days. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 503.3) 
Sec. 42-117. - Public hearing and recommendation of action. 
Within 30 days of receipt of the notice provided for in section 42-116, the owner or any other party in interest who takes exception to such notice may request a public hearing on the matter. The owner or other party with an interest shall then be given an opportunity to appear before the commission, in person or otherwise, and present testimony pertaining to the notice issued. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be given via certified mail. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the commission although all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be entitled to present all relevant evidence. If the commission agrees with the original notice, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a recommendation of action and reasons in support thereof, in writing, to the affected party and to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 503.4) 
Sec. 42-118. - Review by mayor and council. 
The mayor and council will review the recommendation of action by the commission regarding the finding of a failure to provided minimum maintenance and repair. The mayor and council will consider the matter on the merits and render a written decision which will include the reasoning therefor. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the city although all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be entitled to present all relevant evidence. If the owner or other party in interest fails to comply with the notice and does not seek a hearing, or a hearing upholding the notice is had and no appeal is taken, or all appeals rights are exhausted and the notice has been upheld, the city may then perform or cause to be performed such minimum maintenance as is necessary to stabilize and prevent further deterioration of the property or prosecution may commence in municipal court, as provided for in section 42-4. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 503.5) 
Sec. 42-119. - Lien for minimum maintenance and repairs. 
At the direction of the mayor and council of the city, minimum maintenance and repair necessary to prevent deterioration or demolition by neglect may be performed by someone other than the owner. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair. The amount of the cost of such maintenance or repair shall be a lien against the real property upon which the maintained or repaired structure is situated. The lien shall attach to the real property at the time of payment of all costs of maintenance or repair by the city, and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of such costs by the city in the office of the city clerk on a lien docket maintained by the city clerk regarding liens for work performed on unfit buildings. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(1)  A public officer of the city, or any adult citizens of this state, may execute an affidavit of service reciting that a copy of the notice was served upon such persons either personally, or by leaving a copy at the place of each person's residence. This shall be sufficient evidence as to the proper service of the person in possession, owner and party in interest. 
(2)  If any of the aforementioned persons reside outside of the city but within the state, service shall be effected by causing a copy of the notice to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of residence of such party, or such service may be made by any adult citizen, as to personal service or service by leaving a copy at such party's residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(3)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the notice for two successive weeks in the legal organ of the county, and by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the notice. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such notice shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(4)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served, and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the city or is a nonresident, he shall be served as provided above in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person or persons. In the case of other persons who live outside of the city or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane persons or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(5)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the whereabouts cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the public officer shall make an affidavit of that effect, and the service of such notice upon such person shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (3) of this section, and service may be further perfected upon any person, firm or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(6)  A copy of such notice shall also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county, and such filing of the notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such notice or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property maintained by the city. 
(7)  The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien only in the following manner: 
a.  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying the city within 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed in this subsection; 
b.  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city at the time of the sale, transfer or conveyance; and 
c.  Should the amount of such lien or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of such three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (7)b of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for repair of dwellings, buildings or other structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358, and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any persons having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 58-4-40 et seq. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 504) 
Sec. 42-120. - Appeals of minimum maintenance and repair decisions. 
Any owner or other party of interest who takes exception to the city's decision relative to a recommendation of action regarding the failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for convictions of municipal ordinance violations, namely, via petition for writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1998, § 602) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 34; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5)(a)(2). 

Sec. 46-1. - Alarms and burglary systems. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices designed and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into the premises or to signal an attempted robbery at a protected premises with respect to which the city police are expected to respond. 
False alarm means the activation of a burglary and/or robbery alarm by other than a forced entry or attempted or forcible entry being committed or attempted on the premises. False alarms shall include negligently activated alarms, alarms which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained, and alarms which are purposefully activated to summon the police in nonemergency situations. The term does not include an alarm caused by violent weather conditions or act of God or other causes which are beyond the user's control. 
Response means the dispatch of a police officer to the premises when an alarm system has been activated indicating a burglary and/or a robbery is presently in progress on the premises. 
(b)  Information required on commercial premises system. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to maintain within the city an alarm system on commercial premises unless the person owning or operating the business where such alarm system is maintained shall file with the police department the names, addresses and telephone numbers of two persons to be notified if the burglary system alarms or is otherwise activated. 
(2)  In addition, any commercial premises employing an alarm system shall post in a conspicuous place notice of an alarm control company and a named representative of such company who can be notified at all times and who is authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system or who can contact a person to deactivate the system if there are no means of access to the premises. 
(c)  Information required on residential systems. All residential alarm users shall be required to furnish to the police department the names and telephone numbers of two persons to be notified if the burglar alarm system is activated. 
(d)  Prohibited activities. It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police except in the event of an actual or attempted robbery or burglary or other crime. It shall also be unlawful for anyone to notify the police of an activated alarm and fail to disclose to the police knowledge or apparent knowledge that the alarm system has been activated due to some electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section three or more times within any 30-day period shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 14-104) 
State Law reference— Operation of electronic alarm systems by county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; license required to engage in low voltage alarm system contracting, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8.1. 
Sec. 46-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Due to the addition of chapter 24, Cemeteries, which was adopted by Ord. of March 13, 2000, section 46-2 was renumbered as section 24-1 at the editor's discretion to keep related materials together. 
Sec. 46-3. - Drainage requirements. 
It shall be the duty of all owners or holders of lots to keep the lots clean and dry by filling up, leveling and ditching so as to prevent water from standing on such lots. It shall be the duty of all owners and occupants of real estate within the city limits to keep open all ditches and make new ones when necessary for the drainage of their lots. If after notice from the city police any person shall neglect or refuse to comply with the terms of this section, the work shall be done by the marshal, under direction of the city council, at the owner's or occupant's expense. 
(Code 1991, § 20-101(G)) 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 46-4. - Throwing rocks. 
It shall not be lawful for any person to throw rocks or propel other dangerous missiles by slingshot or air rifle in the public streets or elsewhere in the city limits, where the person or property of anyone may possibly be injured. 
(Code 1991, § 20-101(K)) 
Sec. 46-5. - Discharging firearms. 
No person shall fire a gun, pistol or any type of firearm within 300 yards of any house or public street without receiving a permit from the chief of police. No such permit shall be granted for a period of more than six months; and in deciding whether or not to grant such permit, the chief of police shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The purpose for the application. 
(2)  The distance of the area requested from house and public roads. 
(3)  The length of time requested. 
(4)  The reputation of the applicant, particularly concerning his use of firearms. 
(5)  The number of persons who will be participating. 
(6)  All other factors relevant to the protection of or promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1991, § 20-101(S); Amd. of 12-10-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq. 
Sec. 46-6. - Noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause to be made any loud noise which is plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet. 
(b)  The following acts when plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet are declared loud noises in violation of this section; but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive: 
(1)  The excessive sounding of any horn on any motor vehicle except as a warning signal. 
(2)  Causing to be played, used or operated any radio, tape player, compact disc player, instrument, television, or other device for the producing or reproducing of sound between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to disturb the residents of the area. 
(3)  Causing the operation of any drum or sound amplifying device unless a permit for such drum or sound amplification has been obtained from the city. 
(4)  Causing the operation of any equipment or the performance of any outside construction within the town between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless of an emergency nature or when a permit for such has been obtained from the town. 
(5)  Causing the discharge of the exhaust of any engine, including without limitation engines in passenger vehicles, light trucks, motorcycles, road tractor units of tractor trailers, dump trucks, fuel trucks and garbage trucks and all other heavy trucks, and delivery trucks and all other medium-duty trucks, except through a muffler or other device which should effectively prevent loud noises. No person shall slow a heavy truck, medium truck, one ton light truck, or other truck over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating by using a "jake brake", which is an add-on engine brake for diesel engines, with a primary use on long downhill grades where the wheel brakes would otherwise have to be frequently pumped to keep the truck from gaining dangerous speed. Considering the size and topography of the city, the loud noise of jake brake use, wherein it opens the exhaust valve just as the air in the engine cylinder reaches maximum compression, with an almost instantaneous explosive release, said explosive noise outweighs any arguable benefit of such brake. The brakes shall be used instead. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the limits of the city without a proper muffler, in good working order and in constant operation, to prevent excessive or unusual noise. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device for noise making. This subsection shall not, however, apply to farm tractors. 
(6)  The keeping of any animal or bird which by frequent or continuous noise disturbs the residents of the area. 
(7)  Causing the repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the residents of the area. 
(8)  The creating of any noise adjacent to any church while in use, which disturbs the members of the church. 
(9)  Causing to be played, used, or operated in any vehicle, either stationary or mobile, any radio, tape player, compact disc player, instrument or other device for the producing of sound plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet or more so as to disturb the residents or any other affected persons in the area. 
(c)  Sound measurement standards. The following standards shall be used to measure sound volume produced from within a motor vehicle: 
(1)  Measurement shall be by the auditory senses, based on direct line of sight, from a distance of 100 or more feet from the vehicle. 
(2)  Words or phrases need not be discernible. 
(3)  Bass reverberations are included. 
(4)  The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked, or moving on a street or highway. 
(d)  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from these noise regulations: 
(1)  Noises of safety signal and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Noises from emergency work necessary to restore property to safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from danger. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as provided for in section 1-12. 
(Amd. of 8-13-2007, § 1(Exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 
Sec. 46-7. - Public drunkenness. 
No person shall within the city limits be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Code 1991, § 20-103) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 46-8. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Incite a riot shall mean, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written (1) advocacy of ideas or (2) expression of belief, not involving advocacy of any act or acts of violence or assertion of the rightness of, or the right to commit, any such act. 
Public place shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
Riot shall mean a public disturbance involving (1) an act of violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual or (2) a threat of the commission of an act of violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened act or acts of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person or any other individual. 
(b)  Prohibited. A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his conduct if likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he willfully does any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another where the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(4)  Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence. 
(5)  Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the city police or other lawful authority known to be such. 
(6)  Is in public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or drug in such condition as to be usable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others. 
(7)  Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by city police or any other authorized official of the city, when known to be such an official. 
(8)  Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot. 
(9)  Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the city police department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the lawful performance of his duties, or any other person when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence; words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited. 
(10)  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition. 
(11)  Makes or causes to be made a loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public annoyed. 
(12)  Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts or disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health or safety is imminently threatened. 
(13)  Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking, or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 20-102) 
Sec. 46-9. - Interference with business of another. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the premises of another, located within the city, for the purpose of interfering, either directly or indirectly with the business of such person or to interfere directly or indirectly with the business of any person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully, fraudulently, or privately, take, steal or carry away, any article, commodity, merchandise or ware being the property of or on the premises of and within the custody and control of any merchant duly licensed to do business within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully, fraudulently or privately, change, alter or remove the price tag on any article, commodity, merchandise or ware being the property of or on the premises of and within the custody and control of any merchant duly licensed to do business in the city. This subsection shall not apply to one acting with the full knowledge, consent and authority of the merchant, and pursuant to his instructions. 
(d)  Any person, corporation or other legal entity convicted of the violation of this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 12-14-1982, §§ I—IV) 
Sec. 46-10. - Appeals to city council. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the police chief shall have the right to appeal to the city council if such appeal is filed with the city clerk within 30 days of the rendering of the decision. 
(Code 1991, § 20-101) 
Sec. 46-11. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 20-101(I) and 20-101(J) of the Code of Ordinancs, City of Madison, Georgia, (1991 edition), are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 46-12. - Drug-free commercial zone. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.6, a drug-free commercial zone being described in exhibit "B" to the amendment of Feb. 9, 2004, excluding all noncommercially zoned areas within said boundaries which are not residential in nature, and excluding all areas that are not within one-half mile of commercially zoned areas. Exhibit "B" attached to the amendment from which this Code section is derived is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein and includes all previously zoned commercial property within the marked boundaries, and all residential property within the marked boundaries contiguous to such commercially zoned area and within one-half mile from any portion of the commercially zoned area. 
(b)  Signage. The city will post signage designating the area as a drug-free commercial zone in prominent and conspicuous places on the boundaries of and throughout the zone. 
(c)  Administration. The city will file the required documentation of the zone with the department of community affairs, obtain the required adoption of the zone by the general assembly, provide the department of community affairs with copies of the amendment, map, initial report, and annual reports, maintain said records in a permanent register, publish the three-week notice of designation, and permit enforcement of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.6 commencing 30 days after adoption of the zone by the general assembly. 
(Ord. of 2-22-1999; Amd. of 2-9-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 46-13. - Loitering. 
(a)  Loitering for purpose of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13. 
(2)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: 
a.  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this section, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of any violation involving any controlled substances as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, or such person has been convicted under substantially similar laws, or is a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks", burned or callused thumb and index fingers, underweight, or nervous and excited behavior. 
b.  Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity area. 
c.  Such person behaves as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, such person acting as a "lookout", hailing or stopping cars, or repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop or engage in conversation with passersby. 
d.  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang" or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity. 
e.  Such person transfers small objects or packages in a furtive fashion. 
f.  Such person takes flight or tries to hide upon the appearance of a police officer. 
g.  Such person tries to conceal any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity. 
h.  Such person possesses any thing whose customary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of controlled substances such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires, scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades, or other cutting tools. 
i.  The area involved is clearly known to such person to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking. 
j.  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(3)  No arrest shall be made for a violation of subsection (a) of this section unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(4)  Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 46-13(e) below. 
(b)  Juvenile curfew. 
(1)  Purpose: The mayor and city council of Madison, Georgia have determined based on law enforcement reports that there has been an increase in juvenile violence and crime by persons under the age of 18 in Madison; that persons under the age of 18 are particularly susceptible, by their lack of maturity and experience, to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime; that criminal gang activity from the Athens area has infiltrated the Madison community; that there has been a significant increase in crimes such as substance abuse, entering autos, shootings, burglaries, damage to property, fighting, complaints of statutory rape, and other incidents indicating possible "gang" activity. 
The City of Madison desires to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, seeks the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, strives for the protection of the general public, and implements this section for the reduction of the incidents of juvenile criminal activities which are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. O.C.G.A. § 15-11-2(11)(A)(v) states it is a violation when a juvenile "wanders or loiters about the streets of any city or in or about any highway or any public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m." 
The mayor and council recognize that in Mwangi v. State, 316 Ga. App. 52 (2012) the Court of Appeals held that: "Even when officers have no basis for suspecting a particular individual, they may generally ask questions of that individual, ask to examine the individual's identification, and request consent to search, as long as police do not convey a message that compliance with their requests is required." However, the mayor and council also recognize that when an apparent juvenile declines to answer questions, provide identification or be searched, that law enforcement sometimes needs additional tools to be able to effectively police the community. 
The council of Madison, Georgia has determined a curfew for those under the age of 18, many of whom are students, will be in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare and will help to attain the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of Madison, and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm, and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. Law enforcement has reported upon the effectiveness of enforcing curfews in other communities such as Spalding County, Clayton County, Fayette County, Cherokee County, Chatham County, Murray County, Coffee County, Gwinnett County. 
The mayor and council of Madison, Georgia has determined that a curfew ordinance will increase parental responsibility for minors within their control, decrease minor delinquency including criminal activity, and decrease truancy and tardiness of school age minors. 
(2)  Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.  Emergency errand: A mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that call for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
b.  Loiter. See loitering section hereinbelow. Also see O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
c.  Minor: An non-emancipated person under the age of 18. 
d.  Public place: Any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys or buildings open to the public; any cemeteries, school yards, any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation including parking lots; and any vacant lot or land. 
e  Wander: As distinct from loitering (which is separately addressed hereinbelow); to "wander" is to: move around without a definite purpose; to go or extend in an irregular course or direction; to stray from a path, to deviate, to go astray, to ramble without a definite purpose or objective; roam, rove, to go aimlessly, indirectly, or casually, moving or going about aimlessly without plan or fixed destination or going to a destination by an indirect route, or in current vernacular—hanging out or roaming the streets. 
(2)  Minors prohibited from 1) loitering as defined by law or 2) from wandering upon streets and other public places at certain hours; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter (see subsequent section hereinbelow) or to wander in any public place unsupervised by his/her parent, legal guardian, or other adult over the age of 21, having the lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of midnight on any day and 5:00 a.m.; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
a.  When the minor is upon any emergency errand directed by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
b.  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity; 
c.  When the minor is traveling to, or returning directly home from, lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in above referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
d.  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment Rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
e.  When the minor is engaged in interstate or intrastate vehicular travel through the City of Madison with parental consent; 
f.  When the minor is married or has been married pursuant to state law. 
(3)  Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child under the age of 18 years to permit or, by insufficient control, to allow such minor to violate the rules set forth in this section. A person in violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning. Upon subsequent violation(s), the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances for Madison, Georgia. 
(4)  Jurisdiction of juvenile and municipal courts. Any minor under the age of 17 who is charged with violating this ordinance shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. Any minor 17 years of age who is charged with violating this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the of Madison Municipal Court. 
(c)  Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(1)  City parks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, lie down, to reside or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. 
(2)  Sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, to reside, to store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any sidewalk. 
(3)  Other public property; blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks and sidewalks, for living accommodation purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(4)  Other public property; urban camping. It shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks and sidewalks, for living accommodation purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(5)  Private property; urban camping without owner's permission. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner, a leaseholder, an employee, or other rightful occupant to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property, or lie down, outside on any private property without the owner's or leaseholder's permission. 
(6)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
a.  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
b.  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks, or other public places; 
c.  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
d.  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
e.  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
f.  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
g.  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
h.  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; or 
i.  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(d)  Loitering (Applies to both minors and adults.) 
(1)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(2)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Code section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution or sodomy. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: that such person is a known prostitute, pimp, or sodomist, repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passers-by in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any bodily gesture. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(f)  Severability. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this regulation if for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this regulation. 
(Amd. of 11-10-03, § 1; Amd. of 9-8-2014, Exh. A) 
Sec. 46-14. - Nuisances. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on a premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon a premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  Any garbage or other waste which gives off a foul odor or attracts vermin; 
(4)  Junk, papers and other debris being allowed to become scattered or blown off any premises; 
(5)  Combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the premises, or any other conditions which constitute a fire hazard; 
(6)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. All smoke and the emission of all other particulate matter in quantities sufficient to produce an opacity at any point greater than Ringlemann 3 is prohibited. A Ringlemann 1 unit is defined as 20 percent density for one minute. No more than 15 units of Ringlemann smoke shall be permitted per hour and no smoke more intense than Ringlemann 2 is permitted, except that during one hour a day, 30 units of smoke may be emitted, but with no smoke more intense than Ringlemann 3. The total quantity of emitted solids shall not exceed one point per hour per acre of lot area. No odor shall be regularly emitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable within 25 feet of any residential use. 
(7)  Burning of junk or debris, other than tree limbs and leaves pursuant to a burn permit; 
(8)  The pollution of public water or the placement of any harmful substance into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(9)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(10)  Unscreened exterior storage of junk: tractors, equipment, farm implements, trailers, motorcycles, barbecue grills, and other debris visible from neighbors and/or public rights-of-way; 
(11)  Dumping of fuel or oil on the premises in violation of law; 
(12)  Storage of fuel or oil other than in approved closed containers; 
(13)  Sand blasting and any other unreasonably loud mechanical work in a residential area; 
(14)  Unreasonably loud automotive, truck, lawnmower, chainsaw, motorcycle or other exhaust noise, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(15)  Obstruction of a public street, highway, sidewalk, or path of travel regularly used by the public, without a permit; 
(16)  Loud or unusual noise which is plainly audible to a person of normal hearing from a distance of 100 feet which is detrimental or annoying to the public including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or single-family or multiple-family areas such as loud music and other loud activities, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(17)  All precariously leaning, unsafe, rotten, deteriorated or otherwise unstable walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(18)  Any business or building where illegal activities, especially drug crimes, are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(19)  Exterior storage of iceboxes, refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, stoves and other appliances inside which a child could become trapped or in which vermin and other pests may take up residence; 
(20)  Exterior storage of mattresses, box springs, furniture or other items which would attract or could provide a home for rodents, insects, animals and other pests; 
(21)  Toilets or sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers in bad repair; 
(22)  Conditions, such as waste, standing water, and/or animal excrement, conducive to the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects; 
(23)  Colonies of bats which remain unaddressed; 
(24)  Any animal that excessively and continuously makes disturbing noises, defined as ongoing howling, barking or crying or causing unreasonable annoyance continuously for a period of one-half hour or more, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(25)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(26)  Any other continuous or regularly repetitious acts or conditions constituting a nuisance as defined under state law, namely, anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another or which tends to annoy the community, injure the health of the citizens in general, or corrupt the public morals. 
Any person or entity found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000.00, or be imprisoned in jail for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the violation of this section shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or a temporary or permanent injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Nothing in this section shall be construed as an election of remedies and it is hereby provided that the city may seek both the criminal penalties and the injunctive relief contemplated by this section for any violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Amd. of 11-10-08(3), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 6-13-2011; Amd. of 9-9-2014, Exh. A) 
Chapter 47 - OPEN BURNING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 47-1—47-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 47-51. - In general. 
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning in any area within the city limits until first obtaining a permit from the city fire department. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-52. - Allowances. 
After obtaining said permit, open burning will be allowed for the following purposes: 
(1)  Reduction of leaves on the premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises. 
(2)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for the production or harvesting of crops. 
(3)  The burning over of any forest land by the owner of such land. 
(4)  Fires set for purposes of training fire-fighting personnel when all guidelines are met by state agencies. 
(5)  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage. 
(6)  For weed abatement, disease and pest prevention. 
(7)  Open burning in other than predominantly residential areas for the purpose of land clearing or construction or right-of-way maintenance provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population; 
b.  The location of the burning is at least 1000 feet from any dwelling located in a predominantly residential area; 
c.  The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned is minimized; 
d.  Heavy oils, asphalt materials, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any materials other than plant growth are not being burned; and 
e.  No more than one pile 60 feet by 60 feet, or equivalent, is being burned within a nine acre area at one time. 
(8)  Disposal of all packaging materials previously containing explosives, in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulations. 
(9)  Open burning of vegetative material for the purpose of land clearing using an air curtain destructor provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Authorization for such burning is received from the fire department and state forestry office; 
b.  The location of the air curtain destructor is at least 300 feet from any occupied structure or public road. Air curtain destructors used solely for utility line clearing or road clearing may be located at a lesser distance upon approval by the EPA and DNR divisions; 
c.  No more than one air curtain destructor is operated within a ten acre area at one time or there must be at least 1000 feet between any two air curtain destructors; 
d.  Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush and stumps which are relatively free of soil are burned in the air curtain destructor; 
e.  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic based or impregnated materials are not used to start or maintain the operation of the air curtain destructor; 
f.  The air curtain destructor is constructed, installed and operated in a manner consistent with good air pollution control practice for minimizing emissions of fly ash and smoke; and 
g.  The cleaning out of the air curtain destructor pit is performed in a manner to prevent fugitive dust. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-53. - Authority to put out fires. 
The fire department or any city official shall have the authority to order any fire put out if it is determined there is a danger to public safety, a nuisance or significant environmental harm. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-54. - Times of permitted burning. 
All permitted burning shall be carried out between dawn and dusk and all fires shall be extinguished by sunset. However, no burning of any nature shall be allowed on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-55. - Location of permitted burning. 
All burning shall be located on private property so as not to interfere with traffic on public streets or sidewalks. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-56. - Certain organizations exempt. 
Organizations such as fire departments, churches, and groups organized for the training and education of children (such as Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts) may obtain a permit without complying with section 47-4. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-57. - Safety measures. 
During any open burning, a competent person of at least 18 years of age shall be present during the entire burning process and control such burning. Such person shall have a hose connected to a water source or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-58. - No burn days. 
No burning of any kind shall be allowed within the city on a no burn day declared by the city fire department. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-59. - Conditions of permit. 
All permits are issued on a daily basis and are good only for the day of issue and while weather conditions support a safe burn. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-60. - Amount of fires. 
Only one fire may be in progress at any time except as noted in paragraph 47-2(9)c. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-61. - Refusal of permit. 
A permit may be refused if the city can remove the product more safely than it can be burned, or other services are reasonably available which could remove or take the product. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-62. - Distances of burns. 
No fire may be burned closer than 500 feet to any building, structure or any other improvement to the subject real property. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-63. - No burning of certain items. 
The following items may not be burned: tires, any item which may emit gaseous vapors or odors, any item whose odors are likely to be injurious to public health, safety and welfare, any hazardous materials as the same are defined by state and/or federal laws, statutes and regulations. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the burning of nontreated wood. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-64. - Authority of officials. 
The city fire department or any city official has the authority to enter any property to inspect items to be burned, and to return at any time to inspect progress of burning and to insure the fire is out. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-65. - Allowed burning without permit. 
The following are allowed burning by the state without obtaining a permit: 
(1)  For the purposes of cooking food, such as grilling. 
(2)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used and state guidelines are followed. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Sec. 47-66. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by the violation. The violation of any provision of this chapter may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Equitable proceedings for restraining order or injunction in the superior court may be maintained, notwithstanding the fact that the violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies of law may exist. 
(Ord. of 7-24-00, § 1) 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards, commissions and committees, § 2-141 et seq. 

Sec. 50-31. - Established; term of members. 
There is established a recreation commission, to be known as the Madison-Morgan County Recreation Commission. Four members of this commission shall be appointed by the mayor and city council, and four members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of the county; the commission shall consist of eight persons serving without pay. The term of office shall be six years or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the members of such commission first appointed shall expire annually thereafter. Vacancies in such commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by another appointment for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council or the board of commissioners, respectively. 
(Code 1991, § 18-101) 
Sec. 50-32. - Officers. 
Immediately after their appointment, the members shall meet and organize by electing one of their members president and such other officers as may be necessary. 
(Code 1991, § 18-101) 
Sec. 50-33. - Powers. 
(a)  The recreation commission shall have power to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of recreation for the city and county. 
(b)  The recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers, and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the city and county. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities of such properties, and on private properties with the consent of the owners. 
(Code 1991, § 18-101) 
Sec. 50-34. - Superintendent, other personnel. 
The recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone as superintendent who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the commission deems proper. 
(Code 1991, § 18-101) 
Sec. 50-35. - Budget; gifts; title to real property. 
The recreation commission shall submit an annual budget to the mayor and council and to the county commissioners for their approval. The commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. The commission may also receive and hold title to any real property as authorized by the city or county. 
(Code 1991, § 18-101) 
Sec. 50-36. - Reports. 
County commissioners' reports and such other reports may be requested from time to time. 
(Code 1991, § 18-101) 
Secs. 50-37—50-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITIES REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-66. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Any public park in the city administered by the city, any public recreation commission or any similar governing authority, and all facilities on the premises, with the exception of lighted tennis courts and the parking lot adjacent to such tennis courts, shall be closed each day at 7:00 p.m. until local sunrise, commencing September 1 each year and continuing through March 31 of the following year, and from 9:00 p.m. until local sunrise, commencing on April 1 through August 31 each year; however, the mayor and council may issue permits upon application granting the use of the facilities to individuals or groups, and issuing permits for such usage beyond the hours herein stated in this section. 
(b)  The hours of operation of the tennis courts, the swimming pool and bathhouse and restroom facilities located in any such park shall be open as regulated by the mayor and city council or at the direction of the mayor and city council by the recreation department. 
(c)  The use of any public park in the city or any of its facilities after the hours of closing and before local sunrise without permission of the mayor and city council, or the presence of anyone in the park after the hours of closing and before local sunrise, without such permission, shall constitute a misdemeanor; and upon conviction, anyone violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 18-102) 
Sec. 50-67. - Possession of alcoholic beverages; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to use or possess alcoholic beverages any time in public parks in the city or any of the facilities in such a park. 
(b)  The use or possession of any alcoholic beverage in such park or its facilities at any time shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction anyone violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 18-102) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— In order to accommodate provisions relating to development the editor has retitled former Ch. 54 from "Planning" to "Planning and Development." 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; planning commission, § 2-216 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; historic preservation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Submission of city/county comprehensive plan for review. 
(a)  The mayor and council resolves to forward the Joint City/County Comprehensive Plan for Morgan County and the cities of Bostwick, Buckhead, Madison and Rutledge to the Northeast Georgia Regional Development Center for review, comment and recommendation. 
(b)  The mayor and council does hereby certify that the minimum public participation requirements of the plan were met with the holding of public hearings on September 28, 1993, and March 16, 1994. 
(c)  In order to coordinate the review process, the mayor and council further resolve that this plan will be submitted to the Northeast Georgia Regional Development Center for review and comment on April 12, 1994. 
(Res. of 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-2—54-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 

Secs. 54-21—54-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSFERRABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An Amendment of Dec. 14, 2015(2) § 1(Exh. A), amended former Art. III, §§ 54-51—54-59, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an Amendment of May 2, 2014, § 1(Exh. A). 

Sec. 54-51. - Definitions. 
2004 Joint Comprehensive Plan: The comprehensive plan adopted in 2004 entitled the "Joint Comprehensive Plan 2025: Morgan County, Georgia and City of Bostwick, Town of Buckhead, City of Madison, and City of Rutledge." 
Arterial (street): A major road designed for continuous movement of all types of traffic but with less control over vehicular access than highways. 
Dwelling/dwelling unit: A building or portion thereof, with living, sleeping, culinary, and sanitary accommodations, designed for or used for human habitation. 
Extinguish: To cause to cease to exist. TDRs are extinguished once they are exercised in a receiving area or when the owner or authorized representative otherwise elects to cause them to cease to exist. 
Final plat: A finished drawing of a subdivision or a phase of its development showing completely and accurately all legal and boundary information and certification necessary for recording which complies with these regulations. 
Highway (street): A multi-lane, limited access road designed for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic with control over access to abutting property. 
Interstate highway (street): A multi-lane, limited access road continued through more than one state and designed for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic and heavy traffic volume with control over access to abutting property. Also referred to as the interstate and specifically referencing Interstate Highway 20 (I-20). 
Lot area: The total area within the legal boundaries of a parcel of land, including land over which easements have been granted. Also referred to as gross acreage. 
Neighborhood center: An area containing neighborhood commerce (e.g., convenience store, laundry establishments, diner, etc.) and zoned as Neighborhood Commercial District (C2). 
Neighborhood park: A park inside of the city of at least four acres with activity areas for passive enjoyment, unorganized play, courts, playgrounds, or some combination thereof. 
Parcel: The basic development unit, an area with fixed boundaries, not divided by any street or alley. A parcel must meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and must have lot frontage on a public street. Right-of-way shall not be included in the area of a parcel. 
Right of first refusal: The right to have the first opportunity to purchase property upon the owner's decision to sell at the same terms offered by a third party or at predetermined terms. 
Schedule of fees: The fees for the City of Madison as established in the Code of Ordinances, Chapter 56. 
Tree board: Also referred to as the greenspace conservation commission (GCC), the tree board is the civic board established by Code of Ordinances, Chapter 86, charged by the city to lead the local community forestry effort and guide the conservation of the municipality's natural resources. 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 1)) 
Sec. 54-52. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for the transfer of development rights from one property to another to (1) permanently provide for natural areas/habitat protection, riparian areas, greenspace buffers, agrarian landscapes, potential trails, gateways, recreation, and historic landmarks, and (2) locate density in proximity to infrastructure, services, and amenities for the benefit of the citizens and the municipality and the city's future growth. Further this article provides a means to achieve the visions and goals of the 2004 Joint Comprehensive Plan, as amended, the 2009 Madison Greenprint Addendum, as amended, and the 2011 Urban Redevelopment Plan, as amended. 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 2)) 
Sec. 54-53. - Applicability of regulations. 
The provisions of this article apply only to property within Madison. 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 3)) 
Sec. 54-54. - Transferrable development rights program. 
The TDR program provides for both the permanent protection of prioritized natural, historic, and cultural resources and the development and/or redevelopment of areas prioritized for higher density. The TDR program allows for the transfer of the "right to develop" from sending parcels (parcels prioritized for protection) to receiving parcels (parcels prioritized for greater density). 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 4)) 
Sec. 54-55. - Sending parcels. 
(a)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Owners or authorized representatives with the authority to transfer fee simple title of any qualifying sending parcel are eligible to apply for a TDR certificate(s). Sending Parcels are those parcels from which development rights may be created and transferred and may include: 
a.  Parcels that meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  Are within the City of Madison; 
2.  Include one or more of the following resources, which must be identified in the 2009 Madison Greenprint Addendum, as amended: 
i.  Natural areas/habitat protection: Relatively natural habitat of fish, wildlife, or plants, or a similar ecosystem; or 
ii.  Riparian areas: Streams, rivers, wetlands, ponds, or lakes, including a 100-foot buffer on either side of the riparian resource; or 
iii.  Greenspace buffers: Areas of open space, greenspace, and/or agrarian landscapes which soften the impact of infrastructure and development while defining a sense of arrival into the city; or 
iv.  Agrarian landscapes: Landscapes which include agrarian land uses, such as row crops, prime agricultural soils, orchards, timber, etc.; or 
v.  Potential trails: Land areas for passive outdoor recreation by, or for, the use and education of the general public; or 
vi.  Gateways: Areas where transportation networks provide entrance into Madison; or;ol4; 
vii.  Recreation: Generally land areas for passive, neighborhood recreation by, or for, the education of the public. 
b.  Any city-owned parcels within Madison which meet the criteria in Subsection 54-51(a)(1)a.2. 
c.  Any historic landmark: a historic structure associated with significant historic landscape and/or landscape features, listed in the 2009 Madison Greenprint Addendum, as amended, and further registered as a Landmark by the Madison Historic Preservation Commission. 
(2)  TDRs created from city-owned parks and greenspaces shall be conveyed to the TDR Bank. Revenues generated by the bank from the further conveyance of these TDRs shall be used for the protection of additional lands that meet the criteria in subsection 54-51(a)(1)a.2. Where only a portion of a parcel that meets the above criteria is in the TDR program area, the entirety of the parcel in the city limits shall be considered eligible as a sending parcel. 
(3)  Parcels not eligible as sending parcels are as follows: 
a.  Any parcel from which all TDRs have previously been severed; or 
b.  Any parcel on which a perpetual conservation easement has been previously granted, removing all development potential; or 
c.  Any parcel which has used all development rights afforded to the parcel under current zoning; or 
d.  Any parcel or portion of a parcel that has been designated as open space as a requirement of a development agreement, zoning ordinance, or development regulation. 
(b)  Calculation of TDRs on sending parcels. TDRs that are available to be created and transferred from sending parcels are calculated on the basis of baseline density of the sending parcel, as per the Madison Official Zoning Map, adopted on March 28, 2011, less any existing dwelling units. For parcels within residential zoning districts (i.e., R, R1, R2, R4, R6, R8), the baseline density shall be the gross acreage of the parcel divided by the minimum lot area of the zoning district. For non-residential zoning districts, baseline density shall be calculated at four units per acre. The area of a parcel with fractional acreage will be rounded down to the nearest One-quarter acre. 
(c)  Permanent protection of sending parcels. Sending parcels, or portions thereof, where TDRs are being sought shall be permanently protected by conservation easements prior to the creation of TDR certificates. To convey the certified TDRs from a sending parcel, a perpetual conservation easement executed by the owner or authorized representative of the sending parcel and held by an organization authorized by the laws of Georgia to accept and hold conservation easements, per O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, must be signed and recorded with the Morgan County Superior Court Clerk prior to the deed of transfer. 
(1)  The city may develop a model conservation easement, which meets the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, and require it be used to fulfill the requirements of this article; and 
(2)  Each conservation easement executed to create TDRs on a sending parcel shall contain the serial numbers of the TDRs being created. 
(d)  Creation of TDRs from sending parcels. 
(1)  In order to create TDRs from sending parcels, the owner or authorized representative of a qualified sending parcel must complete the following application process: 
a.  The applicant shall submit a preliminary application for sending parcels to the city planning department (herein referred to as the "department"), to determine if (a) the property qualifies as a sending parcel under subsection 54-55(a); and (b) how many TDRs are available on the sending parcel, as calculated under subsection 54-55(b). The department shall: 
1.  Certify the eligibility of the parcel(s) as a sending parcel(s); 
2.  Certify the maximum number of TDRs available on the sending parcel(s); 
3.  Assign a serial number to each TDR created; and 
4.  Provide written notification to the applicant of the assigned serial numbers, which shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of written notice. 
5.  Signed and notarized right of entry agreement authorizing the city staff or its designees to go onto the property to perform a due diligence inspection of the proposed sending site property. 
b.  The applicant shall permanently restrict the applicable area of the sending parcel as required in subsection 54-55(c) to permanently sever the desired number of TDRs from the Sending Parcel. 
c.  The applicant shall submit a certification application to the department which will include: 
1.  A completed certificate application; 
2.  A copy of the perpetual conservation easement as recorded and stamped by the Morgan County Superior Court Clerk; 
3.  A copy of the preliminary application; and 
4.  A copy of the notice provided to the applicant from the department as described in subsection 54-55(d)(1)a. 
The department shall: 
1.  Issue a TDR certificate for each TDR to the applicant; and 
2.  Record the TDR Certificates and serial numbers in the TDR Register. 
(2)  Once the applicant has the TDR certificates, he may hold, sell, donate, or extinguish the TDRs. A deed of transfer shall be required to convey development rights from a sending parcel to another owner. The deed shall be valid only if it is signed by the owner or authorized representative of the sending parcel, complies with all legal requirements for the transfer of real estate, contains provisions established by the city planning department and is recorded in the chain of title of the sending parcel after the conservation easement is executed on the sending parcel. A deed of transfer shall contain a metes and bounds written legal description of the sending parcel; a plat prepared by a licensed surveyor; the names and addresses of the grantor and the grantee of the TDRs; the serial numbers of the TDRs being conveyed, a copy of the TDR certificate(s) issued by the department; and a copy of the executed and recorded conservation easement on the sending parcel. 
(e)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Preliminary application forms for sending parcels shall require the following: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant and/or owner or authorized representative; 
b.  Proof of ownership of the sending parcel; 
c.  Boundary survey conducted within the last ten years; 
d.  Written description of the physical characteristics of the sending parcel, including but not limited to those resources in subsection 54-55(a)(1)a.2; and 
e.  Site plan of the Sending Parcel which illustrates existing or proposed structures, existing or proposed historic landmarks, and easements or other encumbrances. 
f.  The processing fee as established by the city in the schedule of fees. 
(2)  Certificate application forms require the following: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant and/or owner or authorized representative; and 
b.  Total number of TDRs requested from the sending parcel. 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 5)) 
Sec. 54-56. - Receiving parcels. 
(a)  Eligibility. Owners or authorized representatives with the authority to transfer fee simple title of a receiving parcel(s) are eligible to apply for said parcel(s) to be designated as a receiving parcel(s), subject to mayor and council approval. Receiving parcels are those parcels which may receive TDRs to increase density. Receiving parcels must meet all three of the following criteria: 
(1)  Parcels within the downtown urban redevelopment area (DURA), as amended; planned residential districts (PRDs); attached dwelling developments sites/parcels within the general commercial (C3) district; or redevelopment of existing attached dwelling developments sites/parcels; and 
(2)  Parcels identified for residential development or redevelopment as traditional neighborhood residential or mixed-use residential/commercial on the future land use map in the city's 2004 Joint Comprehensive Plan; and 
(3)  Parcels within 2,000 feet of a neighborhood center, within 1,500 feet of a neighborhood park, and within 1,500 feet of an arterial street or designated state highway. 
(b)  Calculation of TDRs on receiving parcels. 
(1)  Qualified receiving parcels may use TDRs to develop additional density allowed through the TDR Program, over and beyond the parcel's baseline density. 
(2)  Baseline Density is calculated as follows: 

 
  
(3)  Beyond baseline density, one TDR is required to develop one additional dwelling unit within a receiving parcel, not to exceed maximum density of an average of 16 units per acre within a receiving parcel. 
(c)  Use of TDRs in a receiving parcel. To use TDRs in a receiving parcel, the owner or authorized representative of a qualified receiving parcel must complete the following application process: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit a final application for receiving parcels. Upon receipt of a completed final application, the department shall schedule the application for mayor and council review at a public meeting and provide written notification to the applicant of the upcoming public meeting. 
(2)  If the parcel is approved as a receiving parcel(s) by the mayor and council at such public meeting, the department shall determine if (a) the parcel(s) qualifies as a receiving parcel(s) under subsection 54-56(a); and (b) the maximum number of TDRs that can be used within the receiving parcel(s), as calculated under subsection 54-56(b): 
a.  Certify the eligibility of the parcel(s) as receiving parcel(s); 
b.  Certify the maximum number of TDRs that can be used on the receiving parcel(s); 
c.  Provide written notification to the applicant. 
(3)  Once the applicant receives notice of the number of TDRs that may be used within the receiving parcel(s), the applicant may assign TDR certificate number(s) to the according portions of the final plat. 
(4)  Prior to approval of the final plat, the applicant shall provide to the department proof of the ownership of, or option to buy the assigned TDRs. 
(5)  Upon approval of the final plat, the department shall then record on the face of the final plat: 
a.  "The TDRs used in this plat have been transferred in accordance with the deed of transfer, as prescribed in the Madison Transferrable Development Rights Article."; and 
b.  The serial numbers of the TDRs used in the Receiving Parcel(s). 
(6)  Upon approval of the Final Plat, the applicant shall submit the original TDR certificates to the department for extinguishment. 
(d)  Application requirements and process. Final application form for receiving parcels will require the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant and authorized representative, if any; 
(2)  Proof of ownership of the receiving parcel(s); 
(3)  Boundary survey of the receiving parcel(s) conducted within 5 years; and 
(4)  The processing fee as established by the City in the schedule of fees. 
(5)  Review by the mayor and council, which shall be as follows: The mayor and council shall consider the application at a public meeting, and shall be guided by the ordinances, guidelines, criteria and policy statements herein and as further adopted by the mayor and council regarding TDRs. The mayor and council shall evaluate the application for any potential substantial adverse effect on the surrounding neighborhood and/or the city at large. The mayor and council may approve the application as proposed if it meets all requirements, or approve it with any modifications it deems necessary to ensure the application meets all requirements, table until a date certain to give the applicant time to revise the application to ensure it meets all requirements, or reject it if the applicant is not willing to accept changes necessary to ensure the application meets all requirements. In the event the mayor and council reject an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The mayor and council may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant may make modifications to the application and may resubmit the Application at any time after doing so. 
(e)  Extinguishment. 
(1)  Once TDRs are recorded on the final plat in a receiving parcel(s), they cannot be used or transferred again. On approval of the final plat on which TDRs are assigned, the department will extinguish the TDRs. To extinguish TDRs, the department shall proceed through the following process: 
a.  Mark on the original TDR certificate in red ink "Extinguished"; 
b.  Record the TDR certificates and serial numbers of the extinguished TDRs in the TDR Register; and 
c.  File the extinguished TDR certificates in the TDR register. 
(2)  Owners or authorized representatives of TDRs may extinguish TDRs without using the TDRs within a Receiving Area. For any reason and at any time, owners or authorized representatives may extinguish TDRs by submitting the TDRs to the Department and proceeding through the process as outlined in subsection 54-56(e). 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 6)) 
Sec. 54-57. - TDR register. 
For the purposes of tracking and marketing TDRs, a central register of TDRs and their certificate numbers shall be maintained by the department or by the city manager's designee. 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 7)) 
Sec. 54-58. - Appeal of TDR decision. 
Any owner or authorized representative aggrieved by a decision of the mayor and council, related to the TDR program may appeal such decision to the superior court in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for City Code violations. Such appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the decision. 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 8)) 
Sec. 54-59. - Land bank. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Subsequent to the adoption of this article, the city may create a land bank (the "bank") to encourage the exchange of TDRs and leverage public funding to implement greenspace policy. 
(b)  Organization and procedures. The bank shall be comprised of three GCC members and two at large individuals appointed by mayor and city council. The bank board shall adopt such procedural and substantive rules to govern its duties and functions, as it deems necessary. Staff support shall be provided by the department. 
(1)  Empowerments. The bank board shall be empowered to: 
a.  Enter into agreements for professional services, e.g. consulting, appraising, accounting, subject to available funding; 
b.  Apply for and accept grants, loans, or donations for the bank's authorized purposes; 
c.  Purchase, receive, sell, hold, or extinguish TDRs; 
d.  Purchase, receive, sell, or hold properties in fee simple; 
e.  Enter into real estate contracts, including, but not limited to, options to purchase, rights of first refusal, and purchase and sale agreements; and 
f.  Engage in other activities as necessary to conduct the functions and operations of the bank. 
(2)  Authority and compensation. The members of the bank board shall receive no compensation from the bank, except reimbursement for actual documented expenses incurred for the performance of their duties as board members. 
(3)  Conveyance of TDRs. To determine the value of TDRs the bank accepts or conveys, the bank board may negotiate, use a competitive bid process, or use any other method reasonably deemed fair and equitable by the bank board. Any eligible owner or authorized representative of TDR certificates may approach the bank board with an offer to convey TDRs to the bank through donation and sale. The bank board shall within 45 days to consider and respond to such offers. 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(2),§ 1(Exh. A, § 9)) 
Chapter 56 - SCHEDULE OF FEES[1] 
SCHEDULE OF FEES 
The following fees shall be charged for departmental administration and regulatory purposes for the following plans, materials, licenses and permits. The schedule of fees is subject to periodic review and revisions; please contact city hall clerk's office at (706)342-1251 ×205 for the most current information. All fees should be made payable to: City of Madison. 
NOTE: Mastercard and Visa welcome at city hall; returned check charge: $25.00. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of 6-25-04, § 1, repealed chapter 56, sections 56-1—56-6, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 56, sections 56-1—56-7. Former chapter 56 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. of Oct. 8, 2001, Exh. A; Amd. of June 9, 2003, § 1. 

Sec. 56-1. - Licenses and permits. 
(a)  Occupational taxes (f/k/a business licenses) (annual): 
(1)  Admin. fee— Note: add employee fee ..... $ 60.00 
(2)  0 to 10 employees (per employee) ..... 12.00 
(3)  > 10 employees (per employee) ..... 8.00 
(4)  Per practitioner fee (alternative) 1 ..... 200.00 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage licenses and permits (annual): 
(1)  Application fee ..... no charge 
(2)  Distilled spirits, retail license—Initial ..... 5,000.00 
(3)  Distilled spirits, retail license—Renewal ..... 1,500.00 
(4)  Distilled spirits, wholesale permit ..... 100.00 
(5)  Malt beverages and wine, retail license ..... 500.00 
(6)  Malt beverages and wine, wholesale permit ..... 100.00 
(7)  Malt beverages only, wholesale permit ..... 100.00 
(8)  Malt beverages only, wholesale permit 2 ..... 2,500.00 
(9)  Wine only, wholesale permit ..... 100.00 
(10)  Malt beverages and wine, pouring license ..... 800.00 
(11)  Alcohol (spirits, beverages, wine) pouring license ..... 4,300.00 
(12)  Special event license (per event) ..... 25.00 
(13)  Catering license ..... 250.00 
(14)  Private club pouring (beer and wine) ..... 500.00 
(15)  Limited pouring (beer and wine) ..... 500.00 
(16)  BrewPub license ..... 500.00 
(c)  Adult entertainment licenses: 
(1)  Adult entertainment licenses (annual) ..... 400.00 
(2)  Adult entertainment permit (employee per annum) ..... 150.00 
(d)  Bed and breakfast establishment license (annual) ..... 100.00 
(e)  Outdoor sales and vending permits: 
(1)  Application fee ..... no charge 
(2)  Garage sale permit (per event) ..... no charge 
(3)  Flea market, indoor (annual) ..... 100.00 
(4)  Flea market, outdoor (per event) ..... 100.00 
(5)  Flea market, outdoor (annual) $35.00/table > 10+ ..... 350.00 
(6)  Peddlers license (annual) ..... 100.00 
(7)  Vending permit 3 ..... 10.00 
(f)  Tour of homes and group tour license/permits: 
(1)  Tour management license/permit 4 ..... 500.00 
(2)  Tour permit—date reservation (refundable) ..... 100.00 
(3)  Tour permit (per tour) 4 ..... 3,000.00 
(4)  Group tour operator license ..... see subsection 56-1(a) 
(5)  Group tour permit 5 ..... 50.00 
(g)  Parades, demonstrations, special events, etc. permits: 
(1)  Application fee ..... 100.00 
(2)  Permit fee (based upon scale of event) ..... TBD 
(h)  Sidewalks, streets and other public places permits (annual): 
(1)  Sidewalk cafe ..... 100.00 
(2)  Appearance zone ..... no charge 
(3)  Publication rack—All sizes (per annum) ..... 65.00 
TBD To be determined by city manager. 
1 Practitioner employed exclusively by the U.S. government exempt. 
2 Wholesale distributors with principal place of business in city. 
3 Street/commercial/residential property vending, per day and per location—Special events only; not to exceed $50.00. 
4 Non-profit fee exemption; non-profit fee exemption for tour permit, if non-profit owns or operates a public attraction. 
5 Valid for a maximum number of ten group tours per annum. 
(Amd. of 6-25-04, § 1; Amd. of 2-9-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-10-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 1-11-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-13-2013, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 3-10-2014(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 7-14-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-11-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 10-10-2016, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 10-10-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 56-2. - Animal control. 
(a)  Registration fees: 
(1)  Dog (each)—January 1 to July 1 ..... 15.00 
(2)  Dog (each)—After July 1 ..... 20.00 
(3)  Dog, spayed/neutered (each)—January 1 to July 1 ..... 5.00 
(4)  Dog, spayed/neutered (each)—After July 1 ..... 10.00 
(b)  Schedule of fees: 

 

 
* The rabies quarantine fee is an additional $10.00 per impound and $5.00 per boarding. 
(c)  Adoption fee schedule: 
Option one: Low-cost adoption, this would include the sterilization and rabies vaccination only, (adoptee responsible for paying *additional services upon picking up adopted pet from the vet's office), or they can obtain through their own vet. 
Feline neuter ..... $35.00 
Feline spay ..... 45.00 
K9-neuter less than 50 lbs ..... 55.00 
K9-neuter more than 50 lbs ..... 75.00 
K9-spay less than 50 lbs ..... 65.00 
K9-spay more than 50 lbs ..... 85.00 
** Rabies for K9 or feline add $10.00 per sterilization price. 
* Additional services: 
Cat vaccinations: FVRCP—combo ..... 15.00 
Feline combo ..... 20.00 
Dog vaccinations: 
Dhlppv ..... 10.00 
Bordatella ..... 12.00 
Fecal ..... 20.00 
Heartworm test ..... 8.00 
Microchip ..... 17.00 
Option two: (includes annual vaccinations, microchip and Capstar) 
Feline neuter ..... 83.00 
Feline spay ..... 93.00 
K9-neuter less than 50 lbs ..... 112.00 
K9- neuter more than 50 lbs ..... 132.00 
K9-spay less than 50 lbs ..... 122.00 
K9-spay more than 50 lbs ..... 142.00 
* Additional services: 
Heartworm test ..... 8.00 
Feline combo ..... 20.00 
Fecal ..... 20.00 
(Amd. of 6-25-04, § 1; Amd. of 2-9-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-10-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 1-11-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-13-2013 § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 3-10-2014(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 7-14-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-11-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A); Am. of 11-4-2016(2), (Exh. A, B) 
Sec. 56-3. - Public utilities. 
Gas Department: 
(a)  Gas establishment of service: 
(1)  Deposit—residential .....3/12 of est. gas charges for 12 months 
(2)  Reconnection ..... 50.00 
(b)  Gas installation/connection fees and discounts: 6 
(1)  Tap fee, includes 100 feet of pipe (unless there is an installation of a natural gas water heater or furnace in which case there is no charge) ..... 200.00 
(2)  Over 100 feet of pipe (per foot) ..... 1.75 
(3)  Gas water heater discount ..... -300.00 
(4)  Gas furnace discount ..... -200.00 
(5)  Gas logs/grill/lights discount ..... -50.00 
(6)  Gas range or dryer discount ..... -50.00 
(7)  CNG home fueling station ..... -500.00 
(c)  Gas base rate name and established rate: 

 
(d)  Gas rates per thousand cubic feet ..... set monthly 
Water Department: 
(e)  Establishment of service: 
(1)  Deposit ..... 100.00 
(2)  Reconnection ..... 30.00 
(f)  Water connection fees: 7, 8 
(1)  ¾" ..... 1,000.00 
(2)  1" ..... 2,500.00 
(3)  1.5" ..... 5,000.00 
(4)  2" ..... 8,000.00 
(5)  3" ..... 16,000.00 
(6)  4" ..... 25,000.00 
(7)  6" ..... 50,000.00 
(8)  8" ..... 80,000.00 
(g)  Water tap fees: 7, 9 
(1)  ¾" ..... 1,295.00 
(2)  1" ..... 1,365.00 
(3)  1.5" ..... 2,625.00 
(4)  2" ..... 2,765.00 
(5)  > 2" ..... TBD 
(h)  Fire sprinkler system monthly fee: 10, 11 
(1)  ¾" ..... 2.00 
(2)  1" ..... 3.00 
(3)  1.5" ..... 8.00 
(4)  2" ..... 12.00 
(5)  3" ..... 28.00 
(6)  4" ..... 50.00 
(7)  6" ..... 110.00 
(8)  8" ..... 195.00 
(9)  10" ..... 250.00 
(i)  Water readiness to serve fee 12 (monthly): 
(1)  ¾" ..... 4.60 
(2)  1" ..... 6.90 
(3)  1.5" ..... 16.10 
(4)  2" ..... 25.30 
(5)  3" ..... 55.20 
(6)  4" ..... 92.00 
(7)  6" ..... 193.20 
(8)  8" ..... 276.00 
(j)  Water rates: 
(1)  Per 1,000 gallons ..... 6.30 
(2)  Bulk water per 1,000 gallons ..... 10.00 
(3)  Wholesale water per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.97 
Wastewater Department: 
(k)  Sewer connection fees: 7, 13 
(1)  ¾" ..... 1,500.00 
(2)  1" ..... 3,750.00 
(3)  1.5" ..... 7,500.00 
(4)  2" ..... 12,000.00 
(5)  3" ..... 24,000.00 
(6)  4" ..... 37,500.00 
(7)  6" ..... 75,000.00 
(8)  8" ..... 120,000.00 
(l)  Sewer tap fee: 7, 14 
(1)  4" ..... 1,920.00 
(2)  6" ..... 1,980.00 
(m)  Sewer readiness to serve fee ..... 4.60 
(n)  Sewer rates: 
(1)  Per 1,000 gallons ..... 6.30 
Sanitation Department: 
(o)  Residential per month—Garbage only ..... 16.00 
(p)  Residential per month—Garbage and recycling ..... 12.00 
(q)  Additional garbage receptacle (per month) ..... 2.00 
(r)  Recycle bin ..... 10.00 
(s)  Residential garbage receptacle (replacement) ..... 50.00 
(t)  Deposit, residential—garbage only ..... 20.00 
(u)  Deposit, commercial—garbage only ..... TBD 
6 Total discounts shall not produce a credit. 
7 For mixed use, commercial, or industrial application, the connection fee shall be the greater of a) scheduled wastewater connection fee based on water meter size; or b) the projected daily flow of wastewater (as determined by the city manager) in gallons multiplied by $6.00. Rates do not include bores or line extensions. 
8 For multi-family residential applications, the connection fee shall be the greater of a) scheduled water connection fee based on water meter size; or b) number of units in the complex multiplied by $1,000.00. 
9 In developments where taps were made during subdivision construction, tap fee shall not be charged; only connection fee and meter set fee ($150.00) shall be charged. Where a tap must be made by city, a tap fee shall be charged. 
10 Based upon unmetered fire main size. 
11 Fire hydrant on private property readiness to serve fee: $5.00 per month per fire hydrant connected to municipal water system and located on private property. 
12 For multi-family residential applications, the monthly readiness to serve fee shall be the greater of a) scheduled meter size fee; or b) number of units in the complex multiplied by $4.60. 
13 For multi-family residential applications, the connection fee shall be the greater of a) scheduled wastewater connection fee based on water meter size; or b) number of units in the complex multiplied by $1,500.00. 
14 In subdivisions where taps were made during subdivision construction and only location of the tap is necessary, tap fee shall not be charged; only connection fee shall be charged in this case. 
(Amd. of 6-25-04, § 1; Amd. of 2-13-06, § 1; Amd. of 12-10-07(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 1-28-08, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 2-9-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-10-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 1-11-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-13-2013 § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 3-10-2014(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 7-14-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-11-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 11-4-2016, (Exh. A); Amd. of 1-8-18, § 1(Exh.); Amd. of 10-10-2018, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 56-4. - Public works. 
Fire Department: 
(a)  Plan review fees: 
(1)  Premises (0—10,000 sq. ft.) ..... 100.00 
(2)  Premises (10,000 > sq. ft.) ..... 0.02 sq. ft.  + $100.00 
(3)  Fire suppression system plan ..... 125.00 
(4)  FDC Knox locking caps ..... tax + 82.50 
(b)  Fire marshal inspections: 
(1)  New construction ..... no charge 
(2)  Fire hydrant flow test fee, per test ..... 165.00 
(3)  Annual check-up ..... no charge 
(4)  Violations—1st follow-up visit ..... no charge 
(5)  Violations—Successive visits, each ..... 100.00 
(6)  Carnivals, fairs, special events, etc. ..... 50.00 
Building and Code Department: 15, 16 
Street Department: 
(c)  Permit fees: 
(1)  Right-of-way encroachment permit ..... 30.00 
(2)  Paving cut/bore permit ..... 45.00 
15 To arrange inspections or secure permits, please contact the Madison Planning Department; all associated fees shall be made payable to the City of Madison. 
16 Fees as published and utilized by the Morgan County Building and Zoning Office as of May 1, 2015. 
(Amd. of 6-25-04, § 1; Amd. of 2-9-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-10-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 1-11-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-13-2013 § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 3-10-2014(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 7-14-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-11-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 56-5. - Planning and development. 
Subdivision Review: 
(a)  Plat review meeting ..... no charge 
(b)  Conceptual plat ..... 50.00 
(c)  Minor subdivision (less than four lots): 
(1)  Final plat review, first two lots ..... 25.00 
(2)  Additional lots (each) ..... 25.00 
(d)  Major subdivision (five lots or more): 
(1)  Preliminary plat review ..... 50.00  + $25.00 per lot 
(2)  Final plat review 17 ..... 50.00 
Land Use Review: 
(e)  Zoning verification (land use only) ..... no charge 
(f)  Pre-application review meeting ..... no charge 
(g)  Zoning action: 
(1)  Text amendment ..... 150.00 
(2)  Map amendment—extant individual parcel in current residential or industrial zone ..... 150.00 
(3)  Map amendment—planned development ..... 550.00 
(4)  Map amendment other than (2), (3) ..... 300.00 
(5)  Conditional use—Residential zone ..... 150.00 
(6)  Conditional use—Non-residential zone ..... 250.00 
(7)  Variance—Single item ..... 150.00 
(8)  Variance—Multiple items ..... 300.00 
(9)  Modification of zoning conditions/PUD ..... 150.00 
(h)  Comp plan/FLUM amendment—Type III ..... 300.00 
(i)  Comp plan/FLUM amendment—Type II ..... 250.00 
(j)  Comp plan/FLUM amendment—Type I ..... 150.00 
(k)  DRI report ..... 300.00 
(l)  Annexation request—Parcel with a portion already inside the city fees ..... atty. fees + 150.00 
(m)  Annexation request ..... 300.00 
(n)  TDR preliminary application—Sending parcels ..... 125.00 
(o)  TDR final application—Receiving parcels ..... 250.00 
Plan Review: 
(p)  Engineer review fees: 18 
(1)  Application fee ..... 100.00 
(2)  Hydrological study or report ..... 100.00 
(3)  Site, staking, soil erosion and sedimentation, grading, drainage, tree protection/tree replacement/landscape, irrigation, paving, street, streetlight plans (per sheet) ..... 60.00 
(4)  Landscape inspection (< 3 acres) ..... 100.00 
(5)  Landscape inspection (> 3 acres) ..... 250.00 
(6)  Landscape re-inspection ..... 75.00 
(7)  Utility location ..... no charge 
(8)  Utility plan—Application fee ..... 80.00 
(9)  Utility plan/water—Inspection fees (per linear foot) ..... 0.08 
(10)  Utility plan/wastewater—Inspection fees (per linear foot) ..... 1.60 
Code Review: 16, 19 
Design Review: 
(q)  Pre-application review meeting ..... no charge 
(r)  COA application—Administrative review ..... 10.00 
(s)  COA application—Changes to existing ..... 20.00 
(t)  COA application—New construction ..... 100.00 
Sign Review: 
(u)  Sign application (includes up to 5 signs) ..... 25.00 
(v)  COA—Administrative review ..... no charge 
(w)  Permit, valuation > $1,000.00 ..... 30.00 
(x)  Permit, valuation $1,000.00 > ..... 30.00  + $5.00/$1,000.00 
(y)  Temporary sign/banner ..... 20.00  + $100.00 bond 
17 No charge for residential single lot development. 
18 Fee covers three successive submittals; if plans are not approvable on third submittal, a fee the same as the initial fee shall be charged for the fourth submittal. 
19 See also Public works: Fire department: plan review fees. 
(Amd. of 6-25-04, § 1; Amd. of 2-9-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-10-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 1-11-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-13-2013 § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 3-10-2014(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 7-14-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-11-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 56-6. - Printed materials. 
(a)  Duplication: 
(1)  Copies (1—10) ..... no charge 
(2)  Copies (10 or more, per copy) ..... 0.10 
(3)  Color copies (produced in house, per copy) ..... 1.00 
(4)  Blueprints (per page) ..... 5.00 
(b)  Stock materials: 20 
(1)  Code of Ordinances ..... 250.00 
(2)  Construction and design standard details ..... 25.00 
(3)  Madison Historic Preservation Manual ..... 25.00 
(4)  Historic preservation design review packet ..... no charge 
(5)  Historic preservation CD Rom ..... 10.00 
(6)  Subdivision regulations ..... 10.00 
(7)  Street map (when in stock) ..... 15.00 
(8)  Zoning ordinance ..... 20.00 
(9)  Zoning map (when in stock) ..... 15.00 
20 On-line editions published at: www.madisonga.com 
NOTE: On-line editions may not contain the most recent revisions; for confirmation, please contact the city clerk's office. 
(Amd. of 6-25-04, § 1; Amd. of 2-9-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-10-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 1-11-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-13-2013 § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 3-10-2014(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 7-14-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-11-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 56-7. - Cemetery. 
(a)  Burial registration fee ..... 0.00 
(b)  Fairview plots—Current city resident (per grave) ..... 200.00 
(c)  Fairview plots—Non-resident (per grave) ..... 300.00 
(d)  Memorial plots—Current city resident (per grave) ..... 500.00 
(e)  Memorial plots—Non-resident (per grave) ..... 1,000.00 
NOTE: No further plots for sale in the Old Cemetery or New Cemetery. 
(Amd. of 6-25-04, § 1; Amd. of 2-9-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-10-09, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 1-11-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-13-2013 § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 3-10-2014(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-12-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 7-14-2014(1), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 5-11-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 56-8. - Public safety/police department. 
(a)  Accident report ..... 5.00 
(b)  Incident report ..... 5.00 
(c)  DVD ..... $25.00 
(d)  Shipping ..... 6.95 
(e)  Precious metals and gems dealer: 
(1)  Registration ..... 25.00 
(2)  Annual renewal ..... 10.00 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 56-9. - Facility rental. 
(a)  Meeting hall—Non-profit organization rental fees: 
(1)  Refundable depostit ..... 50.00 
(2)  Rental fee ..... 50.00 
(3)  AV Fee—Week day* ..... 50.00 
(4)  AV Fee—Weekend* ..... 150.00 
(b)  Meeting hall—Fon-profit organization rental fees: 
(1)  Refundable depostit ..... 50.00 
(2)  Rental fee ..... 200.00 
(3)  AV Fee—Week day* ..... 50.00 
(4)  AV Fee—Weekend* ..... 150.00 
*$50.00 per hour over 4 hours 
(Amd. of 12-14-2015(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 57 - SMOKING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 57-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Madison Smoking Regulations. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-2. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The mayor and council find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the mayor and council find and declare that the purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places; 
(2)  To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-3. - Definitions. 
Child-care facility: Structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children under age 18 away from their place of residence on a regular basis for compensation, including, but not limited to, any public, private or parochial: child-care home, child-care center, nursery school, early learning center, pre-kindergarten, private kindergarten, play school, or pre-school. 
Dining area: Interior area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
Enclosed: All space between a floor and ceiling that is bordered on all sides by enclosures which prevent air flow to the exterior (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including without limitation lobbies and foyers. Opening of doors or windows shall not convert an "enclosed" space into an unenclosed or open space. 
Health care facility: Any general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center, or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1. 
Intermediate care (nursing) home: Any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the welfare of the aged. 
Personal care home: Residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, care and oversight of ambulatory persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing or intermediate care. Personal care homes include facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication and provision of transient medical care. Such term does not include old age residences devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. Personal care homes shall also mean residential care facilities for the elderly. 
Public place: Any enclosed area in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, restaurants, educational facilities, recreational facilities, health care facilities, child care facilities, personal care homes, intermediate care (nursing) homes, auditoriums, theaters, arenas, convention centers, meeting rooms, and convention halls. Enclosed porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall be considered a public place. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child-care facility, an intermediate care (nursing) home facility or a healthcare facility. 
Restaurant: Eating and drinking establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, food courts within enclosed shopping malls, private clubs, sandwich stands, school cafeterias and kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. 
Retail tobacco store: A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories. 
Smoking: Inhaling, exhaling or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-4. - Prohibited smoking. 
Unless otherwise provided, smoking is prohibited in all public places in the city. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-5. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking may occur outdoors but no less than five feet from any entrance to any place where smoking is prohibited. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-6. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(2)  Private residences, including private residences which may serve as an office workplace; except if used as a childcare, an adult daycare or a health care facility; 
(3)  Any property owned or leased by the county, the state, or the federal government; 
(4)  Designated smoking rooms in hotel and motels rented by guests provided that such designated smoking rooms shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the total number of guest rooms; and 
(5)  Outdoor areas of places of employment, except where an owner or employer declares that the outdoor area is a smoke-free environment. 
(6)  Non-enclosed porches, courtyards or decks of public places and places of employment. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, any person who controls any establishment described in this chapter may declare that the entire establishment is a non-smoking establishment. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-7. - Responsibility of owners of public places. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of owners of public places to provide a smoke-free environment in public places. 
(b)  Each owner of public places is encouraged to implement and make known a written smoking policy that incorporates the smoking prohibitions of this chapter. 
(c)  An owner, manager, operator and/or employee of an establishment regulated by this chapter shall inform persons violating this chapter of the smoking prohibitions, and ask the person to stop smoking or leave. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-8. - Posting of signs and notification. 
"No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representations of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every building where smoking is prohibited. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Health department officials or any police officer may issue a citation for any violation. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may do so with the health department or the police department. 
(c)  Any owner, operator, manager or employee of any establishment regulated by this chapter shall inform violators of the smoking prohibition and request compliance. If the violator refuses to either leave or to stop smoking and the police are not called, the person smoking, and the operator or manager shall be charged with violating this chapter. The operator and manager shall be relieved of liability if they call law enforcement and report the violation. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-10. - Non-retaliation. 
No person shall retaliate against any person because they exercise any right to a smoke-free environment. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-11. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision hereof shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $75.00 for a second violation within one year; and 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Sec. 57-12. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This chapter shall not be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the city, its officers nor its employees are liable to any person who claims any breach of this chapter caused injury. 
(Amd. of 11-8-04(2), § 1) 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of 9-10-2012(4), § 1(Exh. A), repealed the former Ch. 58, §§ 58-1, 58-2, 58-31, 58-32, and enacted a new Ch. 58 as set out herein. The former Ch. 58 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1991, §§ 27-106, 27-107; Res. of 11-9-1992; Ord. of 10-14-1996, § 2(a), (b); Ord. of 1-10-2000. 
Cross reference— Removal of dead animals, § 14-3; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garbage is defined as household waste, including food products, containers, bottles, clothing, paper and other waste that is and can be placed in a garbage container, but specifically excluding animal and human litter, auto parts or any metal objects, building materials, rocks, dirt, motor oil, chemicals, ashes or hazardous materials as defined by federal, state or local law. 
Trash is defined as rubbish, vegetation, debris, furniture, noncommercial appliances, but specifically excluding building scraps, roofing and gutters. 
(Amd. of 9-10-2012(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 58-2. - Compliance. 
The city shall only collect or cause to be collected and dispose of garbage and trash that has met the requirements of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 9-10-2012(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 58-3. - Garbage containers. 
(a)  The public works department shall provide each household with one container; provided that the city may require bulk containers for use in multifamily housing areas and mobile home parks where the city determines use of individual containers is economically unfeasible. 
(b)  Such containers shall remain the sole property of the public works department. 
(c)  Each container becomes the full responsibility of the occupant to whom it has been assigned, and the head of household may be assessed such sum as fixed from time to time by the city council should the container become damaged or stolen. 
(d)  Each container shall be embossed with the name "City of Madison" and shall not be marked, painted, cut or otherwise abused by anyone. 
(e)  Should the container become damaged or stolen or if parts become stolen, loose or damaged, the occupant shall notify the public works department, by telephone, during normal business hours. 
(f)  Should the occupant change address, the public works department shall be notified so that the container may be picked up. Under no circumstances shall the container be taken with the occupant to a new residence. 
(Amd. of 9-10-2012(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 58-4. - Garbage collection service charges. 
All owners, occupants, tenants and lessees of buildings and premises, except as hereinafter provided, who receive services from the city for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash and rubbish shall hereafter pay a charge for such services to the city in such amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, such charge being included in the monthly statement mailed to such individuals by the utility department; and such charge shall be subject to the same penalties as authorized for late payment of other charges billed by the finance or utility department. 
(Amd. of 9-10-2012(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 58-5. - Businesses. 
(a)  All businesses located within the corporate boundaries of the city shall use containers for garbage as provided and prescribed by the public works department. Such containers must be of a type that can be hydraulically picked up and transported by vehicles of the public works department utilized for such purposes. Service charges, in such amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk, shall be charged to businesses. Businesses may use private vendors for solid waste services not provided by city such as roll off service, compactor service, construction and demolition material removal, and recycling. 
(b)  The rate of service charge per business shall be established by the city based upon the usage of such containers. A schedule of charges on all businesses under this section shall be available at the clerk's office for inspection. 
(c)  All containers as provided and prescribed for businesses shall be located at the business as specified by the department head of the public works department. 
(d)  A hardened surface made of concrete or similar material shall be provided meeting the specification as required by the department head of the public works department to enable any sanitation vehicle to safely and efficiently service the container provided for garbage; provided, however, the department head of the public works department may approve other arrangements that satisfactorily enable any sanitation vehicle to safely and efficiently service the container provided for garbage. 
(e)  All businesses and/or property owners shall maintain on-site conditions where wear and tear might occur on approach surfaces to a garbage container to an acceptable level as specified by the department head of the public works department. Where any approach surface required to service a garbage container becomes damaged or altered to any unacceptable condition in the opinion of the department head of the public works department, the condition as specified by the department head shall be corrected within 60 days from the date of receipt by the business or property owner of the deficiency. The department head may specify a lesser period of time for corrections of deficiencies where conditions are of a minor degree. 
(Amd. of 9-10-2012(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 58-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 58-7. - Garbage collection procedures. 
All owners, occupants, tenants and lessees of buildings and premises, to whom services from the city for the collection and disposal of garbage are offered, shall comply with the following procedures: 
(1)  The person having authority to control the disposal of garbage in any household, premises or building shall cause all garbage collected therein to be placed in approved containers provided by the city public works department. All garbage placed in containers shall be bagged. 
(2)  All such containers shall be placed in normal locations (to the rear or side of the structure) until pushed to the curb not earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day before the date of collection. Dates and times of collections and collection procedures shall be set forth by the public works department. No such container shall be placed in the street except on the shoulders or areas not reserved for vehicular travel. No such container or plastic bags shall be placed on a sidewalk. 
(3)  Provisions shall be made to exempt occupants who are physically unable to push their containers to the curb. 
(4)  Exemption forms are available upon request at the city clerk's office or may be filled out over the phone by calling city hall. 
(5)  After collection by the public works department of the garbage within any container, all containers placed at curbside shall be promptly removed from the street right-of-way to their normal locations (to the rear or side of the structure) by the person having authority to control the disposal of garbage in any household, premises or building. Any person responsible for any such container not removed by 5:00 p.m. of the day following the day the garbage container was emptied by the public works department shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(6)  Poisons, acids, caustics, explosives or other hazards or dangerous materials, soils, or any type of construction materials and furniture shall not be placed in any container provided for garbage. 
(Amd. of 9-10-2012(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 58-8. - Trash collection procedures. 
All owners, occupants, tenants and lessees of buildings and premises, to whom services from the city for the collection and disposal of trash and rubbish are offered, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All trash and rubbish must be placed on or near the curb, abutting a public street in the city, but the same shall not be placed in the street or in a drainage ditch along such street. Trash and rubbish shall not be placed on a sidewalk. Household trash items (appliances, furniture, bedding, etc.) must be separated from rubbish. 
(2)  Services for accumulations of trash or rubbish shall be limited to one truck load at any one time. Any type of trash that necessitates the use of more manpower than customary will be picked up by the public works department for such charge as fixed from time to time by the mayor and city council. Items considered dangerous to city personnel as determined by the department head of the public works department will not be picked up. Cuttings by commercial tree surgeons, tree cutters, or lawn maintenance service must be removed by said commercial tree surgeon, tree cutters, or lawn maintenance service or by property owner at property owners expense. 
(Amd. of 9-10-2012(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civic and cultural affairs, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; historic preservation, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 50; planning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66; telecommunications, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of 11-12-07(2), § 1(Exh. A), repealed the former Art. I, §§ 62-1—62-6, and enacted a new Art. I, §§ 62-1—62-7, as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 62-1. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access zone means that portion of the public sidewalk reserved for continuous unobstructed pedestrian traffic and ingress/egress to businesses and structures lining the public rights-of-way. 
Amenity zone means that portion of public sidewalk for siting of municipal streetscape elements, such as street trees, street lights, benches, trash cans, sign posts, etc.; approved sidewalk cafe areas; and designated street vending locations. 
Appearance zone means that portion of the sidewalk as approved for downtown beautification or business enhancement, including planters and benches, product display and sidewalk signs, tables and chairs, and literature racks. 
Manager means the city manager, or his designee. 
Obstacle means any object or item whether situated upon or hanging over the right-of-way, including but not limited to noticeable changes in grade or paving materials. 
Public property means property owned, leased, or maintained by the city including but not limited to streets, byways or rights-of-way, sidewalks, parking lots, lots of record with or without structures, parks, and easements. 
Sidewalk means that portion of the right-of-way improved for use by pedestrians located between the curb line or the edge of an improved roadway and the adjacent property line. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-3. - Use of public streets. 
(a)  Storage of vehicles. It shall be unlawful to use the streets of the city for the storage of vehicles of any kind whatsoever. By storage of vehicles is meant the parking or leaving of any vehicle upon the streets of the city, other than a vehicle which is in the current service of the driver, i.e., which is the immediate means of transportation for such driver. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or interfere with issuance of permits for the use of taxi stands and for other purposes as the mayor and council may see fit. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, a fine of not less than $200.00 shall be imposed. Each vehicle so stored shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and each day such vehicle is stored shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  Placement of vehicles for display, sale, advertisement limited. It shall be unlawful to place, for purposes of display, for the sale or advertisement of any property or vehicles whatsoever, upon the public property of the city. Each day in which vehicle is so placed shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-4. - Use of public property. 
(a)  Purpose of the public sidewalk. Use of the public sidewalk for any purpose other than as a pedestrian right-of-way is a privilege, which the city may grant or deny to insure the primary purpose of the public rights-of-way for travel and to maintain the efficiency of the pedestrian path for both safety and convenience. 
(1)  To provide for pedestrian clearance, an access zone shall be reserved at all times for continuous, unobstructed pedestrian traffic along the public sidewalk. This reserved zone shall be a minimum of five feet in width, parallel to the roadway and as straight as possible, and not encroached upon even if this precludes other uses of the public sidewalk. Where less than five feet exists, all of the right-of-way shall be reserved for pedestrian clearance. A minimum of seven feet height clearance above grade for the access zone shall also remain unobstructed. 
(2)  To provide for ingress/egress to businesses and structures lining the public rights-of-way, there shall also be reserved clear passages between the access zone and the curb. These passages shall be a minimum of five feet in width and perpendicular to the roadway and as direct as possible. In addition to corner passages at street intersections, each side of a city block shall have a minimum of two said passages spaced at least 50 feet apart. 
(b)  Use of the appearance zone. Wherever wide sidewalks exist within the downtown commercial district as provided by the current zoning ordinance, the city may designate an appearance zone and grant or deny the privilege of limited use of the zone to abutting businesses for downtown beautification or business enhancement, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  The appearance zone shall only be used for incidental or accessory purposes by an abutting business with a current business license; any use of the area by others shall constitute vending. 
(2)  The appearance zone for a business shall not exceed the width of the front wall of the abutting business nor extend onto the public sidewalk beyond a depth of 30 inches from the front wall of the business or the maximum depth remaining after observance of the access zone. For corner properties, the sidewalk area adjacent to the side wall of the business may also be considered for the establishment of an appearance zone. 
(3)  Placement of beautification or enhancement items. Planters and benches deemed compatible in design and materials and as approved at the reasonable discretion of the manager, or his designee, may be allowed in the appearance zone provided that these items are kept clean, attractive, sanitary, and in a structurally sound condition at all times. Vegetation must be maintained in a healthy and attractive condition at all times. No hanging baskets nor artificial vegetation displays are permitted. All litter must be removed promptly, including cigarette butts. 
(4)  If the manager determines any object to be non-compliant with this section, said object is subject to immediate removal by the business. 
(c)  Placement of merchandise for display, sale, advertisement limited. It shall be unlawful to place, for purposes of display, for the sale or advertisement of any property or merchandise whatsoever, upon the public sidewalks of the city except as provided herein. Each day in which merchandise is so placed shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(1)  In accordance with [sub]section[s] 62-4(a) and (b), wherever wide sidewalks exist within the downtown commercial district as provided by the current zoning ordinance, the appearance zone may also be utilized for product display provided: 
a.  Placement of merchandise occurs only during business hours and all merchandise is removed at the close of business each day. 
b.  To reduce the added risk of product tipping into the access zone, no merchandise shall exceed or be stacked to exceed six feet in height and no shelving units may be used. No tables may be used, unless approved as part of a coordinated Madison Main Street event. 
c.  To reduce the added risk of product rolling into the access zone, all wheels shall be locked or chocked. 
d.  To reduce the added risk of product falling into the access zone, no merchandise shall be hung on the building or suspended from the building's awnings or canopies. 
e.  No signs other than sidewalk signs as permitted within the Official Zoning Ordinance, article X shall be used on public property; labels less than one-inch square shall not constitute signage. 
f.  Literature racks shall be in accordance with section 62, article III. 
(2)  If the manager determines any display, or portion thereof, to be non-compliant with this section, said display is subject to immediate removal. 
(d)  Approval procedure and requirements. 
(1)  An application with the application fee as established by the city council shall be filed with the manager, or his designee, prior to any use or placement of any item upon public property. 
(2)  The manager shall use reasonable discretion to determine whether and to what extent the use of the appearance zone interferes with the considerations of this section as well as those outlined in [sub]section[s] 22-6(5)—(8) and specific limitations outlined in [sub]section 22-9(d). 
(3)  Use of the appearance zone shall be in accordance with the approved application and shall not be modified without the written consent of the manager. 
(4)  The manager at his reasonable discretion may place additional conditions upon the issuance of approval in order to insure the protection of the public rights-of-way and the rights of all adjoining property owners and the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
(5)  The manager at his reasonable discretion may require removal for any reason. Failure to remove items and cease use of public property shall result in a removal of such items by the manager. The business shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the city for the removal and storage of such items. 
(6)  Except for actions arising out of the city's sole negligence, the business agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and all its officers, officials, representatives, agents, and employees, from any and all claims, liability, damages, or causes of action which may arise out of the license or licensee's use of the appearance zone. Commercial general liability insurance shall be maintained with an A-rated insurance company and shall be in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The city must be named as an additional insured on this policy, and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy reflecting compliance with this requirement. 
(7)  The business is responsible for repair of any damage to public property caused by the use of the appearance zone. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-5. - Alteration of public property. 
(a)  Any person desiring to remove any trees, shrubbery, signs, curbs or other objects located on or growing on public property shall first make written application to the city council and, after proper consideration, obtain written permission before any of these are removed. 
(b)  Any person desiring to plant or erect any trees, shrubbery, signs, curbs or other objects on public property shall first make written application to the city council and, after proper consideration, obtain written permission before any of these are placed on the rights-of-way of the city streets. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-6. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any licensed utility company doing business in the city; nor to the state highway department; nor to the water, sewage, gas and fire departments of the city; nor to any governmental agency. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-7. - Placement of printed advertising matter limited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person distributing or causing to be distributed circulars, handbills, papers or other printed advertising matter through the city, to throw into or place in any yard, such items; said items may only be placed in mailboxes of a dwelling or handed to an employee of a place of business. Only one of the items which such person may be distributing shall be placed in each mailbox or business. It shall be unlawful for any person distributing or causing to be distributed circulars, or receiving such handbills, papers or other printed advertising through the city, to throw or scatter such materials upon any public property in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause such an action to be done, on or upon any public property within the city, or upon any private property without the written consent of the owner of such property. 
(c)  No person other than the owner or driver shall deposit any advertising matter in any motor vehicle or stick or otherwise fasten any advertising matter on any part of any motor vehicle. 
(Amd. of 11-12-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 62-8—62-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 

Sec. 62-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the city manager, who shall be the administrator for the receipt and processing of applications for a permit for a private organization or group of private persons to hold a parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other use of public property and roads for private purposes. The city manager may be assisted by other employees of the city. 
Private organization or group of private persons means any firm, partnership, corporation, association or group of individuals more than three in number, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Private purpose means any purpose not commanded or directed by statute, ordinance or other regulation to be performed by the state, county, city or other governmental entity. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(1)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-42. - Permit required. 
Every private organization or group of private persons who wishes to use public property or roads within the city limits for private purposes in holding a parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing or other activity is required to have a permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in any such activity within the city unless such a permit is prohibited under state law or the activity is otherwise exempted by law, ordinance or other valid regulation. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(2)) 
Sec. 62-43. - Permit application; fee. 
(a)  Every private organization or group of private persons required to procure a permit under the provisions of this article shall submit an application for the permit to the administrator, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this article. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this section, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city manager and submitted within a reasonable time prior to the planned activity, for security checks, verifications and arrangements to be made, the city manager to act within ten days of the receipt of the completed application. 
(c)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership, and telephone where applicant may be contacted. 
(2)  Date, time and place where the proposed activity is to be carried on, including proposed routes of passage of parades or other proceedings. 
(3)  Kind and class of activity to be carried on. 
(4)  Names and home addresses of the partners if a partnership. 
(5)  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors if a corporation. 
(6)  Any additional information which the city manager may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article, which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any or all laws and ordinances of the city, county, state or federal government, other than minor traffic violations. 
(d)  Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner of a partnership or by an officer if a corporation. 
(e)  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this section shall be kept in strict confidence by the city, shall not be subject to public inspection unless otherwise required by law, and shall be used solely in administering the provisions of this article. 
(f)  False statements in any application for a permit shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit, denial of the application and/or denial of future applications. 
(g)  Any application, permit and registration fees, as fixed by the mayor and council required under this article, shall accompany the application. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(3)) 
Sec. 62-44. - Administration. 
The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the application for and issuance of permits under this article. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(4)) 
Sec. 62-45. - Duties of administrator. 
The administrator, or an authorized representative, shall have, among others, the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the application for a permit and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To review the application for completeness and collect whatever fees may be required; to designate or coordinate sites and set time schedules; and, where appropriate, to receive the approval of the department of transportation, state highway patrol and the sheriff or any other necessary public officer for the requested activity. 
(3)  To issue to the private organization or group of private persons a permit within ten days of such approval. The administrator may, however, where he deems it appropriate, defer the issuance of a permit until the application for the permit shall have been approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(5)) 
Sec. 62-46. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  When this article provides for the review of an application for a permit by a designated city officer, the administrator shall forward a copy of the application to that officer. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation to the city manager after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer, or upon the receipt of the application if no reviewing officer is designated, the city manager shall take action upon the recommendation and application, although he may refer it to the mayor and council for consideration and action at its next public meeting. 
(c)  Unless some significant interference with the rights of nonparticipant citizens exists, or the orderly flow of traffic would be obstructed unreasonably, or there is a clear and present endangerment to citizens of the city, or there is other unreasonable interference with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience of the general public, the permit shall be granted. The city manager shall then issue a permit to the applicant, which permit shall state the nature of the activity authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the administrator. 
(d)  Where more than one permit is sought for the same date or where the proposed route would result in interference as described in subsection (c) of this section, the city manager shall have the authority to designate reasonable alternate sites and/or routes and set alternate time schedules for the beginning and ending of the activity. 
(e)  The city manager shall have authority to cancel the permit where the activity fails to begin within a reasonable time after the time set for it to begin based on other activities for which permits have been granted or based on the unreasonable interference caused by such delay with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience to the general public. 
(f)  Any applicant whose application for a permit under this article is denied by the city manager may appeal such denial to the mayor and council, which shall consider such appeal at the regularly scheduled meeting next following the receipt of the applicant's appeal. The mayor and council shall consider the appeal by requiring the city manager to explain why the permit was denied. Unless the city manager can show significant interference with the rights of nonparticipating citizens; unreasonable obstruction of the orderly flow of traffic; a clear and present endangerment to citizens of the city; other specific unreasonable interference with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience of the general public; or failure to comply with the dictates of this article, the permit shall be granted. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(6); Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 62-47. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Criminal offenses. 
(1)  Violation of article. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be amenable to the processes of the municipal court. 
(2)  Punishment for violations. Any person or organization convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of the terms of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by confinement in the jail or correctional institution where those convicted of charges in such court are held not to exceed six months, or both, in the discretion of the municipal court. 
(b)  Civil penalties. Any person, being an officer or employee of the city, who shall violate any provision of this section may be discharged from public service or employment or be subjected to such other disciplinary action as may be appropriate. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(7)) 
Sec. 62-48. - Defense to prosecution. 
It shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article for failure to obtain a permit before engaging in any activity described in this article that a permit has in fact been issued unless, at his trial, the accused produces in court a valid permit or a certified copy of the permit. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(8)) 
Sec. 62-49. - Deposits, financial responsibility and indemnification. 
(a)  Nothing in this section shall relieve any person or organization from responsibility for any injuries or damage to person or property, private or public, occasioned by their acts or omissions arising from the activity for which any permit under this article was issued. 
(b)  After examining the application for a permit and receiving the advice and assistance of any other officer named in this article, the city manager, after consideration of the facts reported in the application and any such advice and assistance from another public officer as provided in this article, including prior experiences involving the same or similar activity, shall require, as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit, that a fee be paid in an amount reasonably necessary to provide for, among other things, cleanup after the event, special first aid or medical resources, security for vehicles at any staging area, special traffic considerations, temporary toilet facilities, and similar special and extraordinary expenses occasioned by the permitted activity. This amount shall not exceed an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(c)  As a condition to issuing a permit, the city manager shall require the private organization or group of private persons to provide personnel for trash cleanup of affected areas littered during the activity for which a permit is sought, the provision of first aid and medical resources if considered necessary by the city manager, proof of sufficient storage areas for a large influx of motor vehicles occasioned by the permitted activity, provision of temporary toilet facilities and other similar special and extraordinary items considered to be necessary for the permitted activity in the opinion of the city manager, based on his past experience with such activities and his coordination with other governmental employees and officials. In no event shall the city manager require private organizations or groups of private persons to provide personnel for normal governmental functions, such as traffic control and police protection. If additional requirements are placed on private organizations or groups of private persons in accordance with this subsection, and those requirements are not met despite assurances by the private organization or group of private persons, failure to comply with the aforementioned requirements shall be grounds for denial of any subsequent permit requested by the private organization or group of private persons and for any other claims for funds expended by the city for those extraordinary expenses agreed to but not provided by the applicant. 
(d)  If the private organization is other than individuals, a permit will not issue without the making of the necessary deposit; individuals may be excused from such a deposit on account of indigence upon the execution under oath by the individual applicant, or by each individual in a group applying for a permit, of a pauper's affidavit. Prior to the receipt of such an affidavit, the city manager shall advise the applicant orally or in writing of the penalties for the execution of a false document. 
(e)  As a condition to issuing a permit, the city manager shall require an indemnification and hold harmless agreement including substantially the following language: 
INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT 
The applicant agree(s) to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Madison, its agencies and instrumentalities and all of their respective officers, members, employees and directors (collectively referred to as the "City") from and against any and all claims, demands, liabilities, losses, costs or expenses, including attorneys' fees, and from the payment of any sum or sums of money to any persons whomsoever (including third persons; or subcontractors, employees or agents of the undersigned or of City), for any loss due to personal injury, bodily injury, death, or property damage arising out of, attributable to or resulting from the permitted event; or due to any violation of the approval by the applicant; or due to the application or violation of any pertinent Federal, State or local law, rule or regulation in connection with the permitted event. If and to the extent such damage or loss covered by this indemnification is paid by any City insurance the undersigned agree(s) to reimburse the Payor for such monies paid out. The applicant acknowledges that City makes no warranty, express or implied, concerning the streets and roads or other engineering considerations involved in approving the application. The applicant further acknowledges that the City has relied upon the representations made by the applicant in requesting approval of the application for this event, including the applicant's representations that all conditions of the plan shall be met and that the applicant shall meet all City requirements, as well as all relevant Federal, State and local laws, rules or regulations in the construction, maintenance and operation of the permitted event. This indemnification shall also apply where the City may be partially responsible for the situation giving rise to the claim. To secure the applicant's indemnification hereunder, applicant agrees to maintain at all times during the permitted event a policy or policies of comprehensive general public liability insurance, including personal injury and property damage coverage, in the amount of not less than $500,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person, not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence of bodily injury or death, and not less than $500,000.00 for property damage. All such insurance shall be underwritten by an insurance company which appears in the U. S. Department of Treasury Circular 570. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001, § 2) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of September 10, 2001, amended § 62-49 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 62-49 pertained to deposits and financial responsibility, and derived from the Code of 1991, § 14-102(9). 
Sec. 62-50. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions, provided the city manager is notified of each procession's time and route; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational or school activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  Uses of the recreational property of the city for recreational purposes. 
(Code 1991, § 14-102(10)) 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLICATION RACKS 

Sec. 62-51. - Purpose and authority. 
The purpose and scope of the regulations in this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all publication racks located on public sidewalks in certain locations designated "special publication rack areas" of the city. 
(2)  It is in the public interest to establish regulations that balance the right to distribute information through publication racks with the right of persons to reasonably and safely access and use public sidewalks and the right to conserve the aesthetic beauty of the city. 
(3)  The public health, safety, welfare and convenience require that interference with vehicular, bicycle, wheelchair or pedestrian traffic be avoided; obstruction of sight distance and views of traffic signs and street-crossing pedestrians be eliminated; damage done to sidewalks or streets be minimized and repaired; the good appearance of public property be maintained; trees and other landscaping be allowed to grow without disturbance; access to emergency and other public facilities be maintained; and ingress to and egress from, and the enjoyment of store window displays on properties adjoining public property be protected. 
(4)  The regulations on the time, place and manner of the location and maintenance of publication racks set forth in this chapter are carefully tailored to ensure that the purposes stated in this section are implemented while still providing ample opportunities for the distribution of information to the public. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned publication rack means any publication rack which remains not in active use for a period of 20 consecutive days, provided that a publication rack remaining empty due to labor strike or any temporary and extraordinary interruption of distribution or publication by the newspaper or other publication sold or distributed from that publication rack shall not be deemed abandoned. A publication rack not occupied by the publication for which a permit is issued shall be deemed not in active use. 
City means the governing body of the City of Madison or its duly authorized agents. 
Literature rack means an individual black or dark-green coated-wire rack as approved by the city manager for use to display or distribute information in the appearance zone in accordance with section 62-4. Literature racks are considered temporary merchandise displays by abutting businesses which are used during business hours and removed at the close of business and therefore are not considered publication racks for the purposes of this article. 
Manager means the city manager, or his designee. 
Publication rack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale or distribution of newspapers, periodicals, or other publications. Literature racks are not included. 
Permittee means any person in whose name the publication rack permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity. 
Public property means property owned, leased, or maintained by the city including but not limited to streets, byways or rights-of-way, sidewalks, parking lots, lots of record with or without structures, parks, and easements. 
Sidewalk means that portion of the right-of-way improved for use by pedestrians located between the curb line or the edge of an improved roadway and the adjacent property line. 
Special publication rack area means any area of the city so designated by the city council upon findings that the special circumstances of the area require special design, placement and other standards for publication racks. 
Publication rack module means a permanently affixed modular structure designed to hold either two, four, or six publication racks, provided by or on behalf of the city, which shall be the exclusive location for the placement of publication racks in a special publication rack area. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-53. - Special publication rack areas designated; area special standards. 
The city council hereby finds that special circumstances require special design, placement and other standards for publication racks located in the following area(s) of the city; and such areas are hereby designated as "special publication rack areas": 
(1)  Downtown Madison (the area designated on the Official Zoning Map of Madison, Georgia, as the C-1 Downtown Commercial District). 
a.  The city council hereby designates as a special publication rack area that portion of downtown Madison along Washington and Jefferson Streets between Main and Hancock Streets flanking the sides of the U.S. Post Office property (also known as the Town Square and previously the City Park), as shown on Attachment A hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
b.  The city council finds that downtown Madison comprises the heart of the city's central business district and is one of the major transportation routes through the city and Morgan County, as well as the tourist industry center for the city. The importance of a commercially-thriving downtown has been recognized by the citizens of the city by their support for downtown improvements funded by the downtown special tax district and a special purpose local option sales tax. Infrastructure and aesthetic improvements to the downtown commercial area have been on-going since the 1980s including streetscape improvement projects, facade grant program, design guidelines and design review, and special project/event planning. Downtown Madison has become congested with street furniture and fixtures, such as publication racks, and other sidewalk encroachments competing with pedestrians for the public space, obstructing ingress to and egress from properties adjoining the public rights-of-way, interfering with the good appearance of and access to public sidewalks and streets. The public investment in the landscaping and sidewalk improvements made in downtown Madison needs to be protected from damage by and the detrimental effects of unbridled proliferation of publication racks ungoverned by any criteria for placement of design throughout the downtown district. The need for special standards for placement of publication racks on sidewalks and other public rights-of-way is greatest in the downtown commercial area due to the greater frequency of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and publication rack locations in such area, compared to other parts of the city. Special standards for the design and location of publication racks, and the enforcement of existing regulations for other sidewalk encroachments in the downtown commercial area, will help to create a sense of order out of chaos and provide a friendly, pleasing and safe environment for those who come to the area. The city council has recognized and addressed the need for special standards for other sidewalk encroachments in the area, including sidewalk cafes as well as business enhancement and displays, and now finds it timely to do so for publication racks. 
c.  The city council finds that the regulation of publication racks as set forth in this chapter provides the least intrusive and burdensome means for ensuring that the purposes stated in this chapter are carried out while still providing ample opportunities for the distribution of news and information to the citizens of the city and Morgan County by means of publication racks located within public rights-of-way and public property in the downtown district. 
(2)  Area special standards. The following standards shall apply to publication racks and the placement of publications in publication racks within any special publication rack area so designated pursuant to sub[section] (1) of this section: 
a.  No publication shall be placed in a publication rack located in a special publication rack area except within a publication rack permitted and provided by the city. 
b.  Original placement of publication racks within a special publication rack area. 
1.  No publication rack shall be located in a special publication rack area unless a permit has been obtained in accordance with subsection 2. or subsection 3. below: 
2.  Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance designating a special publication rack area, or as soon as practicable thereafter, the manager shall establish a date (the "cut-off date") by which application shall be made to the manager for use of a publication rack located within a special publication rack area. No application shall be considered that is filed later than the cut-off date established for that area. The manager shall also endeavor to mail notice of the cut-off date to the owners and/or distributors of publication racks existing as of the effective date of the ordinance designating a special publication rack area, provided, however, that failure to provide mailed notice to any person shall not invalidate any action taken pursuant to this section or this chapter. 
3.  The process for obtaining a permit shall be in accordance with section 62-55, provided that where the number of publication racks for which an application has been made exceeds the number of publication racks available in publication rack modules in a special publication rack area, the manager shall issue publication rack permits in the manner described in procedures established by the manager and approved by the city council. 
c.  After the original placement of publication racks within a special publication rack area, as described in subparagraph b. of this subsection (2), application may be made for use of a publication rack in a location within a special publication rack area for which no empty publication rack is available in a publication rack module. Such applications shall be placed on a waiting list. In the event a publication rack in a publication rack module becomes available, the manager shall issue a permit for that location to the applicant for the location if there is only one applicant. In the case of multiple applicants for a single location, the manager shall determine which applicant shall receive the permit in the manner described in procedures established by the manager and approved by the city council. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Note— Attachment A is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 62-54. - Permit required. 
It is unlawful to install, place, maintain, use or cause to be placed, installed, maintained, or used a publication rack on, or projecting on, any public sidewalk located in a special publication rack area without first receiving a permit from the manager and unless such publication rack is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-55. - Obtaining a permit; exclusive requirements. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive requirements for publication rack encroachments onto public sidewalks in special publication rack areas. 
(1)  Application. Applications for a publication rack permit for one or more publication racks shall be made to the manager on a form prescribed by the manager, which shall include, without limitation: 
a.  The name, street and mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant, which shall be the duly authorized representative of both the publisher and, if applicable, any independent distributor authorized to service the publisher's publication rack for which the permit is sought; 
b.  The name, street and mailing address, and telephone number of the distributor or other responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's publication rack(s); 
c.  The number of publication racks proposed for use and a description of the exact proposed location(s) applied for and each proposed publication rack location indicated by the applicant on the publication rack locations' map provided by the city showing the locations of the publication racks to be installed by the city as established by the manager and approved by the city council; 
d.  A description of each proposed publication rack, including whether it will be sized for tabloids or broadsheets and whether it will contain a coin-operated mechanism; in addition, if applicable, an 8½ × 11-inch color copy of the proposed logo decal to be placed in a visible location on the front of the publication rack must be provided with the application; 
e.  The name and frequency of publication of each publication proposed to be contained in each publication rack; 
f.  A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless, the city and its representatives from all claims, demands, loss, fines, or liability to the extent arising from or in connection with the installation, use or maintenance of any publication rack on public property by or on behalf of any such person, except such injury or harm as may be caused solely and exclusively by the negligence of the city or its authorized representatives. 
(2)  Issuance of permit. Permits shall be issued within ten working days from the date of filing the application with the manager if the application is properly completed and the type of publication rack and location proposed for each publication rack meet the standards set forth in this chapter and if a publication rack is available. A single permit shall be issued for all publication racks applied for by an applicant which meet the standards of this chapter. No license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. 
(3)  Permit fee and expiration date. A publication rack permit is valid for one year from January 1 to December 31. A new permit shall be procured each year, which shall be the responsibility of the permittee. The application fee for the permit shall be the fee as set forth in the Madison Schedule of Fees and shall be paid at City Hall upon the filing of an application for the permit or no later than December 15 of the preceding year. No refund of fees shall be made. Nonpayment of the annual permit fee shall result in the cancellation of the permit for the remainder of the permit term, and the publication racks included in the permit shall be deemed abandoned. Permits expire on December 31 of each year, unless revoked or suspended prior to expiration. 
(4)  Issuance of permit sticker. Each permittee shall be issued a pre-printed sticker for each permitted publication rack, which shall be affixed to the lower right corner of the front of each publication rack. 
(5)  Denial of permit. If a publication rack permit is disapproved, in whole or in part, the manager shall notify the applicant within ten working days from the date of filing a complete application with the manager, explaining the reasons for the denial of the permit and notifying the applicant of the right to appeal the decision. The applicant shall have ten calendar days within which to appeal the decision to the city council in accordance with the appeal provisions set forth in subsection (6) of this section. 
(6)  Appeals. Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order, or action taken under the provisions of this chapter may appeal and shall be apprised of the right to appeal to the city council. An appeal must be filed within ten days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or action by filing a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis of the appeal with the city clerk. A copy of said written appeal shall also be filed with the manager. A hearing on the appeal shall be held on a date no more than 30 days after receipt of the letter of appeal. 
(7)  Amendment to permit. In the event of a change in any of the information contained in the application, the permittee shall submit such change in writing to the manager. A permittee may be allocated additional publication racks by an amendment to the permit. The rules and procedures of this section shall also apply to the review and approval of any such amendment. 
(8)  No property rights conveyed. The issuance of a permit for approved locations for publication racks pursuant to this section shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any lease holder rights to any permittee or to any other person. The provisions of this chapter are subject to change by the city council. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-56. - Standards for maintenance and display of publication racks. 
Every permittee under this chapter shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every coin-operated publication rack shall be equipped with a coin-return device that is maintained in good repair and working order by the permittee. It shall be the responsibility of the holder of a permit for a coin-operated publication rack to keep such coin-operation device in proper maintenance and order. 
(2)  In addition, every coin-operated publication rack shall display information on how to secure a refund in the event of coin return malfunction. Such refund decal shall be placed in a visible location on the front of the publication rack and shall be legible. The permittee shall be responsible for the display of this information, including its current accuracy and maintenance. 
(3)  Other than the display of the publication contained therein, no publication rack shall display or be affixed with any words or graphics except that, where feasible, based on the location of the publication rack within the publication rack module, one logo decal for the publication within is permitted in a visible location on the front of the publication rack; said decal shall be limited to the size described in procedures established by the manager and approved by the city council; said decal may also contain the required coin return information, if applicable. The decal will be affixed to each publication rack that has adequate space on the side of the rack by the manager. When logo or refund decals become defaced or worn, the permittee shall provide new decals for the city to place on the publication rack. 
(4)  Old or out-of-date material removed from any publication rack by any person who owns, maintains, or stocks the publication rack shall be recycled or disposed of in a lawful manner. Such material shall not be disposed of in any trash receptacle owned or rented by others without the express written consent of the owner or renter of such receptacle. Such material shall be disposed of in a manner that does not cause the material to become litter. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-57. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-58. - Nuisance. 
Any publication rack or any material in a publication rack placed, installed or maintained in violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with applicable provisions of the law. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-59. - Removal and hearing. 
(a)  In addition to the enforcement remedies and penalties available to the city, any publication rack placed, installed or maintained in violation of this chapter without a permit may be removed by the city subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in this section. 
(b)  Summary abatement. Prior notice and an opportunity to be heard shall not be required prior to removal of any publication rack that is installed or maintained in such a place or manner as to pose an immediate or clear and present danger to persons, vehicles or property or any publication rack that is placed in any location without a permit. In such case, the city shall proceed in the following manner: 
(1)  Within the next working day following removal, the manager shall notify by telephone the permittee or, in the case of an unpermitted publication rack, the owner of the publication rack or a person whose name is shown on the required identification. Within three business days, the manager shall send written confirmation of the telephoned notice. The written confirmation shall contain the reasons for the removal and information supporting the removal, and shall inform the recipient of the right to request, in writing or in person, a post-removal meeting within four business days of the date of such written notice. If the owner of an unpermitted rack cannot be determined and the rack does not contain the required identification, no notice of the removal shall be required. 
(2)  Upon timely request, the manager shall provide a meeting within seven working days of receipt of the request, unless the requesting party agrees to a later date. The proceeding shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be given by both sides. The manager shall give his or her decision in writing to the requesting party within 48 hours after such meeting. If the manager finds that the removal was proper, he or she shall notify the requesting party to pay any applicable penalties and costs and to recover the publication rack. If the manager finds that the removal was improper and that placement of the publication rack was lawful, the manager shall order that the publication rack be released and reinstalled without charge. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 62-60. - Abandonment of publication racks. 
(a)  A publication rack deemed not in active use for 24 hours a day for a period of 20 consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned. 
(b)  A publication rack is deemed not in active use when it is not occupied by the publication for which a permit was issued for said publication rack. 
(c)  The manager shall notify the permittee of any publication rack deemed abandoned that such permittee must surrender the permit or provide written reasons why such permit should not be revoked or amended to delete the abandoned publication rack within ten days of the date of the written notification. 
(d)  Failure to respond or provide sufficient reason why the manager should not revoke or amend said permit shall result in the manager revoking such permit or amending such permit to delete the abandoned publication rack. The publication rack under such revoked permit or deleted from the permit shall be made available for reassignment to another applicant under the provision of sections 62-54 and 62-55 of this chapter. 
(e)  The permittee may surrender the permit to the manager prior to its expiration, when the permittee no longer wishes to distribute the publication through the publication rack. The publication rack which becomes available under this subsection shall be reassigned to another applicant under the provision of sections 62-54 and 62-55 of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 12-10-07(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-7(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 

Sec. 66-1. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
The subdivision regulations of the city adopted August 10, 1998, are by this reference incorporated and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full in this chapter. 
Chapter 70 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1, the city has contracted with the county tax commissioner to prepare the city's tax digest, to assess and collect municipal taxes, and to invoke any remedy permitted for collection of municipal ad valorem taxes. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(14); any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes saved from repeal, § 1-7(16); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-281 et seq.; taxes on distilled spirits, § 6-40; taxes on malt beverages, § 6-109; taxes on wines, § 6-110; excise tax on pouring alcoholic beverages, § 6-178; businesses, ch. 22; occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 4-101 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Madison, Georgia, (1991 edition) on the subject of ad valorem taxes is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 
Secs. 70-2—70-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE LICENSE FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 70-36. - Levied. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1991, § 4-110; Ord. of 1-8-1996, § 2(A)) 
Sec. 70-37. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay, in addition to the tax specified in section 70-36, an additional license fee of $14.00 per location. 
(Code 1991, § 4-110; Ord. of 1-8-1996, § 2(B)) 
Sec. 70-38. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers not otherwise licensed. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 70-36, in the amount of $40.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-110; Ord. of 1-8-1996, § 2(C)) 
Sec. 70-39. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 70-36, 70-37 and 70-38 shall be due and payable on July 1 of each year. 
(Code 1991, § 4-110; Ord. of 1-8-1996, § 2(D)) 
Secs. 70-40—70-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 70-71. - Levied. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1991, § 4-111) 
Sec. 70-72. - Due date; filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. These returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1991, § 4-111(F)) 
Secs. 70-73—70-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq.; local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 70-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel any structure or any portion of a structure, including but not limited to any bed and breakfast house, lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license or use or other agreement or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in this city, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(1); Amd. of 2-23-09) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-107. - Rate of levy. 
There is set and levied on each occupant of a guestroom of any hotel located within the corporate limits of this city a tax in the amount of five percent of the rent for such occupancy. This tax is imposed per O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1)(A)(3). 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(2); Amd. of 6-3-05, § 1) 
Sec. 70-108. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the city to collect the tax on occupants imposed in section 70-107. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(3)) 
Sec. 70-109. - Exemption. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be imposed upon a permanent resident, or upon rooms, lodgings or accommodations for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees traveling on official business. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(4)) 
Sec. 70-110. - Registration of operator. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register the business with the city clerk, on a form provided by the city clerk for such purpose. The required registration shall set forth the name which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, by a member or partner in case of ownership by association or partnership, or by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(5)) 
Sec. 70-111. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator as provided in this article, the city clerk shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(6)) 
Sec. 70-112. - Due date and required report. 
All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, and amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(7)) 
Sec. 70-113. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied under this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act," approved February 20, 1951 (Ga. Laws 1951, page 360). 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(8)) 
Sec. 70-114. - Determination if no return made; unsatisfactory return. 
(a)  Estimate authorized. If any hotel operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this article, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator for the period for which the operator failed to file the return and such estimate shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Notice of determination. The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the hotel operator written notice of his determination as provided in this section. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when mailed by certified mail. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination made under this section shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction of a month, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion of the amount should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should expire last. 
(e)  Unsatisfactory return. The same rules shall apply if a return is made but is determined to be unsatisfactory by the city clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(9)) 
Sec. 70-115. - Required records. 
Each hotel operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers for a period of at least three years, setting forth dates of occupancy and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(10)) 
Sec. 70-116. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Authority of the clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the mayor and council may require. 
(c)  Examination of authorized records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by the city clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(11)) 
Sec. 70-117. - Action for collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the mayor and council may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect such amount due, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other incidental legal fees. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that he has been paid or a certificate showing no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this section, it may be offset by the city clerk. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(12)) 
Sec. 70-118. - Penalties. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 4-104(13)) 
Secs. 70-119—70-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL TAX DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 70-151—70-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - U.S. HIGHWAY 441-INTERSTATE 20 

Sec. 70-171. - Created; boundaries. 
There is created within the city a special tax district which shall be known as the 441-Interstate 20 district of the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-113; Ord. of 11-13-1995(1), § 1(1); Amd. of 5-10-04, § 1) 
Editor's note— The plat showing the boundaries of the special tax district has been omitted from this codification, but is available for reference and review in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 70-172. - Levy. 
The city shall be authorized to levy upon all real estate subject to taxation by the city within the 441-Interstate 20 district on January 1 of each year a tax not to exceed three mills upon the assessed value of all such property, according to the assessed value of such property for ad valorem tax purposes for the city. All taxes levied by the city pursuant to this division shall become due and payable at the same time as ad valorem taxes levied by the city. Delinquent taxes shall bear the same interest and penalties as the ad valorem taxes for the city. 
(Code 1991, § 4-113; Ord. of 11-13-1995(1), § 1(2)) 
Sec. 70-173. - Certain fees and taxes increased. 
All business license fees, occupational taxes and employee taxes levied under chapter 22, article II, within the 441-Interstate 20 district shall be increased by 30 percent. 
(Code 1991, § 4-113; Ord. of 11-13-1995(1), § 1(3)) 
Sec. 70-174. - Utilization. 
All funds raised pursuant to this special tax district created in this division shall be used for such purposes as the city deems beneficial to the district, including but not limited to the construction and maintenance of roads and streets, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, parks, recreational areas, programs and facilities, parking facilities and urban development and revitalization programs. Further, the city is specifically empowered to contract with the Madison-Morgan County Chamber of Commerce to provide these services in return for the funds generated by the special tax district created in this division. 
(Code 1991, § 4-113; Ord. of 11-13-1995(1), § 1(4)) 
Secs. 70-175—70-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 70-196. - Created; boundaries. 
There is created within the city a special tax district which shall be known as the central business district of the city, and which shall be composed of all that territory embraced within the following description: 
All that portion of the city which constitutes the central area of the business district and downtown development authority boundaries, further outlined in red on exhibit "A-1" made a part of this section by reference. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1995(2), § 1(1)) 
Editor's note— The plat showing the boundaries of the special tax district identified as Exhibit "A-1" has been omitted from this codification, but is available for reference and review in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 70-197. - Levy. 
The city shall be authorized to levy upon all real estate subject to taxation by the city within the central business district of the city on January 1 of each year a tax not to exceed three mills upon the assessed value of all such property, according to the assessed value of such property for ad valorem tax purposes for the city. All taxes levied by the city pursuant to this division shall become due and payable at the same time as ad valorem taxes levied by the city. Delinquent taxes shall bear the same interest and penalties as the ad valorem taxes for the city. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1995(2), § 1(2)) 
Sec. 70-198. - Certain fees and taxes increased. 
All business license fees, occupational taxes and employee taxes levied under chapter 22, article II, within the central business district shall be increased by 30 percent. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1995(2), § 1(3)) 
Sec. 70-199. - Utilization. 
All funds raised pursuant to the special tax district created in this division shall be used for such purposes as the city deems beneficial to the district, including but not limited to the construction and maintenance of roads and streets, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, parks, recreational areas, programs and facilities, parking facilities, and urban development and revitalization programs. Further, the city is specifically empowered to contract with the Madison Downtown Business Council, Inc., to provide these services in return for the funds generated by the special tax district created in this division. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1995(2), § 1(4)) 
Secs. 70-200—70-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 70-231. - Types of tangible personal property which are exempt. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 there shall be exempt from taxation 100 percent of the value of the tangible personal properties set forth in this section for the year beginning January 1, 2008, and all subsequent years unless changed by further resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for in this section shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into this state from outside this state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. 
(Res. of 4-13-1992; Amd. of 6-13-2005, § 1; Amd. of 12-12-05(2), § 1; Amd. 12-11-2006(3), § 1; Amd. of 1-14-08, § 1) 
Chapter 74 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city's cable television franchise agreements are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS 

Sec. 74-31. - Findings. 
The city finds as follows: 
(1)  The city has become aware of the availability for residential use of dish-type satellite signal receiving stations; 
(2)  It is deemed the desire of the city to both permit reasonable use of property owners of their property and to protect the rights of other property owners; 
(3)  The city is aware of its duty to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city; 
(4)  The city has determined it will not prohibit the use of such receiving stations, but will permit their use subject to reasonable regulations; and 
(5)  The city has determined that the placement of such stations shall be only in the rear portion of the property and such station shall be otherwise regulated. 
(Code 1991, § 26-102(A)) 
Sec. 74-32. - Location. 
(a)  Dish-type satellite receiving stations ("stations"), subject to the regulations of this section, may be located within the city limits. 
(b)  Stations shall not be linked to receivers which are not located on the same lot or property as the station. 
(c)  Stations shall be located in the rear yard only and behind the principal dwelling or structure located on the lot and shall be located so that however turned or otherwise used, all parts of the station will be set back at least six feet from the side yard lines and shall be set back from the rear lot line no less than six feet or half the depth of the rear yard, whichever is greater. 
(d)  The height of the station, should a dish antennae be turned perpendicular to the ground, should not extend beyond 15 feet, and the maximum diameter of any dish antennae should not exceed 12 feet. 
(e)  No installation or erection of the station shall commence before a permit is obtained from the city building inspector or his designee. 
(f)  All stations, together with all other structures, patios, decks and impervious surfaces (excluding driveways), may occupy an area of land no larger than 50 percent of the rear yard. 
(g)  Vegetation screening and/or fencing with a minimum height of six feet shall be required between the station and residential properties which abut the rear yard between the antennae and any street that borders the front or corner side yard of the property in question, and between the antennae and residential property across such a front or side street, so as to screen the station from the view of persons inside nearby residential properties and from persons on those public streets. 
(Code 1991, § 26-102(B)—(H)) 
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; parades and demonstrations, § 62-41 et seq. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; stopping, standing and parking,O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 78-31. - Adoption by reference. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), known as the "Uniform Rules of the Road" and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Code 1991, § 11-101(A)) 
Sec. 78-32. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1991, § 11-101(B)) 
Secs. 78-33—78-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

Sec. 78-66. - Parking on town square. 
(a)  Parking in and around certain areas of the town square, namely, those areas in which parking time limits are posted in certain city blocks, shall be governed by the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Parking times shall be limited to the times posted in a particular block in the city. 
(2)  Should a vehicle remain in a parking spot for longer than the time posted, a violation shall be imposed, and a ticket shall be given indicating the violation, and a fine of $10.00 shall be imposed. 
(3)  Automobiles of nonresidents of the county may be provided with courtesy tickets, in a form designated by the mayor, so as to provide visitors with a courteous welcome in the city. 
(4)  Any persons who shall attempt to evade or who does evade the parking rules and regulations of the city by erasing any marking placed on any portion of any motor vehicle for the purpose of hindering or preventing city authorities from ascertaining the length of time the vehicle has been parked shall be guilty of a violation of this section and upon conviction shall be fined up to $50.00. 
(5)  Any person who shall remove his vehicle from one public parking place to another for the purpose of hindering or preventing the proper city authorities from enforcing the city's rules and regulations shall be guilty of a violation of this section and upon conviction shall be fined up to $50.00. 
(6)  The parking areas referred to in this section are declared to be all parking spaces in the city to which time limits apply. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is an employee, owner or operator of any trade, business or profession to park in any timed parking zone in the city during the hours set forth in this section, if the trade, business or profession of which the person is an employee, owner or operator is located along a street in the city which abuts a timed parking zone. An exception will be made to allow business owners and employees a loading and unloading period. This period is not to exceed 30 minutes continuously and shall not exceed two such uses per day. The business so engaged in loading or unloading shall notify the city by calling the police department prior to each such use and reporting the intended use of the privilege herein granted. Any business having access to off-street loading shall not be entitled to use the provisions of this subsection. All persons violating this subsection (b) will be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of $15.00 for the first three violations in a calendar year, and $30.00 for any subsequent violations in a calendar year. Any citation received for violating subsection (b) must be paid within five calendar days or additional fees will be added as follows: $10.00 late fee for a $15.00 citation and $25.00 late fee for a $30.00 citation. 
(c)  A timed parking zone is an area of public property which is marked as a parking place, and which is located on a block for which a sign is erected designating the time for which parking is permitted in that zone, e.g. "One-Hour Parking" etc. 
(d)  The hours of application of this section shall be as follows: 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to any person who is parked in a timed parking zone while conducting business with any tradesworker, business person or professional person whose business is not affiliated with the business of the person so parked. It is the intent of this subsection to allow any person to use the timed parking area while doing business with the downtown merchants, tradesworkers and professionals. It is the intent of this section to prohibit use of the timed parking areas as a parking place for anyone in the pursuit of their own or their employer's trade, business or profession. 
(Code 1991, § 11-102; Ord. of 6-10-1996(2); Amd. of 10-10-2016(2), Exh. A; Amd. of 1-14-2019, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 78-67—78-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of Oct. 13, 2003, § 1, repealed article IV, sections 78-101—78-109, in its entirety, and replaced it with a new article IV, sections 78-101—78-109. Former article IV pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1991, §§ 14-103(A)—(P). 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 78-101. - Definitions. 
Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed an unexpired license plate, and which is discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is designed to travel along the ground and shall include but is not limited to automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-102. - Public nuisance. 
No person shall have a junked motor vehicle within the city limits for more than 72 hours. Violation is declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. This section shall not apply to any vehicle totally enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city, and properly operated in the appropriate condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, or any vehicle retained for legitimate antique collection purposes. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-103. - Notice to owner. 
If a violation exists, notice in writing shall be served upon the violator or his/her agent requesting removal of the junked motor vehicle within seven days of receipt of notice. The notice shall advise that upon failure to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal, with the cost of removal to be levied against the violator. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-104. - Responsibility for removal. 
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the violator shall remove the junked motor vehicle. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the violator shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-105. - Hearing. 
A violator who disagrees with the notice may within six days of receipt thereof file a written request for hearing before the mayor and council. The hearing shall be held within 90 days after the filing of the request. The violator shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance. At any such hearing the city and the violator may call and examine witnesses and present evidence, after which the mayor and council shall make a decision regarding the notice of violation. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-106. - Removal of vehicle. 
If the violation has not been remedied within the seven-day period for compliance, or if the notice of violation is affirmed by the mayor and council, the city may cause the junked motor vehicle to be removed from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with such removal. Within 48 hours of the removal of such vehicle, written notice shall be given to the violator and anyone else known to the city who has an ownership interest in the junked motor vehicle, that the vehicle has been impounded and stored. The notice shall give the location of the vehicle and the costs incurred by the city for removal. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-107. - Sale of vehicle. 
Upon removing a vehicle the city may cause the junked motor vehicle to be sold in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 9-13-140 et seq. The notice of the sale shall state: 
(1)  That the sale is of a junked motor vehicle in the possession of the city. 
(2)  A description of the vehicle, including make, model and license number. 
(3)  The terms of the sale. 
(4)  The date, time and place of the sale. 
(5)  Any other information required by state law. 
The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of payment, the city shall cause to be executed a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original for the purchaser, with the copy for the tax commissioner. Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the city's liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-108. - Redemption of vehicle. 
The owner of any vehicle seized hereunder may redeem such vehicle prior to its sale or destruction upon proof of ownership and payment to the city of expenses of removal plus any advertising, all of such sums not to exceed $500.00 plus ten dollars per day storage. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-109. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Amd. of 10-13-03, § 1) 
Sec. 78-110. - Trucks over six wheels prohibited on roads designated: "No Through Trucks". 
(a)  Trucks over six wheels are prohibited from using roads designated by the city manager as "No Through Trucks", which designation shall be ratified by vote of the mayor and council at the next council meeting after said designation by the manager. Such designation is permissible when such trucks are expressly found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic in that area. The purpose of this restriction is to protect the public safety in the use of the city's streets, to facilitate and expedite traffic, and to protect the streets from unusual wear and damage. The mayor and council have control and supervision over its roads and streets. This prohibition is based on a traffic engineering investigation and recommendation. 
(b)  This prohibition shall be posted with appropriate signage so as to apprise drivers of trucks that such trucks are prohibited in areas designated "No Through Trucks". The signage shall be in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Any law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer to whom law enforcement authority has been designated who observes a motor vehicle being operated upon a public road of the state and who has reason to believe that any provision hereof is being violated is authorized to stop such vehicle and make investigation of such. 
(c)  Exemption. Trucks making a delivery to an address on the "No Through Trucks" road, with documentation proving such delivery, are permitted on the "No Through Trucks" road solely for that limited purpose, and shall depart by the shortest route to a road that is not designated "No Through Trucks". Provided, however, the maximum total gross weight of a vehicle and load shall not exceed 56,000 pounds. 
(d)  Initial designation. The following roads are hereby designated as "No Through Trucks" to protect the public safety in the use of the city's streets, to facilitate and expedite traffic, and to protect the streets from unusual wear and damage: 

 
  
(e)  All persons violating the foregoing will guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, each instance being considered a separate violation. 
(Amd. of 9-12-2016, Exh. A) 
Secs. 78-111—78-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPEED ZONES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 78-141. - Established. 
(a)  The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
On-System 
State Route 12 from the Madison west city limit (M.L. 9.95) 0.42 mi. west of State Route 83 to State Route 24 Spur (M.L. 10.78), a distance of 0.83 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 12 from State Route 24 Spur (M.L. 10.78) to City Street #539 —Johnson Street (M.L. 11.77), a distance of 0.99 mi. to be zoned 40 mph. 
State Route 12 from City Street #539 —Johnson Street (M.L. 11.77) to City Street #507 —Burney Street (M.L. 12.38), a distance of 0.61 mi. to be zoned 30 mph. 
State Route 12 from City Street #507 —Burney Street (M.L. 12.38) to County Road #156 —College Drive (M.L. 12.77), a distance of 0.39 mi. to be zoned 40 mph. 
State Route 12 from County Road #156 —College Drive (M.L. 12.77) to the Madison east city limit (M.L. 13.09) 0.03 mi. east of Bowman Street, a distance of 0.32 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 24 from the Madison south city limit (M.L. 7.64) 0.42 mi. south of County Road #121 to County Road #102 —Cox Road (M.L. 10.18), a distance of 2.54 mi to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 24 from County Road #102 —Cox Road (M.L. 10.18) to State Route 12 (M.L. 10.51), a distance of 0.33 mi. to be zoned 40 mph. 
State Route 24 runs common with State Route 12 from (M.L. 10.51) to (M.L. 12.71), a distance of 2.20 mi. 
State Route 24 Bypass from State Route 24 (US 441) (M.L. 0.00) to the Madison city limit (M.L. 1.09) 0.07 west of Cox Road, a distance of 1.09 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 24 Bypass from the Madison city limit (M.L. 3.03) 0.01 mi. north of East Avenue to the Madison north city limit (M.L. 3.68) 0.66 mi. north of East Avenue, a distance of .65 mi to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 24 Spur from State Route 12 (M.L. 0.00) to State Route 24 (M.L. 0.39), a distance of 0.39 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 83 from the Madison south city limit (M.L. 9.16) 0.78 mi. south of Industrial Boulevard, to a point 0.50 mi. south of State Route 12 (M.L. 10.67), a distance of 1.51 mi. to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 83 from a point 0.50 mi. south of State Route 12 (M.L. 10.67) to State Route 12 (M.L. 11.17), a distance of 0.50 mi to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 83 runs common with State Route 12 from (M.L. 11.17) to (M.L. 12.85), a distance of 1.68 mi. 
State Route 83 from State Route 12 (M.L. 12.85) to City Street #510 —West Jefferson Street (M.L. 13.22), a distance of 0.37 mi. to be zoned 30 mph. 
State Route 83 from City Street #510 —West Jefferson Street (M.L. 13.22) to a point 0.07 mi. north of City Street #502 —Garnett Street (M.L. 13.64), a distance of 0.42 mi to be zoned 40 mph. 
State Route 83, school zone, from a point 0.07 mi. south of City Street #500 —Pearl Street (M.L. 13.30) to a point 0.07 mi. north of City Street #502 —Garnett Street (M.L. 13.64), a distance of 0.34 mi. to be zoned 30 mph from 7:15 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and from 2:45 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
State Route 83 from a point 0.07 mi. north of City Street #502 —Garnett Street (M.L. 13.64) to the Madison north city limit (M.L. 13.84), a distance of 0.20 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 402 from the Madison west city limit (M.L. 10.06) 0.31 mi. east of County Road #254, to the Madison east city limit (M.L. 13.90) 0.91 mi. west of County Road #252, a distance of 3.84 mi. to be zoned 70 mph. 
Signs to be erected by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Off-System 
College Drive from Harris Street to the Madison city limit, a distance of 0.57 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
College Drive, school zone, from 0.10 mi. west of College Avenue to 0.10 mi. east of College Avenue, a distance of 0.20 mi. to be zoned 25 mph from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., during school days only. 
Dixie Avenue from the west city limit to a point 0.07 mi. west of Oil Mill Road, a distance of 0.26 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Dixie Avenue from a point 0.07 mi. west of Oil Mill Road to Jasper Street, a distance of 0.26 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
East Avenue from Park Street to City Limits, a distance of 0.75 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
East Avenue, school zone, from Moreland Avenue to 0.20 mi. west of Moreland Avenue, a distance of 0.20 mi. to be zoned 25 mph from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., during school days only. 
Industrial Park Road from State Route 24 to State Route 83, a distance of 1.41 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Lions Club Road from State Route 83 to State Route 24, a distance of 1.04 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Washington Street from the east city limit to a point 0.25 mi. west of the east city limit, a distance of 0.25 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Washington Street from a point 0.25 mi. west of the east city limit to Hancock Street, a distance of 0.90 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
Signs to be erected by the city. 
(b)  This section shall become effective when appropriate signs are erected. 
(Ord. No. 96.080C, 10-14-1996; Ord. No. 78-141, 2-12-01) 
Secs. 78-142—78-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNLICENSED VEHICLES 

Sec. 78-150. - Definitions. 
Unlicensed vehicle means the following devices with the following definitions per the listed section of the O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1: 
(15.5)  Electric assisted bicycle means a device with two or three wheels, which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. For such a device to be considered an electric assisted bicycle, it shall meet the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, as set forth in 49 C.F.R. section 571, et seq., and shall operate in such a manner that the electric motor disengages or ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric assisted bicycle shall: 
(A)  Have a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; 
(B)  Be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; and 
(C)  Be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than 20 miles per hour. 
(25.1)  Low-speed vehicle means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
(28)  Moped means a motor driven cycle equipped with two or three wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be 3.05 cubic inches (50 cubic centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour (48.28 kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged. 
(30)  Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, every bicycle with a motor attached, and every moped. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled other than the vehicles defined above. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-151. - Applicability. 
The provisions hereof shall apply whenever an unlicensed vehicle is operated upon a highway, road or street or upon any path set aside for the use of unlicensed vehicles, subject to those exceptions stated in this part. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-152. - Traffic laws. 
The provisions of this article that apply to motor vehicles, shall apply to unlicensed vehicles, except that the penalties prescribed in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-390(b), 40-6-391(c) and 40-6-393(a) shall not apply to persons operating unlicensed vehicles. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-153. - Proper operation. 
A person operating an unlicensed vehicle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto and shall allow no person to ride upon the handlebars. No unlicensed vehicle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. No child under four years shall ride as a passenger on an unlicensed vehicle unless the child is securely seated according to the manufacturer's instructions and the seat is properly affixed according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-154. - Manner of operation. 
Every person operating an unlicensed vehicle upon a road shall ride as near to the right side of the road as practicable, except when turning left or avoiding hazards, when the lane is too narrow to share safely with a motor vehicle, when traveling at the same speed as traffic, or while exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction; provided, however, that every person operating an unlicensed vehicle shall exercise reasonable care and shall give due consideration to the other applicable rules of the road. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-155. - Carrying. 
No person operating an unlicensed vehicle shall carry any package, bundle, or other article that prevents him from keeping both hands upon the handlebars or steering wheel. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-156. - Lights, brakes, handlebars and helmets. 
(a)  Every unlicensed vehicle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a light on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the department of motor vehicle safety which shall be visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Every unlicensed vehicle sold or operated shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level pavement. 
(c)  No unlicensed vehicle shall be equipped or operated while equipped with a set of handlebars so raised that the operator must elevate his hands above his shoulders in order to grasp the normal steering grip area. 
(d)  No person shall operate a two-wheeled unlicensed vehicle on a road, path, or sidewalk under without wearing a bicycle helmet which meets or exceeds the impact standards for bicycle helmets set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation. A person shall be deemed to wear a helmet only if a helmet of good fit is fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-157. - Reflectors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or use an unlicensed vehicle unless equipped with reflectors of a type approved by the department of public safety. The reflectors shall be so designed and situated as to be visible from the front and rear of the unlicensed vehicle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-158. - Limits on operation. 
(a)  No person shall operate any unlicensed vehicle on a road unless the maximum speed limit of the roadway is 35 miles per hour or less. 
(b)  When traveling on any road, a person operating an unlicensed vehicle shall travel in the same direction authorized for motor vehicle traffic on such road. 
(c)  Any person operating an unlicensed vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with, and shall yield the right of way to, persons traveling on foot. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-159. - Sidewalks. 
Unlicensed vehicles shall not be operated on any sidewalks. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-160. - Parking. 
(a)  An unlicensed vehicle may not be parked on a sidewalk. 
(b)  An unlicensed vehicle shall not be parked on any road as to prevent the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided herein, any person operating an unlicensed vehicle shall be subject to the same parking restrictions as provided for motor vehicles. All violations of parking restrictions shall be deemed the responsibility of the owner of such device; and, for purposes of parking restrictions, the owner shall be deemed to be in control of the device at the time of a parking violation involving such device, and no evidence of actual control by such owner need be proven as an element of the offense. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-161. - DUI. 
Any person who is under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or any drug to a degree which renders him or her a hazard shall not operate any unlicensed vehicle on any highway, road or street. Violation of this Code section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-162. - Age. 
No person under 15 years shall operate an unlicensed vehicle on any highway, road or street. No person shall operate such vehicle upon a highway, road or street unless he or she shall have in his or her possession a valid driver's license, instructional permit, or limited permit. No license or permit shall be required for the operation of an electric assisted bicycle. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-163. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $300.00, except as specifically enumerated otherwise. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Secs. 78-164—78-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROHIBITED VEHICLES 

Sec. 78-170. - Definition. 
Prohibited vehicle means golf carts, similar motorized carts, all terrain vehicles (ATV's), Kawasaki Mules and similar, unlicensed motorcycles, scooters that do not meet Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, miniature motorcycles, and go-karts. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-171. - Prohibition. 
Prohibited vehicles shall not be operated on any public: streets, roads, highways, alleys, parking lots, sidewalks, parks or school grounds. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-172. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $300.00, except as specifically enumerated otherwise. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-173. - Juveniles. 
Juveniles who violate 78-171 shall have their prohibited vehicles seized by law enforcement. The adult responsible for the juvenile may pick up the seized vehicle upon payment of costs actually accrued by law enforcement. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-174. - Liability. 
The adult responsible for the juvenile shall be liable for any damages and/or injuries resulting from the violation of 78-171. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Secs. 78-175—78-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SKATEBOARDS 

Sec. 78-180. - Riding roller skates, roller blades or skateboards in the downtown tax district. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to rollerskate, rollerblade or ride a skateboard on any public: streets, roads, highways, alleys, parking lots, sidewalks, parks or school grounds within the area designated as the downtown tax district. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-181. - Other prohibited uses. 
(a)  Bicycles, skates, skateboards, roller blades and other similar devices must never be ridden on public property steps, stairways, access ramps, retaining walls, benches, railings or on similar architectural features. 
(b)  The riding of bicycles and use of skates, skateboards, and roller blades in a reckless, disruptive, or unsafe manner is prohibited. A reckless, disruptive or unsafe manner is defined as riding at excessive speed and/or performing or practicing stunts; causing noise which disrupts people; riding with undue regard for the safety of others; or riding in a manner that causes damage to public property and landscaping. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-182. - Punishment. 
Any violation of this section may be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Amd. of 3-14-05(2), § 1) 
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; utility connections, § 18-1; flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, § 18-61 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; electric utility franchises, § 22-141 et seq.; environment, ch. 38; historic preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; telecommunications, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for the development, storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1—82-27. - Reserved. 
Sec. 82-28. - Theft of utilities. 
(a)  That the following practices or acts are hereby declared to be illegal and are prohibited by the City of Madison: 
(1)  The cutting, removing or in any manner making ineffective any seal, locking band or lock on an electric, gas, water or other utility meter. 
(2)  Restoration of service by any means after service has been terminated for nonpayment, or obtaining electricity, gas or water or other utility service without making the proper deposit with a utility company or receiving proper authorization from a utility company. 
(3)  Obtaining electricity, gas or water or other utility service by use of jumper wires, or by any other means which bypass a metering device either partially or completely. 
(4)  Damaging or tampering in any manner with any part of a metering device belonging to a utility company. 
(5)  Changing or altering the normal installed position of a metering device in any fashion which causes the normal accurate recording of utility service received to be altered and inaccurate. 
(6)  Obtaining electricity, gas or water or other utility service by use of a metering device which is not authorized by a utility company. 
(7)  Interfering with the automatic registration, recording and transmission of electricity, gas or water consumption or other utility service when readings are recorded and/or transmitted electronically. 
(8)  Fraudulently obtaining, or attempting to obtain, service from a utility company by using a false name or identification. 
(9)  Fraudulently obtaining, or attempting to obtain, service from a utility company by placing the account in the name of someone else after the service has been disconnected for nonpayment or theft of service while the person in whose name the service was in when disconnected is still living at the location of the service. 
(10)  Any other reception of electrical power, gas service or water service or other utility service without proper authorization from a utility company. 
(b)  Alleged violations of this section shall be tried in the Municipal Court of the City of Madison. Any person found guilty of violating any section or part of this section shall be fined a sum not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00 on each count. Each day that the violation continues is a separate count. 
(c)  Any person found violating any section or part of this section will be required to make full restitution to the utility company for the cost of the services obtained in violation of the section, for damage to equipment of a utility company and for all associated costs of the investigation. In calculating the amount of restitution to be paid, the court is authorized to consider the following evidence: 
(1)  The cost of the service received as a result of violating this section shall be computed by the utility company. 
(2)  The cost of any damage to utility equipment shall be based on the actual costs. Costs may be computed and updated annually. 
(3)  Investigative and any associated costs will be computed and updated annually by the utility company. 
(d)  Any person in possession of any premises as owner, occupant, or tenant who is found to have an electric, gas or water meter or other utility service meter which has been tampered with or altered in violation of this section or found to be receiving electricity, gas or water or other utility service as a result of any of the methods described above shall be presumed to have knowingly violated the terms of this section. Such receipt of electricity, gas or water shall be deemed prima facie evidence of an intent to defraud or deprive the utility company of recovering proper charges for payment for such service. 
(e)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(f)  That the provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, phrase or provision shall be declared or held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder of the sections, phrases or provisions. 
(g)  The City of Madison finds that there is a continuing problem with persons illegally obtaining electricity, gas and water by various means and that this results in a loss of revenue to utility companies and creates a dangerous situation that can result in the loss of life or property. This section shall be cumulative to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25, and is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25(c). 
(h)  For purposes of this section, "utility company" shall be defined as any company, electric membership corporation, municipality, or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas or water or other utility service. 
(Amd. of 7-26-2010, § 1(Exh. A); Amd. of 8-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 82-29. - Identify theft prevention program. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known as the "Identify Theft Prevention Program." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Madison, Georgia. 
Covered account means (i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer their payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment thereto. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information, and drivers' license information and, for a natural person, includes one's social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(d)  Findings. 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include utilities. 
(3)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: None. 
(4)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and maintenance on accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(5)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered into the city's computer system, and any documents with personal identifying information will be securely maintained. 
(6)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account, of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(e)  Process of establishing a covered account. 
(1)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer: a valid government-issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer, driver's license, a copy of the lease, or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered into the city's computer system, and any documents with personal identifying information will be securely maintained. 
(2)  Each utility account shall be assigned an account number. 
(f)  Access to covered account information. 
(1)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(2)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the city clerk or IT consultant on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and/or symbols. 
(3)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(4)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential, and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(g)  Credit card payments. 
(1)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(h)  Sources and types of red flags. All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft, and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(i)  Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(1)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may, in his or her discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by city manager: 
a.  Contact the customer; 
b.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
1.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
2.  Close the account. 
c.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
d.  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
e.  Notify law enforcement in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account, causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
f.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(2)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may, in his or her discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
a.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
b.  Deny the application for the new account; 
c.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
d.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(j)  Updating the program. The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(k)  Program administration. The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(l)  Outside service providers. In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Amd. of 7-16-09(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 82-30. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known as "Treatment of Address Discrepancies." 
(b)  Purpose. Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(c)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1) that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 1 
City means City of Madison. 
(d)  Policy. In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(e)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
a.  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
b.  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
c.  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(f)  Methods of confirming consumer addresses. The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Amd. of 7-16-09(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
1 See 16 CFR § 681.1(b). 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5)(a)(5); adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq. 

Sec. 82-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, PL 92-500, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, PL 95-217, and as subsequently amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the outer face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Categorical standard means national pretreatment standards applicable to industrial users specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to a city-owned wastewater treatment works. Categorical standards are established in 40 CFR, chapter I, subchapter N, relating to effluent guidelines and standards. 
Chemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
Composite sample means the accumulation of a number of individual samples over a period of time, so taken as to represent the nature of the wastewater. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
County sanitarian means the person designated as such by the county board of health. 
Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewerage system of the city and in obtaining, having or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through the system. Such terms shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Designated city representative means the city manager or his authorized deputy or representative. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
General pretreatment regulations means 40 CFR, chapter I, part 403, General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution, as amended. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastewater stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastewater stream and without consideration of time. 
Grease means a group of substances, including fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils, and certain other nonfatty materials. 
Grease interceptor means a tank or vessel designed to remove and retain grease and floatable oil from a wastewater stream prior to discharge to a public sewer. 
Grit means the heavy suspended mineral matter present in wastewater such as sand or gravel. 
Grit interceptor means a tank or vessel designed to interrupt the flow of wastewater so as to cause grit to settle out of the wastewater stream prior to discharge to a public sewer. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
Municipality means the governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and sanitary sewer systems within the city and adjacent areas of the county. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD 5 is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorous is not more than 15 mg/l, total oil and grease is not more than 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l), total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 20 mg/l, and the total flow is not more than 36,000 gallons per day. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. 
Pit privy means a shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes, together with a: 
(1)  Sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub-out; and 
(2)  Subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401.15. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into public wastewater facilities. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge; sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant." 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. I, §§ 1—6, 8—26, 28, 29, 31—38, 40—49) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-32. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human excrement or objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, easement or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the city and not served by an approved and properly functioning private wastewater disposal system as of the effective date of this article, is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities in such places, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. Any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city, which has an approved and properly functioning private wastewater disposal system as of the effective date of this article will not be required by the city to connect to a public sanitary sewer as long as the private wastewater disposal system functions in accordance with requirements of the state department of human resources, the state department of natural resources and the county sanitarian. For septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities, the county sanitarian shall determine if the wastewater disposal system is functioning properly. 
(e)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances and swimming pool drains and overflows shall be connected to the public sewer; provided, that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the county sanitarian may be used. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. II, §§ 1—5) 
Sec. 82-33. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 82-32, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section and the state department of human resources or the state department of natural resources. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction on any private wastewater disposal system, except for septic tanks or pit privies, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the designated city representative. Septic tank and pit privy installations are under the jurisdiction of the county sanitarian. 
(c)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the county sanitarian. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(d)  No person shall construct, repair, alter or enlarge any septic tank unless the person holds a valid permit for such work issued by the county sanitarian. The county sanitarian may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the county sanitarian of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part of a septic tank may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the county sanitarian. A copy of the approval shall be provided to the city by the owner of the private wastewater disposal system. 
(e)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of state and federal water pollution control agencies of jurisdiction and with the county sanitarian. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 43,560 square feet. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(f)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the county sanitarian deems the use to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(g)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in this section, and the county sanitarian determines that the private wastewater disposal system is not functioning properly, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days after official notice to do so. Any septic tanks, pit privies and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(h)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(i)  No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the county sanitarian deems the use of such facilities to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(j)  Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available, to a septic tank, or other permitted private wastewater disposal system. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(k)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)  In areas where the county sanitarian deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(l)  Discharge of septic tank contents into the sewer system shall be as follows: 
(1)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump or otherwise discharge into any manhole or other opening, into the city sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the city sewer system the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subsection (l)(2). Pumpings or contents taken from grease, grit or oil interceptors are prohibited. 
(2)  Permits. The designated city representative is authorized to issue permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the designated city representative and under his supervision. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the designated city representative, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. Prior to permit issuance, the designated city representative may require a complete analysis of waste products to be discharged to determine compatibility with the treatment process. The analysis will be at the expense of the person requesting the discharge permit. 
(3)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks, as provided in the city's fee schedule. A record shall be kept of such dumpings. Fees for dumping shall be paid prior to the city's accepting the waste material. 
(m)  Any premises with a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste or liquid waste disposal system located on the premises that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 60 days from the receipt of written notification from the county sanitarian, the state or the city that the system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and order that the system be corrected. 
(n)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county sanitarian or the state. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. III, §§ 1—14) 
Sec. 82-34. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance of such sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits, for residential and commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the designated city representative. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building or either an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer; but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(e)  Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the designated city representative, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification of such provisions, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice No. 9, latest edition, shall apply. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city: 
(1)  a.  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A 74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision; extra strength clay pipe, ASTM Specification C 700, latest revision or plastic PVC pipe, ASTM Specification D 3034, SDR35, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. 
b.  Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a potable water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe may also be required by the designated city representative where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe, except that nonmetallic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the designated city representative. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the designated city representative, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the designated city representative. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C 12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  a.  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
b.  Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have rubber gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM Specification C 564, latest revision. 
c.  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have rubber gaskets in accordance with ANSI Specification A21.11, latest revision, and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
d.  Compression joints for clay pipe shall be in accordance with ASTM Specification C 425, latest revision. 
e.  Compression joints for plastic pipe shall be in accordance with ASTM Specifications D 3212 and F 477, latest revisions. 
(6)  The city will place a cleanout on each building sewer installed or repaired after the effective date of this article. The cleanout will be located on the public side as near as practical to the crossing of the building sewer from private property into public property, rights-of-way or easements. 
(7)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the designated city representative. 
(8)  The installation of all building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall conform with all pertinent Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) requirements. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be built parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the designated city representative for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9, latest edition. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the designated city representative before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the designated city representative when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the designated city representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades, lights and other devices so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(l)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(m)  If any building sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the building sewer. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. IV, §§ 1—13) 
Sec. 82-35. - Restricted use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters, to any sewer; except stormwater runoff from limited areas such as solid waste dumpster pads, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the designated city representative. 
(b)  Stormwater other than that exempted under subsection (a) of this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the designated city representative and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling or condensing water may be discharged, on approval of the designated city representative and the state environmental protection division, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, acetone, toluene, turpentine, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, fuel oil, mineral spirits or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other waste, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as but not limited to ashes, bones, cinders, grinding and polishing wastes, sand, mud, grass clippings, leaves, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, fibers, feathers, tar, plastics, rubber, latex, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, offal, paper or plastic dishes and cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(e)  The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not, either singly or by interaction with other substances, harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The designated city representative may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations of this subsection if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the objectives of this section. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability, the designated city representative will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or wastewater which will elevate the temperature of the influent to the city wastewater treatment works to 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) or higher. 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see definition, properly shredded garbage in section 82-31). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, motels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material at the point of discharge exceeds the following limits: 

 
Or any element which in the judgment of the designated city representative will damage collection facilities or be detrimental to the treatment process. These limits may be amended if such amendment is deemed necessary to protect the facilities or life or health and/or to comply with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(6)  All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the Federal Industrial Pretreatment Standards (40 CFR parts 401 to 471) and those industrial pretreatment standards established or set by the state environmental protection division. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the designated city representative. 
(8)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(9)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to receiving waters. 
(11)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(12)  Any gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, acetone, toluene, turpentine, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, fuel oil, mineral spirits or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(13)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD (above 300 mg/l), biochemical oxygen demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
d.  Unusual suspended solids (above 300 mg/l) in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(f)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (e) of this section and which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(g)  Grease, oil and grit interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand or other harmful ingredients; except such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the designated city representative and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Except when specifically permitted by the designated city representative, interceptors shall be located outside of buildings. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the designated city representative. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(h)  When required by the designated city representative, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, protected against vandalism, supplied with electrical current, and constructed in accordance with plans approved by the designated city representative. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer. 
(j)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the designated city representative. 
(k)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment provided that all applicable state and federal pretreatment requirements are met. 
(l)  Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewer system may be required to pretreat such wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the designated city representative and the state environmental protection division prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also be submitted and approved by the designated city representative. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. Pretreatment requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum: 
(1)  Screening. Screens shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sewer system when deemed necessary by the designated city representative to prevent excess suspended solids from reaching the city system. 
(2)  Neutralization. If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to assure compliance with the regulations of this subsection at all times. 
(3)  Equalization. Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sewer system when deemed necessary by the designated city representative to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(m)  There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provisions of this section, it shall be his responsibility to apply to the designated city representative who can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit and compliance schedule. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. V, §§ 1—13) 
Sec. 82-36. - Malicious damage. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. VI, § 1) 
Sec. 82-37. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the public wastewater system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public wastewater system. 
(c)  The city manager or his designated representative shall have administrative authority over the operations of wastewater facilities which are owned and/or operated by the city. 
(d)  The city manager shall designate the city representative who shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article, and shall approve the appointment of inspectors and approve the credentials and identification set forth in subsection (a) of this section. In addition, the city manager shall appoint the hearing officer, who shall carry out the provisions of section 82-39(e) of this section related to such officer. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. VII, § 4) 
Sec. 82-38. - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as set forth in 40 CFR 403, as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. VIII, § 1) 
Sec. 82-39. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the state. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of violation. 
(b)  In the event of violation of this article, the county sanitarian or designated city representative may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the county sanitarian or city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action, and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The record of the mailing of the notice or order shall be prima facie evidence of the notice, and failure of the owner to receive the notice shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the county sanitarian, the city or the hearing officer pursuant to this article or continuation of any violation of this article beyond the applicable time limit will constitute a separate offense and upon conviction in the municipal court shall be punished by the judge of such court within limits provided by the Charter and section 1-12. Compliance with this article is required notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued. 
(d)  The violation of any provisions of this article may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety or comfort may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of a notice of a violation of this article and/or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease, the owner of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before a hearing officer to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city's order. The owner may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. This demand must be filed with the city clerk and be made within five days from the receipt of the order being challenged. Upon the receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time and place for the hearing, to be not less than 45 days from the date of filing of the demand. The hearing shall apply to any customer's complaint, dispute or challenge of the city's rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances or policies. Upon the customer's written complaint filed with the city clerk, the hearing officer shall set a hearing as provided in this subsection or at a time agreed upon by the parties. 
(f)  The hearing officer shall, at such hearing, hear evidence presented by the designated city representative and the owner or customer; and if the hearing officer determines from such evidence that the violations exist and are of such magnitude that the effectiveness of the city's wastewater treatment works is diminished, the hearing officer may order water and sewer service to the offending location terminated. However, it shall be within the power of the hearing officer to delay the termination of services for up to 30 calendar days if, from evidence presented, it appears that the offender will in good faith cure such violations within the time stated in the delay. In the event of any such delayed termination order by the hearing officer, it shall be the duty of the offender within the time specified in the delayed termination order to cure such violations, obtain an affidavit of the designated city representative that the violations have in fact been permanently cured, and present such affidavit to the hearing officer, else, the termination order shall remain effective and city water and sewer services shall be discontinued on the date specified in the order. When city water and sewer services have been terminated under this section, such services shall be provided to the location only upon application to the city for such services in the manner and form required by the city of any new customer, and under city policies relating to the provisions of such services as such policies exist at the time of application. If the hearing officer determines from evidence presented that the violations are less than contended by the city, the hearing officer may modify, alter or cancel previous actions or orders by the city. 
(g)  Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted pursuant to subsections (e) and (f) shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(h)  For the purposes of this article, the decisions of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the county sanitarian on any issue of sanitation, or lack of it, and its effect on human health or well-being. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. IX, §§ 1—8) 
Sec. 82-40. - Service charges. 
It is determined necessary to fix and collect sewer service charges from customers. Such charges shall be published separate from this article; and the revenue received shall be used for operation, maintenance, debt retirement and other authorized expenses. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. X, § 1) 
Sec. 82-41. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  So ordered by the hearing officer as prescribed in section 82-39(f); 
(2)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(3)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(4)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of a permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(b)  Notification processes for discontinuance of service are presented in section 82-39(b). 
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, art. XI, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 82-42—82-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY SYSTEMS USING CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 82-76. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Utility Systems Using City Right-of-Way Ordinance." This shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying city property and rights-of-way. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-77. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations, shall have the meaning given herein. 
City is the City of Madison, Georgia. 
Company a/k/a utility is any utility provider in Madison. 
Council is the Mayor and Council of the City of Madison, Georgia. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical conductors, conduits, ducts, inner ducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and other equipment and technology. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Public ways means streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, rights-of-way, easements, grounds and other public places owned or controlled by, leased to or granted to the city. 
Service area means the company's system within Madison. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-78. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city within 90 days of the effective date of this article. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner. 
(2)  The name, street address, email address, telephone and fax numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated to assure accurate contact information is available to city at all times. 
(3)  A copy of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia PSC and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the city shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the city shall so notify the utility in writing. Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-79. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a permit from the city per this chapter. Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in applicant's permit application. The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date, unless the utility is in violation of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from city on application made on forms prescribed by the city. Fees shall be set by the mayor and council. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans showing in detail the location, size or capacity, relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact and operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the contractor who is to do such work; 
(4)  Twenty-four-hour contact information including name, address, email address, telephone and fax numbers of facilities representative(s) in case of emergency. 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(c)  If the city determines applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the city may issue a permit. 
(1)  Approval will be consistent with this chapter; and 
(2)  Applicant has submitted a complete application and secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law to construct facilities as proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  No impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way. 
(d)  Per O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable law, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(e)  The utility shall obtain all other required permits or approvals per city ordinance, state and federal law. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-80. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  Ordinance compliance. Any company, including any which has sought and obtained a state-wide franchise, shall operate within Madison, Georgia in compliance with the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth as to the construction, operation, maintenance and ownership of a system, including all poles, wires, cables, fibers, underground conduits, pipes, manholes, and other fixtures and appliances ("equipment") necessary for the construction, maintenance and operation in this city of the system and any lines connected therewith, across, above, over, and under the public ways now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, located in city. 
(b)  Regulatory compliance. The system shall be designed, maintained and operated such that quality and reliability of the system will be in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. The company shall operate and maintain the system per all applicable state and federal testing procedures and technical performance standards. Company shall also comply with all applicable state and federal regulations pertaining to customer service requirements, and company shall also comply with all other applicable regulations. 
(c)  Work. All work in the installation, operation, upgrade, repair and removal of equipment shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. The free flow and safety of traffic and the public use of city property shall not be unduly impaired and the installation shall not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other city property. Maintenance and operations of the facilities shall not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. 
(d)  Stop work order. At any time city may order the immediate cessation of work which poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(e)  Corrections. If, using reasonable discretion, it is determined by city or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any equipment or construction is harmful to the health or safety of any person, then company shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions or remove such equipment. 
(f)  Grade changes. If the grades or lines of any street are changed at any time, then company shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the reasonable advance request of city, protect or promptly alter or relocate equipment so as to conform to such new grades or lines. If company refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate equipment, city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate such equipment without any liability to company and company shall pay to city the reasonable costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(g)  Protection of structures. In connection with the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment, company shall, at its own cost and expense, protect the streets and any structures thereon, thereunder or thereover, and shall obtain the prior approval of city before altering the streets or any such structures. Any such alteration shall be made by company, at its sole cost and expense, in a manner prescribed by city. Company shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, in a manner reasonably specified by city, any street or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment. If company does not commence such replacement or repair after 30 days written notice, city or the owner of the affected structure may make such replacement or repair and company shall pay the cost of the same. 
(h)  No obstruction. In connection with the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment, company shall not obstruct the sidewalks, streets, subways, railways, waterways or other traffic to, from or within the corporate limits of city without the prior consent of city. Equipment of company in the streets shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the use of the streets and adjoining property. Company shall install its equipment in accordance with all laws, ordinances, regulations and policies applicable to any individuals, groups or entities who construct, operate, own, control, or provide: 
(1)  Utility facilities or services (including without limitation, a local exchange carrier, inter-exchange carrier, reseller, competitive access provider, cellular or personal communications services provider or telephone company); 
(2)  Telephone, data, voice, television, cable television, video, electric, water, sewer or gas facilities, or services; 
(3)  Fiber optic, coaxial, electric or other wire or cable or conduits, ducts, poles, towers and related facilities (except lighting facilities, traffic control devices, and police and fire alarms). 
(i)  Moving equipment. In addition to company's obligation to move equipment at its cost per the request of city, company shall, upon reasonable prior written notice by city or any person holding a permit issued by city to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move equipment to the extent commercially reasonable permit the moving of said structure. Company may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than city for any such movement of its equipment. 
(j)  Emergencies. Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the city of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. If city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(k)  Disasters. City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster, or other emergency, as determined by city in its reasonable sole discretion, cut or move equipment, in which event city shall not incur any liability to company, any affiliated person or any other person. When possible, company shall be consulted prior to any such cutting or movement of equipment and be given the opportunity to perform such work itself. All costs to repair or replace such equipment shall be borne by company. City shall use reasonable efforts to avoid any disruption to company's services or equipment. 
(l)  Oversight and inspection. City may with reasonable notice, oversee, regulate and inspect installation, technical operation, upgrade, repair and removal of equipment per this article and applicable law and regulations. By such oversight and inspection, city does not take on any joint partner role or any similar liability or responsibility. 
(m)  Approvals. Company shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals necessary before installing, operating, upgrading, repairing, and removing equipment, and following completion of installation, company shall provide city with updated as built maps of the utility system. Any fees that city charges to issue permits or approvals shall not be offset against the compensation that company is required to pay to city. 
(n)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a permit or a written approval of registration does not surrender or lose, waive, impair, or lessen the powers and rights vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, Georgia and City Charter, and under the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-81. - Non-exclusivity; non-liability. 
(a)  Nothing in this article affects the right of city to occupy and use the streets to install, operate, upgrade, repair and remove equipment for any services, or to engage in any other activity in the streets. Nothing herein abrogates the right of city to perform any public works or improvements. If the equipment interferes with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of such public works or improvements, company, at its expense, shall promptly, following reasonable written notice from city, take action to protect, alter or permanently relocate equipment, as requested by city. 
(b)  City and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall not have any liability to company for any damage as a result of or in connection with such public works or public improvements. The foregoing provision freeing city and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors from liability pursuant to this section shall not apply to acts of gross negligence or willful misconduct or to damages caused by violations by city or its officers, employees, agents, consultants or independent contractors of O.C.G.A. ch. 25-9, relating to notification prior to and excavation near underground utilities, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-82. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
Company shall, in connection with protection of health and safety of the public, be subject to the lawful exercise of the police power by city and to such regulations governing public ways as city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance promulgate. Every installation by company shall be in accordance with the applicable codes then in force in city. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-83. - Company liability—Indemnification. 
Company, as an indemnifying party, shall hold city harmless from all loss sustained by city, on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand, resulting from negligence on the part of company in construction, operation, or maintenance of the system. If any claim or action is brought against city for which company might be liable as an indemnifying party, city shall promptly give notice to company of such and a description of the source and nature thereof. On notice of any claim or action within the scope of this section, company shall have the obligation to negotiate a settlement or compromise (such being subject to the approval of city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld) of any such claim or action, or to defend actions instituted at the sole cost and expense of company. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-84. - Conditions on street use. 
(a)  Use. Company shall, subject to the permitting process herein, reasonably determine the number and location of all transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment for proper operation of the system on the public ways, and company shall locate such system as is reasonable under the circumstances to prevent interference with the proper use of public ways. City shall not grant any request for any use or occupancy of public ways in proximity to the system that would conflict with company's use or occupancy herein permitted or take any action that would be inconsistent with or adverse to company's use or occupancy of the system. Company shall not interfere with the technical operation of any other utility system within the corporate limits of city, and such interference would be a material violation hereof. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance by company of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing of city, company shall at its own cost and expense, replace and restore all sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, to as good a condition as before said work was commenced. 
(c)  Relocation. If city in its governmental capacity shall lawfully alter or change its public ways, company, as reasonably necessary to maintain its system, and on reasonable notice by city, shall at company's expense relocate or adjust its poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, or other fixes. Company shall not be liable for any expense incurred by it if company is required to adjust or relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other telephone fixtures, where such alteration is made necessary by actions of a third party other than city. 
(d)  Temporary removal of lines for building moving. Company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by city, temporarily raise or lower or move its lines to permit moving of buildings. The expense of such shall be paid by the person requesting the same, except where the person is the city, and company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. Company shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes unless there is an emergency. 
(e)  Utility pole and use rental. Company shall have the right to use utility poles erected by city upon obtaining prior permission from mayor and council, or their designate. 
(f)  Tree trimming. Company may, under the general oversight of city after written permission, trim trees on and overhanging public ways, but only to the extent reasonably necessary to prevent branches of trees from interfering with lines, cables or facilities of company. City does not take on any joint partner role or any similar liability or responsibility. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-85. - Inspection. 
City shall have the right to inspect all work performed by company on, along, in, or across any of the public ways of city to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations of city and any pertinent ordinances governing installations which affect, or might affect, such public ways. Company shall maintain its system in good operating condition at all times. An exception to this condition is automatically in effect when service furnished by company is interrupted, impaired, or prevented by fires, strikes, riots or other occurrences beyond the control of company, or by storms, floods, or other casualties, in any of which events company shall do all things reasonably within its power to restore normal service. By such inspection, city does not take on any joint partner role or any similar liability or responsibility. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-86. - Violation. 
(a)  An event of violation shall include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following acts or failures to act by company, or by any employees, contractors, subcontractors, consultants, agents or representatives of company, or, to the extent applicable, to any affiliated person: 
(1)  Any substantial failure to comply with any material violation of this article that is not cured within 45 days after written notice pursuant hereto; or if such substantial noncompliance, by its nature, cannot be cured within 45 days, if company has not, within 45 days after written notice, initiated reasonable steps to remedy such and notified city of the steps being taken and the projected date of such compliance; 
(2)  The condemnation by a public authority other than city, or sale or dedication under threat or in lieu of condemnation, of all or any part of the utility system, the effect of which would materially frustrate or impede the ability of company to carry out its obligations, and the purposes of this article; 
(3)  Company's suspension or discontinuing of its business; 
(4)  Any denial, forfeiture or revocation by any federal, state or local governmental authority of any authorization required by law or the expiration without renewal of any such authorization, and such either individually or in the aggregate, materially jeopardize company's ability to operate the utility system in the franchise area; or 
(5)  A persistent failure by company, or by any employee, contractor, subcontractor, consultant, agent or representative of company, to comply with any of the material provisions, terms or conditions of this article after company has received notice of a failure to comply and has been given a reasonable opportunity to cure. 
(b)  Upon the occurrence of an event of violation, city may: 
(1)  Require company to take such actions as city deems reasonably appropriate under the circumstances; 
(2)  Prosecute the company in court for a violation of any provision of this chapter, to be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits, and/or the city may; 
(3)  Impose a penalty on company for such event of violation, as outlined below. 
(c)  City shall exercise option (b)(1) above per the procedures below: 
(1)  City shall notify company, in writing, of an alleged event of violation, which notice shall specify the alleged event of violation with reasonable particularity. Company shall, within ten days after receipt of such notice, or such longer period of time as city may specify in such notice, either: 
a.  Cure such alleged event of violation; or 
b.  In a written response to city, either: 
1.  Present facts and arguments refuting such alleged event of violation; or 
2.  State that such alleged event of violation will be cured and set forth the method and time schedule for accomplishing such cure. 
(2)  After receiving company's response to the notice, city shall determine: 
a.  Whether an event of violation has occurred; 
b.  Whether such event of violation is excusable; and 
c.  Whether such event of violation has been cured or will be cured by company. 
If company does not respond to city's notice, then city may conclude that an event of violation has occurred, and that such event of violation is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by company in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to city, and city may then issue a written order, detailing its findings and the action to be taken, and company may appeal such order. 
(3)  If, after receiving company's response to city's written notice, city determines an event of violation has occurred and that such event of violation is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by company in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to city, then city shall provide notice of such to company. 
(4)  If city's governing body determines that there is an event of violation, then company may within ten days in writing request a public hearing, to take place not less more 45 days from the request. At the hearing, company may state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses. 
(5)  If city after the public hearing upholds the finding that an event of violation occurred, and such event of violation will not be cured in a manner and per a schedule reasonably satisfactory to city's governing body, and that such event of violation is not excusable, then city will issue a written order, detailing its findings and the action to be taken. 
(6)  Company may within 30 days seek certiorari to the superior court, which shall review the decision of city non-de novo. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-87. - Penalty. 
If any of the following events occur and are not remedied within 30 days after company's receipt of written notice thereof, city, at its discretion, may impose a penalty on company up to a maximum of $200.00 per occurrence, per day, commencing with the 31st day after company's receipt of the aforesaid written notice, which amount shall be in addition to any other remedies available to city under this article and any other laws, agreements and regulations: 
(1)  Equipment is installed, operated, upgraded, repaired or removed in the streets without appropriate permits and other regulatory approvals obtained from city, as required hereby. 
(2)  Sidewalks, streets, railways or other traffic to, from or within the city is/are obstructed by company, its officers, employees, agents or contractors without permission having been obtained from city, as required hereby. 
(3)  Structures in the streets are altered by company, its officers, employees, agents or contractors without city approval or are not protected, as required hereby. 
(4)  Failure to provide information required hereby or which city may reasonably require in the oversight and regulation of the installation, operation, upgrade, repair and removal of equipment. 
(5)  Failure to secure or maintain liability insurance as required hereby. 
(6)  Failure to secure or maintain the performance bond as required hereby. 
Each of the foregoing failures may result in injuries to city and its residents, businesses and institutions. Such penalties shall be without prejudice to any other remedies available to city to the extent permitted by law. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-88. - Termination of services. 
Upon termination of services in city by company, city may issue a removal order directing company to remove, at company's sole cost and expense, all or any portion of the utility system, subject to the following: 
(1)  In removing the utility system, or any part thereof, company shall, at its own expense, refill and compact any excavation it makes, and shall leave the streets and other property, including utility cables, wires and attachments, in as good condition as that prevailing immediately prior to company's removal of the utility system; 
(2)  The liability insurance and indemnity provisions hereof remain in full force and effect during the period in which the utility system is being removed and the associated repairs to the streets and other property are being made; and 
(3)  If, in the reasonable judgment of city, company fails to substantially complete removal, including repair of the streets and other property, within 12 months of city's issuance of a removal order, city may: 
a.  Authorize removal of the utility system, at company's cost, by another person; and/or 
b.  Declare all rights, title and interest to the utility system belong to city, including any portion of the utility system not designated for removal, without compensation to company. 
(4)  Alternatively, company may submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility does so, city may do one or more of the following: 
a.  Purchase the facilities; 
b.  Accept donation of some or all facilities; or 
c.  Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(5)  Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Amd. of 3-12-2012, which intended to add § 82-89 entitled "Payment to city," has been currently reserved at the discretion of the city clerk and city attorney. 
Sec. 82-90. - Partial invalidity and repeal provision. 
If any section, sentence, or clause of this article is held illegal, ultra vires, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof if the invalidity does not substantially alter the meaning thereof. All ordinances and agreements and parts of ordinances and agreements in conflict herewith are repealed. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-91. - Liability and insurance. 
Company shall maintain a liability insurance policy, in a form reasonably acceptable to city, together with evidence thereof reasonably acceptable to city. City and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees (through appropriate endorsements if necessary) shall be named as additional insureds to the extent of the liabilities assumed by company under this article. Company shall provide such insurance in the minimum combined amount of $3,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage. 
The liability insurance policy shall be maintained throughout any period of time during which company operates or is engaged in the removal of equipment. Each such liability insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 60 days after receipt by City, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew." Within 30 days after receipt by city of said notice, and in no event later than 15 days prior to said cancellation, company shall obtain and furnish to city replacement insurance policies in a form reasonably acceptable to city. 
The legal liability of company to city and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the liability insurance policy, including without limitation, company's indemnification obligations herein, shall not be limited by such insurance policies nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder, except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payment by company. Company shall: 
(1)  At its own cost and expense, replace, repair or restore any damaged property substantially to its prior condition; and 
(2)  Pay damages determined to be due per any claim against company for any injury to or death of any person caused by any act or failure to act of company, or any officer, employee, agent or contractor of company, in connection with the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment or the provision of services through the equipment. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit any recovery to which a person may otherwise be entitled, nor shall anything herein be deemed an admission of liability on the part of company. 
City and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall have no liability to company, any affiliated person or any other person for any special, incidental, consequential, punitive, or other damages as a result of the exercise of any right of city per this article or applicable law. Nothing herein shall be deemed an admission of liability by city nor be interpreted to waive any protection for city against liability under the law. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 82-92. - Miscellaneous. 
The preamble to this ordinance is incorporated into this article as if set out fully herein. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, or clauses of this article are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be declared illegal by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such illegality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this article. All parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. The effective date of this article is March 12, 2012. All notices shall be in writing and shall be sufficiently given and served upon the other party by first class mail, registered or certified, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, or via facsimile (with confirmation of transmission). 
(Amd. of 3-12-2012) 
Chapter 86 - VEGETATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 90. 

Sec. 86-1. - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
The city council finds that the city is blessed with a diverse and abundant cover of trees and vegetation which is of general aesthetic value to the city. This ecological diversity makes the city a desirable place for residents and visitors alike. The appearance of the city from the public ways contributes ecologically and aesthetically to the economic prosperity of the city and demonstrates pride in its natural heritage. However, the growth and development of the city oftentimes requires the removal of trees and other plant material, thereby contributing to the depletion of a most valuable natural resource. Therefore, it is necessary to protect, preserve and restore this valuable asset; and the city council declares the purposes and intent of this article to be as follows: 
(1)  To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration and carbon dioxide reduction, and stormwater runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement. 
(2)  Prevent reductions in the drainage holding capacity of land. 
(3)  Prevent soil erosion. 
(4)  Prevent streams, ditches and other waterways from silting. 
(5)  Maintain moderate temperature extremes with natural tree cover. 
(6)  Maintain moisture levels in the air. 
(7)  Minimize noise and glare. 
(8)  To provide a habitat for living things that might not otherwise live or survive in urban and suburban environs. 
(9)  To encourage the preservation of existing trees and vegetation. 
(10)  To provide visual buffering and enhance the beauty of the city. 
(11)  To safeguard and enhance property values, thereby protecting public and private investments. 
(12)  To preserve the unique identity and environment of the city. 
(13)  To conserve energy and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(A)) 
Sec. 86-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arborist means a specialist in the care and maintenance of trees. 
Buffer means any visual buffer or screening. 
Buildable area means that portion of a lot on which a structure or improvements may be erected according to current zoning requirements. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that encloses a space and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature or as further defined in the building codes of the city. 
Building official means the individual appointed by the city to enforce its building and zoning ordinances and regulations. 
Caliper means tree trunk diameter measured at a point six inches above ground level. (Acceptable diameter is within 0.5 inch of caliper in the table, unless caliper is two inches or less, in which case diameter must be within -0.25, +0.5 inch.) 
Canopy dripline means a vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree's branch tips down to the ground. 
Cover area means that area which falls within the dripline of any tree. 
Critical root zone means the land area circular in shape and centered on the trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is defined by the farthest canopy dripline. 
dbh means diameter-at-breast-height, which is the tree trunk diameter (in inches) at a height of 4½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4½ feet, then each trunk is measured as a separate tree. 
Destroy means any intentional or negligent act which will cause a tree to decline and die within a period of two years, including but not limited to such damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree by the application of toxic substances, the operation of heavy machinery, the change of natural grade by excavation or filling the covered area or around the trunk of a tree, and damages from injury or from fire inflicted on trees which result in or permit pest infestation. 
Developed property means property upon which a building, structure, pavement or other improvements have been placed. 
Development area means, under an approved tree protection plan, the portion of a tract exempted from the tree protection zone; consisting of the area to be occupied by buildings, the area to be occupied by unenclosed accessory uses, and the area necessary to meet minimum parking requirements. 
Exceptional tree means any tree determined by the mayor and council to be of notable historic interest, high aesthetic value, or of unique character because of species, type, age or size. 
Green space means any area retained as permeable unpaved ground and dedicated to supporting vegetation. 
Height means the height of mature specimens under favorable growing conditions. (If expressed as a range, the midpoint of the range is the average height and the bottom of the range is the minimum height.) 
Historic tree means a tree which has been determined to be of notable historic interest because of its age, size or historic association and has been so designed in the official records of the city. 
Pine means a tree of the family Pinaceae, genus Pinus. 
Public utility means any publicly, privately or cooperatively owned line, facility or system for producing, transmitting or distributing communications, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, steam, clay, waste, stormwater not connected with highway drainage and other similar services and commodities, including publicly owned fire, police, traffic signals and lighting systems, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part of the public. 
Shade tree means a broad-leaf tree having an average height at maturity of at least 20 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with pyramidal, conical or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
Specimen tree means any tree in fair or better condition which: 
(1)  Equals or exceeds the following diameter sizes (except as provided in subsection (2) of this definition): 
a.  Large hardwoods, e.g., oaks, hickories, yellow poplars; 30 inches dbh; 
b.  Large softwoods, e.g., pines, deodar cedars, 36 inches dbh; 
c.  Small trees, e.g., dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, 12 inches dbh; 
(2)  Meets the following minimum standards: 
a.  Life expectancy of greater than 15 years; 
b.  A relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow, and less than 20 percent radial trunk dieback; 
c.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only); 
d.  No major insect or pathological problem; 
e.  If lesser sized, is a rare or unusual species or of historical significance; 
f.  If lesser sized, is specifically used by a builder, developer or design professional as a focal point in a project or landscape; 
g.  Has been designated in the official records of the city. 
Specimen tree stand means a contiguous grouping of trees which is of high value because it is a: 
(1)  Relatively mature, even-aged stand; 
(2)  Stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature; 
(3)  Stand of historical significance; or 
(4)  Stand with exceptional aesthetic qualities. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches, which has a trunk diameter of two inches or more measured at a point six inches above ground level and which normally attains a height of at least ten feet at maturity. 
Tree establishment plan means a map and supporting documentations which describes for a particular site where trees are to be planted in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the types of trees, and their corresponding tree quality points. 
Tree, large, means a tree with a height at maturity of 40 feet or more. 
Tree protection plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where existing trees are to be retained in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the types of trees, and their corresponding tree quality points. 
Tree protection zone means the area surrounding a preserved or planted tree that is essential to that tree's health and survival, and is protected within the guidelines of this chapter. 
Tree replacement plan means a plan indicating the location, size, quantity and species of replacement trees. 
Tree, small, means a tree with a height at maturity of not more than 40 feet. 
Undeveloped property means property upon which no building, structure, pavement or other improvements have been placed. 
Yard area means an open space which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, with the exception of trees and other natural vegetation, on the same lot with a building. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(B)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-3. - Tree board established. 
There is created and established a city tree board, which shall consist of seven members. Members shall be residents of the city, though one member may be a nonresident with professional expertise in arboriculture or horticulture. They shall be appointed by the mayor and city council and shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(C)) 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards, commissions and committees, § 2-141 et seq. 
Sec. 86-4. - Term of office of tree board members. 
Each member of the city tree board shall serve for three years, with the exception of the members of the first board, which shall have three members serving for only one year, three members serving for two years, with only one original member serving a full three-year term. If a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. The chairman of the tree board shall recommend to the mayor and city council a replacement of members for the nonperformance of duties. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(D)) 
Sec. 86-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article provides full power and authority over all trees located within street rights-of-way, parks and public places of the city, and to trees located on private property except as otherwise noted in this section. 
(b)  The tree protection zone shall correspond to the entirety of a tract of land for which no tree protection plan has been approved. After such approval, the tree protection zone shall correspond to that part of a tract of land designated as a tree protection area in the plan. 
(c)  This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Tracts of land for which the zoning ordinance imposes no yard requirements and permits 100 percent coverage of the lot by buildings. 
(2)  Property occupied by single-family dwelling, unless nonresidential uses or additional dwelling units are proposed for such property or construction, paving or other activity on the property will damage trees on the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Property containing at least five acres in areas zoned industrial according to the latest zoning atlas of the city. 
(4)  Property upon which is located improvements in the amount of at least $50,000.00, and the owner of the property is not increasing the value of the improvements by more than 50 percent. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(E)) 
Sec. 86-6. - Tree protection plan. 
(a)  Protective measures. In the tree protection zone, protective measures shall be applied to the aboveground portion of a tree and to roots within the critical root zone, as follows: 
(1)  Damage prohibited. No person shall: 
a.  Cut, carve, transplant, or otherwise damage or remove any tree; 
b.  Attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any trees; 
c.  Allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to trees (such as concrete washout, fuel, lubricants, herbicides, paint) to come in contact with them; or 
d.  Set a fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat of the fire will injure any portion of any tree. 
(2)  Fence required. During excavation, filling, construction or demolition operations, each tree or stand of trees shall be protected against damage to bark, roots and low-hanging branches with a fence enclosing the critical root zone (four feet high, two-inch by four-inch posts; with double one-inch by four-inch rails, plastic construction area fencing, or 12-gauge two-inch by four-inch wire mesh). "Tree save area" signs shall be posted on all sides of the fenced area. 
(3)  Compaction prohibited. All buildings materials, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt, debris or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or aboveground damage shall be kept outside the critical root zone. Where a limited amount of encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the building official, the critical root zone shall first be mulched with a four-inch layer of processed pine bark or wood chips or a six-inch layer of pine straw. 
(4)  Grade changes prohibited. There shall be no raising or lowering of the ground level within the critical root zone. Stripping of topsoil in the critical root zone shall not be permitted. Where necessary, the use of moderate fill is permitted only with prior installation of an aeration system approved by the building official. Deposition of sediment in the critical root zone shall be prevented by placement of sediment barriers, which shall be backed by two-inch by four-inch wire mesh in areas of steep slope. 
(5)  Ditches, trenches prohibited. No person shall excavate any ditch, tunnel or trench within the critical root zone. Where such encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the building official, tunneling rather than trenching shall be used. If roots must be cut, root pruning procedures approved by the building official must be employed. 
(6)  Paving prohibited. No person shall pave with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within the critical root zone. 
(b)  Plan required; contents. A proposal for development or improvement of any tract of land shall include a tree protection plan, including trees to be planted in order to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter. The tree protection plan may be included in the soil erosion and sediment control plan; see chapter 38. Such plan shall be submitted to the building official prior to any grading, bulldozing or other removal of the existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage. The plan shall show the following: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the owner of record and the applicant. 
(2)  Boundary lines of the tract by lengths and bearings, streets adjoining the property, total area of the tract, north point, graphic scale and date. 
(3)  All existing specimen trees, including those to be removed, and all other trees ten inches dbh or greater which will remain on the site and be protected during construction; and trees less than ten inches dbh which are submitted for credit under subsection (b)(6) of this section. The owner of the property shall indicate the common and botanical names and the size of each tree. In heavily wooded areas that will not be disturbed, the site plan may show only the boundaries of each stand of trees and a list of the number, size and species of ten inches dbh or large trees in each stand. 
(4)  Locations of proposed buildings, structures and paved areas. 
(5)  Locations of all utility lines. Utility lines must be placed along corridors between critical root zones of trees which will remain on the site. 
(6)  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading and trenching. 
(7)  Limits of tree protection areas, showing trees to be maintained and planted, specifying species and size. 
(8)  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a tree which would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
(9)  Planting schedule. 
(c)  Determination of site density factor. The minimum required quantity of trees on a site after development must produce a total site density factor (sdf) of 25 units per acre. The site density factor is determined as follows: sdf = (total site area, in acres) × 25. The number of new trees to be planted is determined as follows: 
(1)  Using table 1, calculate the existing density factor (edf) of trees ten inches dbh or greater which will remain on the site and be protected during construction. Existing trees less than ten inches dbh but at least two inches dbh may be counted as 0.5 unit each, provided such trees have grown in uncrowded conditions and have developed normal spread or such trees are part of a specimen tree stand. (Add together the individual units for each tree to get the edf.) 
Table 1. Conversion From dbh to Existing Density Factor 

 
(2)  To calculate the replacement density factor (rdf), subtract the edf from the sdf. 
rdf = sdf - edf 
Table 2. Conversion From dbh or Caliper to Replacement 
Density Factor 

 
The unit value of specimen trees shall be 20 percent greater than table value. 
(d)  Application of density factors to the plan. 
(1)  Required planting areas shall be as follows: 
a.  1.  The tree protection zone shall include at least strips of the following depths adjacent to property lines (plus strips required by buffer or landscape requirements elsewhere in this chapter), permitting only the encroachment of driveways necessary to serve the property: 

 
2.  No tree shall be planted closer to a building foundation or water, sewer, electrical or natural gas line than as follows: 
i.  For a mature small tree, five feet. 
ii.  For a mature medium tree, ten feet. 
iii.  For a mature large tree, 15 feet. 
3.  No tree shall be planted under overhead utility distribution lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater than the lowest overhead wire. 
b.  Landscape islands shall be provided within parking areas of six or more spaces, but shall not be required within vehicle storage or display areas. 
1.  The total area of all islands shall comprise at least five percent of parking lot area in commercial and residential zoning districts or three percent of parking lot area in industrial zoning district; plus one percent of other vehicle use area on the property (such as loading, storage or display areas). 
2.  Each island shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet. It shall be so shaped that a five-foot-diameter circle will fit within the island. No portion of an island less than three feet in width may be counted in the area. 
3.  Landscape islands shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving. 
4.  Vehicles may overhang a landscape island provided the island is at least 3.5 feet in depth per abutting parking space, at least five feet in depth overall, and protected by wheel stops or curbing. Two feet of the landscaped area may count as part of the required depth of each abutting parking space. 
(2)  Distribution of trees shall be as follows: 
a.  At least one shade tree shall be planted in each required landscape island, and at least one tree shall be planted for every 30 linear feet of length in each required planting strip. 
b.  Where trees must be added to achieve the total density factor (sdf), such additions shall be made between the street and the front of the building until such additions comprise at least half the total density factor (sdf). 
(3)  Existing trees in excess of the sdf shall be as follows: Existing trees which are in excess of the minimum total density factor (sdf) requirement but are outside the development area shall not be removed unless adjacent development would cause irreparable damage to the critical root zones. 
(4)  Criteria for replacement trees shall be as follows: 
a.  Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site. 
b.  The species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. 
c.  The trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to those removed. 
d.  Preference shall be given to specimens of no more than three inches dbh. 
e.  Authority for questions of tree characteristics shall be Elbert L. Little, The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Trees: Eastern Region (New York: Alfred A. Knopk, 1980); Barbara Ferguson, ed., All About Trees (San Francisco: Ortho Books, 1982); publications of the state forestry commission; publications of the cooperative extension service of the University of Georgia College of Agriculture; or other authority acceptable to the city. 
(5)  For specimen and nonspecimen trees, emphasis shall be given to the preservation of specimen trees, even isolated individual trees, over retention of other trees. Nonspecimen trees, however, should be saved in stands rather than as individual trees scattered over a site. 
(6)  Where the proposed development area is so large that the minimum total density factor (sdf) cannot be achieved, the development area shall be reduced by removing parking spaces in excess of the minimum required, placing additional planting islands within the development area, or reducing the area to be occupied by buildings. 
(7)  The property owner shall maintain trees on the property in accordance with this article and the approved plan, including replacing trees which die or are irreparably damaged. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(F)) 
Sec. 86-7. - Easement. 
The mayor and city council are authorized to enter into agreements with the owners of private property located within the city for the purpose of acquiring easements to plant trees on such property, in consideration for which the private property owner shall acquire ownership of such trees as the city may plant; however, any such agreement shall limit the duration of the easement to a time period of two years and shall limit the property interest acquired by the city to that distance sufficient to allow the planting of trees, in no case to exceed a maximum of a 15-foot setback from the property line or right-of-way held by the city. Under such agreement the private property owner shall agree to maintain the trees planted on his property and shall also agree to hold the city harmless for any liability attributable to the planting or presence of the trees on the private property. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(G)) 
Sec. 86-8. - Permits. 
(a)  A permit shall be required to remove or cause the death of existing trees located within the tree protection zone, or for grading or other work adjacent to a tree which would affect it adversely. An approved tree protection plan is required for issuance of a permit. 
(b)  Exceptions to permit requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Permits are not required by public utility companies and government agencies for the conduct of operations having the purpose of assuring uninterrupted utility and governmental services and unobstructed passage on public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Permit requirements are waived where the building official determines that trees to be removed are dead or have been damaged by lightning, wind, ice or other disasters to the extent that public safety is endangered. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(H)) 
Sec. 86-9. - Enforcement. 
The city manager shall have the power to promulgate and enforce rules, regulations and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees upon the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the city and in areas described in the tree protection zone as set down under section 86-5. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(I)) 
Sec. 86-10. - Penalties, claims and appeals. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to provisions of this chapter, upon being found guilty of a violation, shall be subject to section 1-12. Each day during which any violation of the provisions of this section shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. 
(2)  If as the result of the violation of any provision of this article the injury, mutilation or death of a tree located on city-owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs, and Evergreens, as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(b)  Assessment of claim. If a nuisance (down trees) is not abated by the date specified in the notice, the city manager is authorized to cause the abatement of the nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement shall be filed as a lien against the property on which the nuisance was located. In addition, the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was located shall be subject to prosecution. 
(c)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any action of the city manager or the tree board may appeal such recommendation to the mayor and city council. The appeal must be filed with the city clerk within 30 days after the decision is rendered. The city may approve, modify or reject the decision made by the city manager or tree board if the mayor and council finds that the city manager or the tree board abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city made pursuant to this subsection may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law from convictions for municipal ordinance violations. 
(Code 1991, § 27-108(J)) 
Sec. 86-11. - Harvesting and selective cutting of trees. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. To provide for the regulation of such activity to ensure: 
(1)  That the right to harvest trees is exercised with due regard for the protection of the physical property of adjacent landowners; and 
(2)  That the potential for negative environmental and aesthetic impacts resulting from improper tree harvesting and wholesale cutting of trees is minimized. 
(3)  That in accordance with agricultural and forestry practices, to provide for alternative regulations in this section for legitimate tree harvesting and selecting cutting operations. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words are defined as they are used in this section: 
Tree harvesting plan: A written description with a map of a specific logging operation prepared before the operation commences. 
Operator: The individual, partnership, company, firm, association or corporation engaged in the harvest of timber, including his agents or subcontractors or employees. 
Owner: The individual, partnership, company, firm, association or corporation which holds title to standing timber and to the land on which it is situated, including his agents or subcontractor or employees. 
Perimeter buffer: A defined setback from the property line in which no cutting of any tree or vegetation shall occur in order to mitigate visual and other negative impacts associated with tree harvesting and selective cutting practices. 
Tree harvesting (also timber harvesting/logging): As an agricultural practice, the wholesale removal and cutting down of trees and logs to be converted to any forest product or for sale to others or for any other reason. 
Selective cutting: The selective removal and cutting down of trees and logs for the improvement of forest health as a best management practice. 
(c)  Applicability. The provisions and requirements of this section shall apply to all tree harvesting and selective cutting operations on properties with more than three acres except those properties exempt from the tree ordinance under section 86-5. Properties with fewer than three acres shall remain subject to all other sections of the tree ordinance. 
(d)  Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of each operator and landowner on whose land tree harvesting or selective cutting of trees is to be carried out to develop or have developed the tree harvesting plan, and submit notification and said plan as required in this section. It shall be the joint responsibility of the landowner and the operator to see that they carry out the provisions of the tree harvesting plan, and both shall be subject to penalty for violations of said plan. 
(e)  Regulations. 
(1)  Tree harvesting. Full removal of the mature timber shall be permitted for properties locally registered in the Georgia Current Use Valuation Act (CUVA) program, provided that a perimeter buffer of no less than 50 feet is retained. 
(2)  Selective cutting. Selective cutting shall occur only when basal area reaches 120 or higher, allowing a reduction of basal area to no less than 60 basal area, provided that a perimeter buffer of no less than 25 feet be retained. 
(f)  Tree harvesting plan requirements. 
(1)  Points that shall be addressed by the tree harvesting plan include: 
a.  The number, percentage, location, and species of trees four inches or more in diameter measured at four and one-half feet above ground level to be cut. 
b.  The location of property boundaries and adjoining property owners for the tract on which the logging will take place and the boundaries of the proposed harvest area. 
c.  The location of all: i) cemeteries; ii) streams, wetlands and drainage ways; iii) sensitive slopes and iv) buffers as may be required by other local ordinances within and immediately adjacent to the timber harvest area. 
d.  Other information as can be reasonably requested by staff. 
(2)  The tree harvesting plan shall contain a representation under signature of the operator that he will comply with all provisions of the ordinance and maintain erosion and sedimentation controls until all disturbed areas are re-vegetated. 
(3)  A letter from the owner authorizing the operator to conduct lumber operations on the property. 
(4)  Submission of a plan prior to the start of operations is required for a permit to be issued. Plans shall be reviewed by the planning department within 30 days of submittal, and plans in compliance with this section of the tree ordinance shall be issued a permit. 
(g)  Permit. 
(1)  No operator shall begin any timber harvesting operation in the City of Madison without first securing a timbering permit, except as exempted there from in subsection 86-11(c) above. 
(2)  The zoning enforcement officer shall promptly issue a permit upon submission of a complete application consisting of: 
a.  Tree harvesting plan as specified in subsection 86-11(f). 
b.  Payment of a permit fee in the following amount within six months following notification by the zoning enforcement officer of acceptance of the application: 
c.  A fee of $100.00 for every property ten acres or less. 
d.  An additional $5.00 per acre permit fee for all property over ten acres. 
(3)  Permits shall be effective for a period of 12 months from issuance. 
(4)  All properties and operations subject to this section shall be subject to inspection prior to, during, and subsequent to tree harvesting and selective cutting to insure compliance with the tree harvesting plan. For inspections to ensure compliance with section 86-11, the City of Madison shall utilize a registered forester, specifically with the Georgia Forestry Commission if available. 
(h)  Violations. 
(1)  Moratorium. In the event of violation of the requirements of this section during a tree harvesting or selective cutting operation, the landowner or operator shall be subject to a three-year moratorium on the issuance of any permit for development activity (e.g., land disturbance permits, building permits, site plan review, etc.). This penalty shall be in addition to, and be applied to commence immediately after, any moratorium or penalty resulting from a violation of state or local laws and regulations protecting a natural resource (i.e., streams, wetlands, cemeteries, etc.). 
(2)  Planting requirement. Post-moratorium, the property owner shall also be responsible for planting of the trees on the property meeting the minimum site density requirement established in subsection 86-6(c), using trees of at least 2.0 caliper. Such replanting shall occur during the next planting season (December through March). In instances where a tree harvesting plan has been filed and approved in accordance with subsection [86-]11(f), the property owner shall have the option to replant in accordance with said plan prior to the end of the moratorium. 
(3)  Penalties. In the event that the property owner fails to comply with the planting requirement within 60 days following notice by the city, each day that work is not initiated to meet the planting requirement regarding the minimum site density constitutes a separate violation and is subject to the penalties set forth for such violations as provided for in section 1-12. 
(4)  Operator penalty. Any operator retained by a property owner who violates a provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth for such violations as provided for in section 1-12. 
(Amd. of 2-8-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 90 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-7(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; historic preservation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; vegetation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

Sec. 90-1. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
The city's zoning ordinance and zoning map adopted March 28, 2011, as amended, are by this reference incorporated in and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full in this chapter. 
(Amend. 1-12-2015, § 2(Exh. B) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1991 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1991 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1991 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1991 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1991 Code. 

 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 