THE CODE OF THE CITY OF OAKWOOD, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
OAKWOOD, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
H. Lamar Scroggs 
Mayor 
____________ 
Sam Evans, Post 1 
Ron McFarland, Post 2 
Gary Anderson, Post 3 
Martha Collins, Post 4 
Montie Robinson, Sr., Post 5 
City Council 
____________ 
Stan Brown 
City Manager 
____________ 
Patti J. Doss-Luna 
Assistant City Manager 
____________ 
Donald T. Hunt 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Tangee Puckett 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Oakwood, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances provided by the city, as updated through March 9, 2009. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Michael E. Raabe, Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Patti J. Doss-Luna, Acting City Manager, and Donald T. Hunt, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Oakwood, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Oakwood, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Oakwood, Georgia. 2009. 
FIRST READING: 09-14-2009 
PUBLIC HEARING: 10/12/2009 
FINAL READING: 10/12/2009 
AN ORDINANCE  NO. 646 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF OAKWOOD, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
WHEREAS, the City of Oakwood, Georgia has undertaken a review of its ordinances and determined it to be in the best interest of the citizens of the City of Oakwood, Georgia to codify said ordinances for reference thereto, and 
WHEREAS, the said ordinances have been compiled and codified by the City of Oakwood with the assistance of Municipal Code Corporation of Tallahassee, Florida into one cohesive code which shall be known as "The Code of the City of Oakwood, Georgia", a copy of which is maintained by the City Clerk for the City of Oakwood and is incorporated herein by reference thereto; 
NOW THEREFORE, THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OAKWOOD, GEORGIA HEREBY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Oakwood, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 54, each inclusive, is adopted with the following amendment to Chapter 2, Section 2-6 entitled "Per diem pay" being deleted in its entirety and the following is substituted in lieu thereof: 
Sec. 2-6. Per diem pay. 
The mayor and members of the city council shall be entitled to a per diem pay of $50.00 per meeting (maximum of 10 meetings per month) for attendance at meetings other than regular and special meetings of the city council. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 9, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine as set forth in Chapter 22 of this Code. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City of Oakwood, Georgia may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City of Oakwood, Georgia to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after March 9, 2009 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective October 12, 2009 upon approval by the Mayor of the City of Oakwood or in accordance with the provisions of the 2007 Oakwood City Charter. 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Oakwood, Georgia Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Oakwood, Georgia, as adopted on May 29, 2007, by 2007 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 298), page 4162. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "City of Oakwood" and by that name shall have perpetual succession. The city may sue and be sued and plead and be impleaded in all courts of law and equity and in all actions whatsoever; and the city may have and use a common seal. 
Sec. 1.02. - Corporate boundaries. 
The corporate boundaries of the City of Oakwood shall be those existing on December 5, 2006. The city manager shall maintain a current map of the corporate boundaries of the city, and such map shall incorporate any changes that may hereafter be made from time to time in the manner provided by law, inclusive of all changes made subsequent to December 5, 2006, pursuant to Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. tit. 36]. 
Sec. 1.03. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades to the extent permitted by general law; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 48] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the city council, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 22] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of storm water, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Ethics. To adopt ethics ordinances and regulations governing the conduct of municipal elected officials, appointed officials and employees, establishing procedures for ethics complaints, and setting forth penalties for violations of such rules and procedures; 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(12)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property that is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(16)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(17)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(18)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(19)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(20)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(21)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, storm-water management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(22)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(26)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, and to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 22] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on, public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(34)  Security, welfare, and convenience. To make, ordain, and establish bylaws, ordinances, rules, and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(35)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(36)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(37)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune-telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(38)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(39)  Taxes—Ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(40)  Taxes—Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(41)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(42)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(43)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and any listing of particular powers in this Charter shall not be held to be exclusive of others or restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority, generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a). 
Sec. 1.04. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.01. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of the City of Oakwood, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The city council established in this Charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city. The City of Oakwood shall consist of one election district with five numbered posts designated as Posts 1 through 5, respectively. Persons seeking election to the city council shall select the post for which they offer as candidate. 
(c)  No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the area comprising the corporate limits of the City of Oakwood for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of the election for mayor or councilmember, shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service, and shall continue to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Oakwood. 
(d)  General municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2007 and biennially thereafter. 
(e)  (1)  The councilmembers representing Posts 3, 4, and 5 shall be elected at the general municipal election in 2007 and quadrennially thereafter. 
(2)  The mayor and the councilmembers representing Posts 1 and 2 shall be elected at the general municipal election in 2009 and quadrennially thereafter. 
(f)  The mayor and councilmembers shall take office as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 21-2-541.1 and serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
Sec. 2.02. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 45], or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election if such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office. If such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the mayor shall nominate and the city council shall confirm a successor for the remainder of the term. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor or any councilmember. 
Sec. 2.03. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Sec. 2.04. - Election by majority vote. 
The candidates for mayor and councilmember who receive a majority of the votes cast in the applicable election shall be elected to a term of office. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in said election, a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes. Such runoff shall be held at the time specified by state election law unless such run-off date is postponed by court order. 
Sec. 2.05. - Applicability of general laws; qualifying; other provisions. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2], the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, the establishment of qualifying fees, to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2], the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 2.06. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. Such salary shall be paid from municipal funds in monthly installments. The city council may provide by ordinance for the provision of insurance, retirement, workers' compensation, and other employee benefits to the mayor and councilmembers and may provide by ordinance for the reimbursement of expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor and councilmembers in carrying out their official duties. 
Sec. 2.07. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  [Fiduciary capacity.] Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14], concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. 
(g)  [Homeowners' associations.] No elected official shall serve as an officer or on the board of a homeowners' association located within the city limits of the City of Oakwood. 
(h)  [City employment.] No member of an elected official's immediate family shall serve as an employee of the city. 
(i)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No city employee shall continue in that position upon election to any public office in this city or any other public office whose duties are inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of said city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(j)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.08. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and, for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.09. - Meetings and mayor pro tempore. 
(a)  The city council shall meet on the first working day in January immediately following each regular municipal election. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor-elect (or the mayor if the position of mayor did not stand for election) and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected mayor or councilmembers, as appropriate, by the city clerk. The oath shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of [councilmember or mayor as the case may be] of the City of Oakwood and will to the best of my ability support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia, and the Charter, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Oakwood. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident of my district and the City of Oakwood for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal Charter of the City of Oakwood. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Oakwood to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
(b)  The position of mayor pro tempore shall be an annual appointment and shall rotate between Post 1 through Post 5 sequentially beginning with Post 1 in January 2008. Should any councilmember so appointed decline for any reason to serve the annual appointment, then the appoint[ment] shall rotate to the next Post position. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence except that the mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote as a councilmember and may not exercise the mayor's prerogative to vote in the case of a tie. During the mayor's disability or absence, the mayor pro tempore may veto any action of the city council. If both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore are absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one of the remaining councilmembers, chosen by the members present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the mayor's duties in the same manner as the mayor pro tempore. 
(c)  The city council shall, at least once a month, hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The city council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(d)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on the call of the mayor or three councilmembers. Notice of such special meetings shall be delivered to all councilmembers and the mayor personally, by registered mail, or by electronic means at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by the mayor or a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice. The notice of such special meeting shall state what business is to be transacted at the special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
Sec. 2.10. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business for the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the yeas and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but on the request of any councilmember there shall be a roll-call vote. In order for any ordinance, resolution, motion, or other action of the city council to be adopted, the measure must receive at least three affirmative votes and must receive the affirmative votes of a majority of those voting. No councilmember shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the city council for official action except when such councilmember has a conflict of interest which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. Any councilmember present and eligible to vote on a matter and refusing to do so for any reason other than a properly disclosed and recorded conflict of interest shall be deemed to have acquiesced or concurred with the members of the majority who did vote on the question involved. The mayor shall vote only in the case of a tie or in the case where his or her vote will provide the third affirmative vote required for approval of a matter. 
Sec. 2.11. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Oakwood as provided by article I of this Charter. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this Charter and the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Oakwood and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Sec. 2.12. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment plants, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, and hospitals; charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.13. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except for the office of city manager, the city council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The city council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices, and agencies or of any departments, offices, and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the city council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Charter or by ordinance and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 2.14. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be nominated by the mayor and be confirmed by the city council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by applicable state law. 
(b)  No member of any board, commission, or authority of the city shall hold any elective office in the city. Councilmembers and the mayor, however, may serve as ex officio members of such boards, commissions, or authorities without a vote. 
(c)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment except as otherwise provided by this Charter or any applicable state law. 
(d)  No member of any board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she shall have executed and filed with the designated officer of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the city council and administered by the mayor. 
(e)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of a majority of the members of the city council. 
(f)  Members of boards, commissions, and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the designated officer of the city. 
Sec. 2.15. - Ordinance form; procedures; emergencies. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance and resolution shall be introduced in writing and the city council shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or amend the same. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be: "It is hereby ordained by the City Council of the City of Oakwood, Georgia." A resolution may be passed at the time it is offered but an ordinance shall not be adopted until the title of said ordinance shall have been read at two city council meetings, provided that the beginning of said meetings shall be not less than 24 hours nor more than 120 days apart. This requirement of two readings shall not apply to emergency ordinances or to ordinances adopted at the first business meeting of the city council in a calendar year. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(c)  Emergency orders. 
(1)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(2)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(d)  The catchlines of sections of this Charter or any ordinance printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and: 
(1)  Shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or as any part of the section; and 
(2)  Shall not be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted unless expressly provided to the contrary. Furthermore, the chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Charter shall not be deemed to govern, limit, or modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any chapter, article, or section hereof. 
(e)  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business, including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. Such rules may include punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the city council. 
Sec. 2.16. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.17. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor. 
Every ordinance, resolution, and other action adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly to the mayor for his or her approval by signature. Once an ordinance or resolution has been signed by the mayor, it shall become effective immediately upon filing with the city clerk. If an ordinance or resolution is not approved by the mayor by the tenth day following the date action was taken by the city council, it shall become effective at 12:00 noon on the tenth day following city council action unless the ordinance provides for an alternate effective date. 
Sec. 2.18. - Codes of technical regulations. 
The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of section 2.15 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 3.01. - Powers and duties of the mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city government, a member of and the presiding officer of the city council, and responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of the city's affairs. The mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, and franchises in the city. The mayor may conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's affairs and shall have such powers and duties as specified in this Charter or as may be provided by ordinance consistent with this Charter. 
(b)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the advocate of policy; 
(3)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, resolutions, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(4)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Vote on any motion, resolution, ordinance, or other question before the city council only as provided in section 2.10 of this Charter and vote on any matter before a committee on which he or she serves; 
(6)  Obtain short-term loans in the name of the city when authorized by the city council to do so; 
(7)  Appoint councilmembers to oversee and report on the functions of the various departments of the city; 
(8)  Require the city manager to meet with him or her at a time and place designated for consultation and advice on the affairs of the city; 
(9)  Name qualified residents of the city to boards and commissions with approval of the city council; 
(10)  Make recommendations with respect to the employment or termination of city employees; 
(11)  Prepare or have prepared an agenda for each meeting of the city council which shall include all business submitted by the mayor, any councilmember, the city manager, and the city attorney; and 
(12)  Fulfill and perform such other duties as are imposed by this Charter and duly adopted ordinances. 
Sec. 3.02. - City manager; appointment, qualification, and compensation. 
The mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the city council, for an indefinite term, an officer whose title shall be the "city manager"; and the city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city manager shall be appointed without regard to political beliefs and solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her educational background and actual experience in, and knowledge of, the duties of office as hereinafter prescribed. 
Sec. 3.03. - City manager; chief administrative officer. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the government of the City of Oakwood. The city manager must devote all of his or her working time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the city over which said officer has jurisdiction. 
Sec. 3.04. - City manager; powers and duties enumerated. 
The city manager shall have the power and it shall be his or her duty to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  Appoint and employ all necessary employees of the city, provided that excepted from this power of appointment are those officers and employees who by this Charter are appointed or elected by the city council or are not under the jurisdiction of the city manager; 
(3)  Remove employees employed by said officer without the consent of the city council and without assigning any reason therefor; 
(4)  Exercise supervision and control of all departments and all divisions created in this Charter or that may hereafter be created by the city council except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the city council with a right to take part in the discussions but having no vote; the city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(6)  Recommend to the city council, after prior review and comment by the mayor, for adoption of such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient; 
(7)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be forthwith to take such steps as are necessary to protect and enforce the same; 
(8)  Make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the city as to matters within said officer's jurisdiction to the extent that such contracts are funded in the city's budget except such as may be otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that no contract purchase or obligation requiring a budget amendment shall be valid and binding until after approval of the city council; 
(9)  Act as budget officer to prepare and submit to the city council, after review and comment by the mayor, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the amounts allotted to each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; 
(10)  Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(11)  Make a full written report to the city council on the first of each month showing the operations and expenditures of each department of the city government for the preceding month; and a synopsis of such reports shall be published by the city clerk; 
(12)  Fix all salaries and compensation of city employees in accordance with the city budget and the city pay and classification plan; and 
(13)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
Sec. 3.05. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.08 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction or supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 3.06. - City manager; removal. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution removing the city manager and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file with the city clerk acting for the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a city council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)  The city council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of four of its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the city manager, if he or she has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he or she has requested one. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal and, unless he or she has been convicted of a felony at that time, he or she shall be given not less than 60 days' severance pay. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency. 
(c)  If the city manager becomes disabled and is unable to carry out the duties of the office or if the city manager dies, the acting city manager shall perform the duties of the city manager until the city manager's disability is removed or until the city manager is replaced. Removal of the city manager because of disability shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 3.07. - Acting city manager. 
(a)  The city manager may designate in writing any administrative employee of the city who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager during the city manager's temporary absence from the city or during the city manager's disability. If such designation has not been made and the city manager is absent from the city or unable to perform the duties of the office or to make such designation, the city council may, by resolution, appoint any qualified administrative employee of the city to perform the powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until the city manager shall return to the city, the disability ceases, or the city council appoints a new city manager. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the city council may designate a person as acting city manager who shall exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the city manager until a city manager is appointed. 
Sec. 3.08. - City attorney. 
The mayor shall nominate and the city council shall confirm by majority vote a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be deemed appropriate, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, other officers, and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. The city attorney shall review all contracts of the city but shall not have the power to bind the city. 
Sec. 3.09. - City clerk. 
The city manager shall designate a city clerk, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the city council, to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council; to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city; and to perform such duties as may be required by law or ordinance or as the mayor or city manager may direct. 
Sec. 3.10. - City tax collector. 
The city manager shall designate a city tax collector, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the city council, to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city; and the city tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of the State of Georgia relating to the collection, sale, or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Sec. 3.11. - City accountant. 
The city manager shall designate a city accountant, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the city council, to perform the duties of an accountant. 
Sec. 3.12. - Consolidation of functions. 
The city manager, with the approval of the city council, may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector, and city accountant or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The city manager may also, with the approval of the city council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of the appointment of other persons to perform the same. 
Sec. 3.13. - Position classification and pay plans; employment at will. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and a pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Said plan may apply to all employees of the City of Oakwood and any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted by the city council, neither the city council nor the city manager shall increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except in conformity with such pay plan or pursuant to an amendment of said pay plan duly adopted by the city council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all employees of the city shall be subject to removal or discharge, with or without cause, at any time. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.01. - Creation. 
There is established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Oakwood which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law, including ordinances of the city; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony or material is desired in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; and to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which, under the laws of the State of Georgia, are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of, and in accordance with, the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the judge pro tempore shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
Sec. 4.02. - Judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he or she shall have attained the age of 25 years and shall have been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for a minimum of three years. The judge shall be appointed by resolution of the city council. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the city council. The position of judge created in this article shall not be a full-time position and the person serving in said position may engage in the private practice of law. 
(b)  The judge pro tempore shall serve as requested by the judge, shall have the same qualifications as the judge, shall be appointed by resolution of the city council, and shall take the same oath as the judge. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of his or her office, the judge and judge pro tempore shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state declaring that he or she will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(d)  The judge, or judge pro tempore, shall serve for a term of four years but may be removed from the position by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council or upon action taken by the State Judicial Qualifications Commission for: 
(1)  Willful misconduct in office; 
(2)  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties; 
(3)  Habitual intemperance; 
(4)  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute; or 
(5)  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. 
Sec. 4.03. - Convening. 
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary by the judge to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.04. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Oakwood and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or imprisonment for 15 days. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction to the full extent allowed by state law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as security for appearances of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Oakwood or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears, by probable cause, that a state law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by state law. 
(g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with the entire judicial jurisdiction and judicial powers throughout the entire area of the City of Oakwood granted by state laws generally to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
Sec. 4.05. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Hall County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

Sec. 5.01. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, institution, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 5.02. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide, by ordinance, the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 5.03. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall, after review and comment by the mayor, submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 5.04. - Action by city council on budget. 
The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager except that the budget, as finally amended and adopted, must provide for all expenditures required by law and this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year; and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
Sec. 5.05. - Audits. 
(a)  There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
(b)  As a minimum, all audits and budgets of the city shall satisfy the requirements of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 81], relating to local government audits and budgets. 
Sec. 5.06. - Homestead exemptions. 
Any homestead exemptions applicable to ad valorem taxes levied by the city shall be as provided by Act of the General Assembly pursuant to Article VII, Section II, Paragraph II of the Constitution of Georgia [Ga. Const. art. VII, § II, ¶ II]. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.01. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act which shall remain of full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 6.02. - Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of this city not in conflict with this Charter shall continue in full force and effect unless repealed or amended. 
Sec. 6.03. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Oakwood in the County of Hall, approved April 1, 1979 (Ga. L. 1979, p. 3089), is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 6.04. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 6.05. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
CHAPTER 1. - REDEVELOPMENT POWERS; REFERENDUM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 297), page 4159. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. The ordinance is included herein substantially as enacted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [City authorization and powers; intent.] 
City of Oakwood shall be and is authorized to exercise all redevelopment and other powers under Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 44], the "Redevelopment Powers Law," as amended. The intention of this Act is to authorize the City of Oakwood to undertake and carry out community redevelopment, to create tax allocation districts, to issue tax allocation bonds, and to incur other obligations within the meaning of and as fully permitted under the provisions of Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, as amended, and to authorize the City of Oakwood to exercise redevelopment powers as fully as the "Redevelopment Powers Law" may now or hereafter permit and not to limit any redevelopment powers permitted under the "Redevelopment Powers Law." 
Sec. 2. - [Election superintendent.] 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of the City of Oakwood shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Oakwood for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on a date during 2007, as determined by the governing authority and as provided under Code Section on 21-2-540 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-540], and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The election superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of the City of Oakwood. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 

 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, then Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect immediately. If Section 1 of this Act is not so approved or if the election is conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January, 2008. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Oakwood. It shall be the municipal election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 3. - [Effective date.] 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
CHAPTER 2. - COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2007 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 299), page 4189. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. The ordinance is included herein substantially as enacted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Title.] 
This Act shall be referred to as the "City of Oakwood Community Improvement District Act." 
Sec. 2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Act shall be to provide enabling legislation for the creation of one or more community improvement districts within the City of Oakwood, and such district or districts may be created for the provision of some or all of the following governmental services and facilities as provided and authorized by Article IX, Section VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia [Ga. Const. art. IX, § VII] and the resolution activating each district as it now exists or is hereafter amended or supplemented as provided for by law, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights, and devices and services to control the flow of traffic on streets and roads or services in connection therewith; 
(2)  Parks and recreational areas and facilities and services; 
(3)  Public transportation, including, but not limited to, services intended to reduce the volume of automobile traffic, to transport two or more persons in conveyances, to improve air quality, and to provide bicycle and pedestrian facilities and the operation of a traffic management association or similar entity and services; 
(4)  Terminal and dock facilities and parking facilities and services; and 
(5)  Such other services and facilities as may be provided for by general law or as the Georgia Constitution may authorize or provide now or hereafter. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Agricultural" means the growing of crops for sale or the raising of animals for sale or use, including the growing of field crops, fruit or nut trees, the raising of livestock or poultry, and the operation of dairies, horse boarding facilities, and riding stables. 
(2)  "Board" means the governing body created for the governance of a community improvement district herein authorized. 
(3)  "Caucus of electors" means the meeting of electors hereinafter provided for at which the elected board members of the district are elected. A quorum at such caucus shall consist of those electors present, and a majority of those present and voting is necessary to elect board members. No proxy votes may be cast. 
(4)  "City council" means the duly elected city council of the City of Oakwood. 
(5)  "City governing authority or body" means the city council and the mayor. 
(6)  "District" means the geographical area designated as such by the resolution of the governing body of the City of Oakwood consenting to the creation of the community improvement district or districts or as thereafter modified by any subsequent resolution of the governing body or bodies within which the district is or is to be located or a body corporate and politic being a community improvement district created and activated pursuant hereto, as the context requires or permits. 
(7)  "Electors" means the owners of real property within the given district which is subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board as they appear on the most recent ad valorem real property tax return records of Hall County or one officer or director of a corporate elector, one trustee of a trust which is an elector, one partner of a partnership elector, or one designated representative of an elector whose designation is made in writing to the Hall County tax commissioner and the city clerk of the City of Oakwood at least ten days prior to an election. An owner of property that is subject to taxes, fees, or assessments levied by the board shall have one vote for an election based on numerical majority. An owner of multiple parcels has one vote, not one vote per parcel, for an election based on numerical majority. Multiple owners of one parcel have one vote for an election based on numerical majority which must be cast by one of their number who is designated in writing. 
(8)  "Equity electors" means electors who cast votes equal to each $1,000.00 value of all owned real property within the given district which is then subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board. Value of real property shall be the assessed value. 
(9)  "Forestry" means the planting and growing of trees for sale in a program which includes reforestation of harvested trees, regular underbrush and undesirable growth clearing, fertilizing, pruning, thinning, cruising, and marking which indicate an active tree farming operation. The term does not include the casual growing of trees on land otherwise idle or held for investment, even though some harvesting of trees may occur thereon. 
(10)  "Mayor" means the duly elected mayor of the City of Oakwood. 
(11)  "Project" means the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation of land, interests in land, buildings, structures, facilities, or other improvements, including operation of facilities or other improvements, located or to be located within or otherwise providing service to the district and the acquisition, installation, modification, renovation, rehabilitation, or furnishing of fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, or other property of any nature whatsoever used on, in, or in connection with any such land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, or other improvements for the purposes set forth in Section 2 of this Act. 
(12)  "Property owner" or "owner of real property" means any entity or person shown as a taxpayer for one or more parcels of real estate on the most recent ad valorem tax records of Hall County within the district as certified by the Hall County tax commissioner. 
(13)  "Property used nonresidentially" means property or any portion thereof used for neighborhood shopping, planned shopping centers, general commercial buildings, transient lodging facilities, tourist services, office or institutional buildings, office services, light industry, heavy industry, central business district, parking, or other commercial or business use or vacant land zoned or approved for any of the aforementioned uses which do not include residential. 
(14)  "Residential" means a specific structure, work, or improvement undertaken primarily to provide either single family or multifamily dwelling accommodations for persons and families of four units or less and for which an application for a homestead exemption has been filed and accepted. 
(15)  "Taxpayer" means an entity or person paying ad valorem taxes on real property, whether on one or more parcels of property within the district. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one taxpayer and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(16)  "Value" or "assessed value" of property means the values established in the most recent ad valorem tax reassessment of such properties certified by the chairperson of the Hall County Board of Tax Assessors. 
Sec. 4. - Creation. 
Pursuant to Article IX, Section VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia [Ga. Const. art. IX, § VII], there is created one or more community improvement districts to be located in the City of Oakwood, Georgia, wholly within the incorporated area thereof, which shall be activated upon compliance with the conditions set forth in this section. Each district, if more than one is implemented, shall be governed as directed by this Act. The conditions for such activation shall be: 
(1)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the creation of the community improvement district or districts by the governing authority for the City of Oakwood and imposing such conditions on the projects and activities which may be undertaken as will ensure their compatibility with adopted city policies and planning for the area; and 
(2)  The written consent to the creation of the community improvement district by: 
(A)  A majority of the owners of real property within the given district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the given district; and 
(B)  The owners of real property within the given district which constitutes at least 75 percent by value of all real property within the district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board. For this purpose, value shall be determined by the most recent approved county ad valorem tax digest. 
The written consent provided for in this paragraph shall be submitted to the Hall County tax commissioner, who shall certify whether subparagraphs (A) and (B) of this paragraph have been satisfied with respect to such proposed district. The district or districts or respective board or boards created under this Act shall not transact any business or exercise any powers under this Act until the foregoing conditions are met. A copy of such resolutions shall be filed with the Secretary of State and with the city clerk of the City of Oakwood, who shall each maintain a record of the district activated under this Act. Nothing contained herein shall limit the ability of the governing authority of the City of Oakwood to implement more than one community improvement district so long as the requirements hereof and of the Georgia Constitution are satisfied. The provisions of this Act shall be construed so as to provide for the independent application and exercise of all powers for each district contained herein including the ability to levy taxes as outlined herein as separately and independently authorizing and empowering such separate community improvement districts created hereby. Nothing contained herein shall require the governing authority of the City of Oakwood to create more than one community improvement district or to require the creation of a new district if the district boundaries of an existing district are changed, added to, supplemented, or modified. 
Sec. 5. - Administration, appointment, and election of board members. 
Each district created pursuant hereto shall be administered either by the governing authority or by a board as prescribed under this Act. In the event that a district is to be governed by such a board, the board shall be composed of a minimum of seven board members to be appointed and elected as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Two board members shall be appointed by the mayor of the City of Oakwood and confirmed by a majority of the city council, one of whom shall be a member of the city council, to serve in posts 6 and 7. Three board members shall be elected by the vote of electors, and two members shall be elected by the vote of equity electors. The members representing the electors and equity electors shall be elected to serve in post positions 1 through 5, respectively. Each elected board member must receive a majority of the votes cast for the post for which he or she is a candidate. Votes for posts 1 and 2 shall be cast by electors, and votes for posts 3, 4, and 5 shall be cast by the equity electors. The initial term of office for the members representing posts 1 and 3 shall be one year. The initial term of office for the members representing posts 2 and 5 shall be two years, and the initial term of office of the members representing post 3 shall be three years. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for four years except the appointed board members who shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing body which appointed him or her. Elected board members shall be subject to recall in the same manner as elected. 
(2)  The initial board members to be elected as provided in paragraph (1) of this section shall be elected in a caucus of electors which shall be held within 120 days after the adoption of the resolution by the City of Oakwood consenting to the creation of the district and the obtaining of the written consents herein provided at such time and place within the district as the City of Oakwood shall designate after notice thereof shall have been given to said electors by publishing same in the legal organ of Hall County as hereinafter provided. Thereafter, there shall be conducted annually, not later than 120 days following the last day for filing ad valorem real property tax returns in Hall County, a caucus of said electors at such time and place within the district as the board shall designate in such notice for the purpose of electing board members to those board member positions whose terms expire or are vacant. If a vacancy occurs in an elected position on the board, the board shall, within 60 days thereof, call a special election to fill the same to be held within 60 days of the call unless such vacancy occurs within 180 days of the next regularly scheduled election, in which case a special election may, but need not, be called. For any election held hereunder, notice thereof shall be given to said electors by publishing notice thereof in the legal organ of Hall County at least once each week for four weeks prior to such election. 
(3)  Board members shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses reasonably incurred in the performance of their duties. They shall elect one of their number as chairperson and another as vice chairperson. They shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary/treasurer, either of whom may, but need not, be a member of the board or an elector. 
(4)  If the boundaries of a district are subsequently changed after creation of the district to include land within a municipality which was not a party to the creation of the district or, if a municipality's boundaries are changed to include land within an existing district, the governing authority of the municipality shall acquire the right to appoint a member to the board of the district upon entering into the cooperation agreement provided for in Section 9 of this Act. If, by municipal annexation or by deannexation of land from a district, the district no longer includes land within the incorporated area of the City of Oakwood or within a municipality, respectively, then the board member of the district appointed by such governing authority in which the district is no longer located shall cease to be a board member. 
(5)  Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2], the "Georgia Election Code," shall not apply to the election of district board members. Should a vacancy in office of a district board member occur and the regular caucus of electors is more than six months in the future, a special election shall be called to fill such vacancy, unless it is filled by appointment as hereinabove required. The district board may adopt such bylaws not inconsistent herewith to provide for any matter concerning such elections. 
Sec. 6. - Taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(a)  The board may levy taxes, fees, and assessments within the district only on real property used nonresidentially, specifically excluding all property exempt from ad valorem taxation under the Constitution or laws of the State of Georgia; all property used for residential, agricultural, or forestry purposes; and all tangible personal property and intangible property. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall not exceed 2.5 percent of the aggregate assessed value of all such real property, subject to such limitations as the governing authority for the City of Oakwood may implement with the adoption of a resolution consenting to the creation of said district. The taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be used only for the purpose of providing those governmental services and facilities set forth in Section 2 of this Act which are specially required by the degree of density of development within the district and not for the purpose of providing those governmental services and facilities provided to the municipality as a whole. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall be collected by the City of Oakwood in the same manner as taxes, fees, and assessments are levied by the City of Oakwood. Delinquent taxes shall bear the same interest and penalties as City of Oakwood ad valorem taxes and may be enforced and collected in the same manner. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments so levied, less a fee to cover the costs of collection of 0.25 percent thereof, but not more than $10,000.00 in any one calendar year, shall be transmitted as soon as they are acquired by the City of Oakwood to the board and shall be expended by the board only for the purposes authorized hereby. 
(b)  The board shall levy the taxes provided for in subsection (a) of this section subsequent to the report of the assessed taxable values for the current calendar year and notify in writing the collecting governing bodies so they may include the levy on their regular ad valorem tax bills, if possible. 
(c)  There shall be a segregation of all funds from the levy of taxes, fees, and assessments as described hereunder for the district, and neither the City of Oakwood nor the Hall County tax commissioner shall expend for any purpose not authorized by the board of this district any such taxes, fees, or charges assessed and collected hereunder except for such costs as may be attributed to the billing and collection of such fees, levies, and assessments. 
(d)  If, but for this provision, a parcel of real property is removed from a district or otherwise would become nontaxable, it shall continue to bear the tax millage levied by the district then extant upon such parcel for indebtedness of the district then outstanding until said indebtedness is paid or refunded. 
Sec. 7. - Boundaries of the district. 
(a)  The boundaries of the district or districts shall be as designated as such by the City of Oakwood as set forth in the resolution required in Section 4 of this Act or as may thereafter be added as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The boundaries of the district or districts may be increased after the initial creation of a district if: 
(1)  Written consent of the owners of any real property sought to be annexed is first obtained; 
(2)  The board of the district adopts a resolution consenting to the annexation; and 
(3)  A resolution is adopted which grants consent to the annexation by the governing authority of such municipalities as may have area within the district before or after the annexation. 
Sec. 8. - Debt. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the district may incur debt without regard to the requirements of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia [Ga. Const. art. IX, § V], which debt shall be backed by the full faith and credit and taxing power of the district but shall not be an obligation of the State of Georgia or any other unit of government of the State of Georgia other than the district; provided, however, that the board and the district may not issue bonds validated under or in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3], known as the "Revenue Bond Law," or in accordance with such other successor provisions governing bond validation generally or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 9. - Cooperation with local governments. 
The services and facilities provided pursuant hereto may be provided for in a cooperation agreement executed jointly by the board, the governing body of the City of Oakwood, and any municipalities and other governmental authorities or agencies within which the district is partially located. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit the authority of the City of Oakwood or any such municipality or any such authority to provide services or facilities within the district, and the City of Oakwood or such municipalities shall retain full and complete authority and control over any of its facilities located within its respective areas of any district. Said control shall include but not be limited to the modification of, access to, and degree and type of services provided through or by facilities of the municipality or county. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit or preempt the application of any governmental laws, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations to the district or the services or facilities provided therein. 
Sec. 10. - Powers. 
(a)  The district and the board created pursuant hereto shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions hereof, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power to: 
(1)  Bring and defend actions; 
(2)  Adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  Make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the board or to further the public purposes for which the district is created, including, but not limited to, contracts for construction of projects, leases of projects, contracts for sale of projects, agreements for loans to finance projects, contracts with respect to the use of projects, and agreements with other jurisdictions or community improvement districts regarding multijurisdictional projects or services or for other cooperative endeavors to further the public purposes of the district; 
(4)  Acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purposes of the district; 
(5)  Finance (by loan, private grant, lease, or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of the district or any other funds of the district, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships (whether limited or general), or other entities, all of which the board is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(6)  Borrow money to further or carry out its public purposes and to execute bonds, notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its notes or other obligations, loan agreements, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the board, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(7)  Issue notes or other obligations of the district and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project and otherwise to further or carry out the public purposes of the district and to pay all reasonably incurred costs of the board incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purposes; provided, however, that the board and the district may not issue bonds validated under or in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3], known as the "Revenue Bond Law," or in accordance with such other successor provisions governing bond validation generally or as may be provided by law; 
(8)  Make application directly or indirectly to any private source for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the district's public purposes and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such private source; provided, however, that the district and the board shall not have the power to apply for, receive, administer, or utilize grants from federal, state, county, or municipal governments or agencies or any other public sources; 
(9)  Enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the district; 
(10)  Contract for any period, not exceeding 50 years, with the State of Georgia, state institutions, or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state for the use by the district of any facilities or services of the state or any such state institution, municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state or for the use by any state institution or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of the state of any facilities or services of the district, provided that such contracts shall deal with such activities and transactions as the district and any such political subdivision with which the district contracts are authorized by law to undertake; 
(11)  Grant, mortgage, convey, assign, or pledge its property, revenues or taxes, or fees or assessments to be received as security for its notes or other indebtedness and obligations; 
(12)  Receive and use the proceeds of any tax levied by any county or any municipal corporation to pay the costs of any project or for any other purpose for which the board may use its own funds pursuant hereto; 
(13)  Receive and administer gifts, private grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(14)  Use any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use thereof or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to be the best advantage of the district and the public purposes thereof; 
(15)  Appoint, select, and employ engineers, surveyors, architects, urban or city planners, fiscal agents, attorneys, and others and to fix their compensation and pay their expenses; 
(16)  Encourage and promote the improvement and development of the district and to make, contract for, or otherwise cause to be made long range plans or proposals for the district in cooperation with the City of Oakwood and any municipal corporations in which the district is wholly or partially located; 
(17)  Invest its funds, whether derived from the issuance of its bonds or otherwise, in such manner as it may deem prudent and appropriate, without further restriction; 
(18)  Adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the board, the election and duties of officers of the board, and other matters which the board determines to deal with in its bylaws; 
(19)  Exercise any power granted by the laws of this state to public or private corporations which is not in conflict with the public purposes of the district; and 
(20)  Do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers conferred hereby. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in subsection (a) of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated herein and elsewhere in this Act, and no such power limits or restricts any other power of the board except where expressly noted. 
Sec. 11. - Construction; notice, proceeding, publication, referendum. 
This Act shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. No notice, proceeding, or publication except those required hereby shall be necessary to the performance of any act authorized hereby, nor shall any such act be subject to referendum. 
Sec. 12. - Applicability of chapter 5 of title 10 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." 
The offer, sale, or issuance of notes or other obligations by the district shall not be subject to regulation under Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. tit. 10, ch. 5], the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." 
Sec. 13. - Dissolution. 
(a)  A district activated under the provisions of this Act may be dissolved upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  The adoption of a resolution approving of the dissolution of the community improvement district by the City of Oakwood and such municipalities if partially within one or more municipalities; or 
(2)  The written consent to the dissolution of the community improvement district by: 
(A)  A majority of the owners of real property within the district subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the district; or 
(B)  The owners of real property constituting at least 75 percent by value of all real property within the district subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board. For this purpose, value shall be determined by the most recent approved county ad valorem tax digest. The written consent provided for in this paragraph shall be submitted to the Hall County tax commissioner, who shall certify whether subparagraphs (A) and (B) of this paragraph have been satisfied with respect to the proposed district dissolution. 
(b)  In the event that successful action is taken pursuant to this section to dissolve the district, the dissolution shall become effective at such time as all debt obligations of the district have been satisfied. Following a successful dissolution action and until the dissolution becomes effective, no new projects may be undertaken, obligations or debts incurred, or property acquired. 
(c)  Upon a successful dissolution action, all noncash assets of the district other than public facilities or land or easements to be used for such public facilities, as described in Section 2 of this Act, shall be reduced to cash and, along with all other cash on hand, shall be applied to the repayment of any debt obligation of the district. Any cash remaining after all outstanding obligations are satisfied shall be refunded to each property owner in direct proportion to the total amount in taxes, fees, or assessments paid by the property owner relative to the total revenues paid by all properties in the district. 
(d)  When a dissolution becomes effective, the municipal governing authority, or the governing authority of a county if wholly within the incorporated area thereof, shall take title to all property previously in the ownership of the district, and all taxes, fees, and assessments of the district shall cease to be levied and collected. 
(e)  A district may be reactivated in the same manner as an original activation. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Oakwood, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Oakwood City Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" (of the city council) means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire council. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Oakwood, Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Oakwood, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Oakwood, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time, except hours, is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" means the County of Hall, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Oakwood" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Oath. The term "oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. The term "premises" means a place or places. 
Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Hall County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" means and includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes, editor's notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since they would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following, except those ordinances which have been amended as part of this recodification: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or adopting any subdivision regulations. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part of such chapters, sections and subsections, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Oakwood, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:… . . .." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(d)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-12. - Fees. 
Where any reference is made in this Code to the imposition of a fee, and the fee is not specified therein, the amount of the fee is kept in a separate fee schedule maintained by the city clerk. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City council member means any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor, of the City of Oakwood. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the City of Oakwood. 
Government or city means the government of the City of Oakwood, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-2. - Manager form of government. 
The city manager shall be vested with the authority and responsibility to oversee and supervise the regular business affairs of the city and shall act as the office manager of the city hall. Except as otherwise provided by general or local state law, he shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall exercise executive supervision over all city employees and departments. He shall further have such other duties as the mayor or council may require and which are not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city or any state law. The city manager need not be a resident of the city. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. VIII, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3. - Duties, responsibilities of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall be responsible for supervising all paid employees of the city other than the city attorney and the city judge. The city manager's authority to supervise employees under his control shall include the ability to hire, discipline or dismiss any such employee. The city manager shall be responsible for the supervision and control of the chief of police and all employees reporting to the chief of police. The chief of police, subject to the approval and supervision of the city manager, shall be responsible for the hiring, firing and supervision of all police department employees and shall have the ability to take disciplinary action against any employee of the police department. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to adopt and implement personnel policies and procedures for the orderly administration of personnel matters within the city which shall apply to all employees under the control of the city manager. The chief of police shall have the authority, with the approval of the city manager, to adopt and implement standard operating procedures and personnel policies for the orderly administration of personnel matters in the police department. The city manager and the chief of police shall not adopt or implement any personnel policies pursuant to the authority granted in this section which would have the effect of changing the status of any employee of the city to any designation other than an employee at will. In addition, no personnel policies or procedures shall be adopted by the manager or the chief of police pursuant to the authority granted in this section which would limit or prohibit the mayor and city council from exercising the legal authority granted to the mayor and city council pursuant to article 3 of the Charter, which authorizes the mayor and council to exercise ultimate final authority over the administrative affairs of the city. This specifically shall preclude policies or procedures (written or otherwise) which limit or reduce the authority of the mayor to inquire and investigate the conduct of city affairs. 
(c)  The city manager shall have such other and further duties, responsibilities and authority as may be delegated to the city manager by the mayor and council. The city manager shall be responsible for overseeing and supervising the regular business affairs of the city and shall report directly to the mayor and council. 
(d)  The city manager shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The compensation, benefits, term of office and other conditions of employment of the city manager shall be established by the mayor and council and set forth in an employment contract. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. VIII, § 2, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-4. - Oath of office. 
Pursuant to section 2.14(d) of the city Charter, no member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office as prescribed hereinafter and administered by the mayor as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of [member of board, commission or authority as the case may be] of the City of Oakwood and will to the best of my ability support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia and the Charter, ordinances and regulations of the City of Oakwood. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state or any foreign state which I, by the laws of the State of Georgia, am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. [I have been a resident of the City of Oakwood for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal charter of the City of Oakwood.*] I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Oakwood to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward or expectation thereof." 
(*If applicable) 
(Ord. No. 554, § 2, 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Oath of office, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-5. - Mayor and city council member salaries. 
The annual salary of the mayor of the city is hereby increased from $5,400.00 a year to $10,800.00 a year ($900.00 per month) and the salary of each member of the city council is hereby increased from $4,200.00 per year to $7,200.00 a year ($600.00 per month). Said increase is pursuant to and authorized by the city Charter and O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 1, 10-15-1985; Ord. No. 232, § 1, 2-13-1995; Ord. No. 554, art. VI, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Salary of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2-6. - Per diem pay. 
The mayor and members of the city council shall be entitled to a per diem pay of $50.00 per meeting (maximum of ten meetings per month) for attendance at meetings other than regular and special meetings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 2, 11-9-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 646, § 2, adopted Nov. 9, 2009, deleted § 2-6 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 2-6 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 2-7. - Travel reimbursement for elected officials. 
(a)  Adoption; purpose. Pursuant to the authority granted to it by the laws of the state and the city Charter, the city council hereby ordains that the following policy is adopted to compensate and reimburse city elected officials who will be traveling for approved city business. Elected officials are encouraged to take advantage of training opportunities and represent the city at various meetings and events. This travel policy is hereby established to facilitate reimbursement for expenses incurred. Elected officials are responsible to know what the city's travel policy states and to abide by this policy. Elected officials shall only be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the elected official in carrying out their official duties. No reimbursement shall ever exceed the actual expenditure incurred by the elected official. 
(b)  Meetings; events; out-of-state travel. Any elected official's attendance or travel to training, meetings, or events held out of state that is not related to the Georgia Municipal Association (GMA) or National League of Cities (NLC) must be pre-approved by the city council. 
(c)  Spouse/dependent attendance. Within budget, the city encourages elected officials to attend functions that will be in the best interest of the city. Spousal attendance frequently enhances the image of the city and is usually encouraged. However, the city cannot expend public funds for spouses while elected officials are attending meetings, conferences, training sessions, conventions or other city-sponsored functions. Therefore, spousal attendance/participation is a personal expense. 
(d)  Expenses. 
(1)  Accommodations. 
a.  Outside a 50-mile radius. The city will pay for overnight lodging expenses outside the 50-mile radius of the city for training. Accommodations should be in or as close to the conference center as possible. 
1.  Room receipts are required. Amounts are expected to be reasonable and within the range of similar quarters in the immediate area visited, not to exceed an amount equal to established convention rates at the convention/meeting headquarters hotel. If accommodations are not available at the headquarters hotel, the city will pay the prevailing rate at alternate hotels recommended by the convention officials, not to exceed the rate of the headquarters hotel. 
2.  The city is exempted from all taxes when its officials stay in a hotel in the state. A hotel/motel tax exemption form and a state tax exemption form will be provided for the elected official to present upon arriving at the hotel. 
3.  Officials must pick up a city check or city credit card before leaving for the trip and present at check-in for each overnight in-state trip, (required) to receive tax exemptions. It is the responsibility of the elected official to ensure that all tax exemptions are secured; the city will not reimburse for tax that should have been exempted. 
b.  Within a 50-mile radius. The city will not pay/reimburse for overnight lodging expenses within a 50-mile radius of the city, unless pre-approved by council for circumstances where an elected official may have early morning or late night meetings. 
1.  The approval should be confirmed in advance of registration to stay at a convention hotel within the 50-mile radius. 
2.  The city will cover overnight lodging expenses within a 50-mile radius when a city strategic planning conference is held and the city will pay directly to the facility. Mileage expenses may be reimbursed for strategic conferences, using city hall as the beginning point, since reimbursement policies normally do not cover mileage getting to the place of work. 
(2)  Food. Travelers are expected to take advantage of all meals included in convention/meeting registration fees. Expenses for other meals shall be paid based on a reasonable food cost in the area being visited. 
a.  The city will not pay for alcoholic beverages. Spouses or guest's meals (including tax and gratuities) and/or any alcoholic beverages must be deducted from receipts; only travelers' expenses may be included on the reimbursement request. 
b.  Tips shall not exceed 15 percent of the total bill. 
(3)  Transportation. Travel reimbursements will cover either commercial tickets (usually airline) or mileage for use of a personal vehicle at the rate as allowed by the IRS and approved by the city council. Reimbursements will not be made for first-class commercial airline tickets. The city will reimburse for the most cost-effective mode of travel. 
a.  Reasonable taxi fares and parking fees are covered when necessary. 
b.  All personal vehicle mileage must be substantiated with a detailed listing including beginning and ending odometer reading, total miles driven and the purpose of the meeting/trip. Expense reports without this documentation will be returned to the requestor (without payment) for explanation. 
(e)  Reimbursements. Proper documentation is always needed for expenses to be paid by the city. The main items for proper documentation consist of receipts, meeting agenda, outline of meals by day and by meal, and detailed explanation of any item reported that is not ordinary in nature. Transactions and payments with respect to lodging, travel, and the credit card are managed and approved by the city clerk's office. 
(1)  When all proper documentation is attached to the travel voucher, it should be turned in to the city clerk, who will review the voucher and the appropriate backup for any irregularities. The clerk will then obtain one other approval from another elected official and submit to the accounting department for payment. If an irregularity exists, the city clerk will address the issue immediately. If extenuating circumstances occur, then each situation will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
(2)  To support claims for travel and extra expenses following out-of-town events, an expense report must be submitted (see attachment 1, which is not set out herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk) and receipts must be turned in for reimbursement within three business days after returning from a trip. Elected officials may only be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred in carrying out their official duties. Other necessary or unusual expenses incurred will be paid after written explanation is attached to travel voucher and approved by all appropriate personnel. 
(3)  Telephone charges are allowed so the employee can call home. The employee is allowed one phone call home each day with the charges not to exceed $8.00 per day. Local phone charges (usually $0.75) are allowed unless they become excessive. 
(4)  Reimbursements will be made on a priority basis. The business office will return checks to the travelers within five working days. 
(f)  Exclusions. 
(1)  Entertainment expenses. The city will not pay for any movies or other entertainment expenses while traveling. 
(2)  Sports activities. The city will not pay any fees for sports activities associated with tournaments, etc. Even if some of the activities are a part of the conference agenda, the officials must pay the cost to participate. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. VI, § 3, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-8. - Employee travel reimbursement. 
Employees will be reimbursed for travel expenses while on city business as follows: 
(1)  Private vehicle use. Reimbursement for private vehicle use shall be adjusted annually to conform to the mileage rate established by the IRS. 
(2)  Meals/incidentals. Reimbursement for meals and incidentals shall be adjusted annually to conform to the locality per diem rates established by the U.S. General Services Administration. 
(3)  Lodging. Reimbursement for lodging shall be the actual reasonable cost approved in advance by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. VI, § 4, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-9. - Employee benefits. 
The city shall make available to employees the benefits as set forth in the personnel policies. The employee compensation plan shall be recommended annually by the city manager as a part of the budget process. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. VII, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Secs. 2-10—2-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL RULES OF PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 et seq.; open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 

Sec. 2-37. - Meeting times; place; notice. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the city council shall be on the second Monday of each month beginning at 7:00 p.m., pursuant to section 2.09(c) of the Charter. 
(b)  Regular meetings of the city council shall convene in the assembly room of city hall. 
(c)  Special meetings of the city council shall be called in accordance with section 2.13(d) of the city Charter. If the place where any such special meeting is to convene shall be at any place other than the place specified in subsection (b) of this section, then the notice shall so specify. Subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d), special meetings may be held at any time without notice to all councilmembers upon attendance at such meeting by all members of the council or by waiving of notice by those not in attendance. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Notice of meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-38. - Open meetings. 
Except for those exceptions specifically provided for by general law, all meetings of the city council shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 2, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-39. - Quorum. 
Quorum requirements shall be as specified in section 2.10 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 3, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-40. - Agenda. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the power and duty to set the agenda after receiving input from members of the city council, the city manager and the public for meetings of the city council, pursuant to section 3.01(11) of the Charter. 
(b)  The agenda for each regular meeting (and work session) of the city council shall be prepared and distributed to the members of the city council no later than the preceding Friday. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 4, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-41. - Public hearing procedure on general matters. 
The public hearing procedure on general matters shall be as follows: 
(1)  The presiding officer opens the public hearing. 
(2)  Staff summarizes the public hearing procedures which are as follows: 
a.  Staff will present the item. 
b.  The petitioner will then have the opportunity to present his request. 
c.  Those who support the application will be asked to comment first. 
d.  Those who oppose the application or who have questions will be asked to comment next. 
e.  The petitioner will then have an opportunity to make summary remarks and answer any questions raised by the public. 
f.  After the petitioner's summary remarks, the public hearing will be closed. 
g.  After the public hearing is closed, the council will consider the items presented. At that time, the council may discuss the item, and call upon the petitioner or other interested parties to clarify points and answer questions. Additional questions or comments from the public may not be asked once the public hearing has been closed. 
(3)  All parties wishing to speak during the public hearing should come to the podium, give their name, address and interest along with any comments they may have on the item. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 5, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-42. - Public hearing procedure on zoning matters. 
The public hearing procedure on zoning matters shall be as follows: 
(1)  Proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance may be introduced for first reading at any regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(2)  Proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance shall be disposed of by the receipt of public input, item by item. At the close of public input and as part of new business, the city council shall take up the consideration of each such item as follows: 
a.  If a parcel is to be annexed into the city, the agenda shall reflect a separate item for consideration of annexation only first. Immediately upon acceptance of the parcel for annexation, the chair shall cause the caption of the annexation ordinance to be read followed by a vote on the questions of accepting said ordinance for first reading. 
b.  A separate agenda item shall identify the current zoning of the property and the proposed zoning classification along with the purpose of the zoning change. 
(3)  During the public hearing, all persons supporting and opposing a proposed rezoning may take either one of two different opportunities to address the mayor and city council on the proposed rezoning, as follows: 
a.  Ten-minute argument opportunity. 
1.  Proponents shall first present their ten-minute argument in support of the proposed rezoning and opponents shall then present their ten-minute argument in opposition to the proposed rezoning. 
2.  Neither side will be required to use all of its ten-minute argument period. 
3.  Either side may allocate its ten-minute argument period among any number of speakers, provided that the presentation by all speakers for each side shall not exceed ten minutes per side. 
4.  All persons wishing to speak longer than three minutes during one side's ten-minute argument period must register their intent to do so with the city clerk not later than the time that the meeting of the mayor and city council at which the public hearing on the proposed rezoning is to be conducted is first called to order. 
5.  In the event that all persons wishing to speak longer than three minutes as a part of one side's ten-minute argument are not able to agree how that side's ten-minute argument period shall be allocated, they shall inform the mayor of their disagreement before either side begins its ten-minute argument, in which event the mayor shall decide and announce the manner in which that side's ten-minute argument period shall be allocated. Any councilmember dissatisfied with the mayor's allocation of that side's ten-minute argument shall have the right to appeal the mayor's allocation decision to the city council before either side begins its ten-minute argument for a decision by the city council. 
b.  After the proponents and opponents of the proposed rezoning have concluded their ten-minute arguments, any person who has not yet spoken either for or against the proposed rezoning shall be allowed to address the mayor and city council concerning the proposed rezoning for no longer than one minute per person. Such person shall identify themselves along with their address upon being recognized by the chair. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 6, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Notice and hearing on zoning matters, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. 
Sec. 2-43. - Public input. 
Except as specifically provided for in section 2-42 for zoning matters, at such point in the city council's agenda when the city council is receiving public input from citizens and others, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  All oral public input shall be received before the city council undertakes the consideration or disposition of any matter. The mayor shall first invite the public input as to any item appearing on the city council agenda and shall then invite the public input as to any matter not on the city council's agenda. 
(2)  Throughout the time that the city council is receiving public input, neither the mayor nor any city council member shall interrupt, question or otherwise engage in any kind of debate with such person. 
(3)  Public input shall be limited to three minutes per person with notice of 30 seconds remaining. 
(4)  Any member of the public who, with the intent to prevent or disrupt the meeting, substantially obstructs or interferes with the meeting by physical action or verbal utterance shall be removed from the meeting at the direction of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 7, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Notice and hearing on zoning matters, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. 
Sec. 2-44. - Schedule for consideration and final action. 
All matters calling for action by the city council shall be introduced, considered and disposed of as follows: 
(1)  No ordinance shall be considered for final disposition unless it shall have first been considered in the course of at least one prior meeting of the city council in accordance with section 2.15(a) of the Charter. 
(2)  When a matters is before the city council for consideration for final disposition, no motion shall be received but: 
a.  To adjourn; 
b.  To lay on the table; 
c.  To pass out with no action; 
d.  For the previous question; 
e.  To postpone indefinitely; 
f.  To postpone to a day certain; 
g.  To commit; or 
h.  To amend; 
which several motions shall have precedence in the order listed. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 8, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-45. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  As a part of the agenda for any meeting of the city council, the mayor may set forth those items of a routine nature calling for action by the city council and as to which it is anticipated that their consideration and disposition will not require any significant discussion by the members of the city council. 
(b)  Upon the objection of any councilmember to any one or more of such items remaining on the consent agenda, the same shall be removed therefrom and assigned an item number and taken up individually, later in the meeting, and the city council shall proceed to consider the remainder of the items on the first part of the consent agenda. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 9, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-46. - Motion for the previous question. 
(a)  The motion for the previous question shall only be admitted when demanded by a majority of the city council voting and on the motion for the previous question there shall be no debate. 
(b)  The motion for the previous question shall take precedence over all other motions except a motion to adjourn or to lay on the table and, when it is moved, the first question shall be: "Shall the motion for the previous question be sustained?" 
(c)  If decided in the affirmative, the city council shall then proceed to act on the previous question. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 10, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-47. - Stating the question. 
The mayor shall state all questions to the city council and declare the vote thereon in accordance with section 2-64. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 11, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-48. - Division of a question. 
When a motion, resolution, ordinance or other matter relating to a certain subject contains several parts, each of which is capable of standing as a complete proposition if the others are removed, it may be divided into two or more propositions to be considered and voted on as distinct questions. Any city council member may move for a division of the question on a subject in which the sense thereof will admit it. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 12, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-49. - Motion to reconsider. 
(a)  Before the minutes of the preceding meeting of the city council shall be read or approved without reading, any member of the prevailing side on a matter previously disposed of may move for a reconsideration of any matter therein contained except such as has already been the subject of a motion to reconsider. 
(b)  Motions for reconsideration of a matter shall be made and voted on no later than at the meeting following the meeting at which the matter was decided and shall be made before the minutes of said previous meeting are approved. However, actions on an amendment to any pending matter may be reconsidered at any time before the final action on the ordinance, resolution or other matter to which the amendment relates. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 13, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-50. - Call from table. 
A majority of the city council members may call up for consideration any matter ordered to lie on the table. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 14, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-51. - When matters in possession of the city council. 
When an ordinance, resolution, motion or other matter is introduced before the city council and stated by the mayor, or read by the city clerk, it shall be deemed to be in the possession of the city council and may not be withdrawn at any time before the final disposition thereof without the consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 15, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-52. - Matters previously rejected. 
(a)  Whenever any matter or proposal has been rejected by the city council, it shall not be introduced or considered again during the calendar year during which the rejection occurred except on motion to reconsider made pursuant to section 2-49. 
(b)  Any matter subject to a no-action decision by the city council may be brought back to the city council at any time. 
(c)  Exempted from the provisions of this section shall be any matters brought to the city council by the city board of planning and zoning in accordance with its rules and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 16, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-53. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order in meetings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 17, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-54. - Mayor to preserve order. 
The mayor shall preserve order in meetings of the city council and shall, in the exercise of a sound discretion, suspend irrelevant debate and command silence, whenever the same may be deemed needed. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 18, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-55. - Mayor may call councilmembers or city attorney to chair. 
The mayor may, during any meeting of the city council, call the mayor pro tempore, or in the event that the mayor pro tempore is not present, name any member of the city council, to perform the duties of the chair during any part of that meeting but no longer. The mayor may also call the city attorney to perform the duties of the chair in any public hearing of a matter. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 19, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-56. - Address to be through the chair. 
No member of the city council shall address the city council or interrogate a member who is speaking except through the chair. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 20, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-57. - Who is entitled to floor. 
Councilmembers shall be recognized in the order in which recognition is sought. When two or more councilmembers shall seek recognition at the same time, the mayor shall name the person entitled to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 21, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-58. - Debate. 
When any councilmember is about to speak in debate or deliver any matter to the city council, the member shall respectfully address the chair, shall be confined to the matter in debate and shall not speak more than three times on any subject and no more than five minutes per address with notice of 30 seconds remaining. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 22, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-59. - Silence. 
The members of the city council shall forbear from private conversation and preserve silence until a speaking member shall have yielded the floor. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 23, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-60. - Decorum. 
If any member transgresses the rules of the city council, in speaking or otherwise, the mayor may call the member to order, in which case the member so called to order shall immediately yield the floor unless permitted to explain. If appealed to the chair, the city council shall decide. If the decision of the city council is not then submitted to, the delinquent member shall, for the first offense, be reproved, and, for continuing refractory, may be expelled from the city council chamber. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 24, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-61. - Attorney's opinion. 
(a)  It shall be in order, in the course of a meeting of the city council, or of any committee thereof, for the city attorney to make recommendations on matters before the city council, to introduce matters for the city council's consideration or propose matters for referral to committee. 
(b)  Upon a vote of the city council so directing, the city attorney shall furnish the city clerk with a copy of any opinion given by the city attorney concerning the city council or any department, board, commission or authority of the city and such written opinion may be required to be rendered prior to the next regular meeting of the city council and made a part of the records of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 25, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-62. - Rulings upon points of order. 
The mayor shall decide all points of order but an appeal may be had from any such decision to the city council. When requested, either by the mayor or by any councilmember, the city attorney shall act as parliamentarian and shall render an opinion to the mayor on any point of order. A vote of two-thirds of the city council present shall be necessary to override a decision of the mayor on a point of order. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 26, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-63. - Suspending the rules. 
These rules shall in no case be suspended nor shall the order of business be changed except by a vote of three-fourths of the city council members voting. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 27, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-64. - All votes recorded. 
All votes on all matters shall be recorded and, unless the same shall be unanimous, the same shall be contingent upon the recording of the "ayes" and "nays" of each councilmember, the names of those abstaining and those absent, all of which shall be entered upon the minutes of the proceedings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 28, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-65. - Minutes. 
(a)  The city clerk shall prepare the proposed minutes of the meetings of the city council and shall keep and maintain the minutes and records of all meetings of the city council. The city clerk shall keep and maintain any other records or recordings of the meetings of the city council in such manner and for such time as the city council shall require. Any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records of the city council once approved at reasonable times. 
(b)  Following regular and special called sessions of the city council, the city clerk shall provide the mayor and each councilmember a copy of the proposed minutes of the meeting no later than Friday preceding the next regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 29, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-66. - Parliamentary rules. 
When any question arises, in a meeting of the city council, which is not provided for in these rules, the same, so far as practicable, shall be controlled by the rules and usages usually governing parliamentary bodies as set forth in Robert's Rules of Order, latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. IV, § 30, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-67. - Rules and procedures. 
The rules and procedures for meetings before any of the several city boards, commissions and authorities shall be in accordance with the rules and procedures adopted in this article with the following exceptions and additions: 
(1)  The chair of such board, commission or authority shall perform the duties and obligations ascribed to the mayor in this article. 
(2)  Matters forwarded for consideration by the city council shall be accompanied by that portion of the minutes of the meeting in which the matter was considered (or a draft thereof if formal approval of such minutes has not been made). 
(3)  Each board, commission and authority of the city shall follow the within rules and procedures except to the extent that such rules and procedures conflict with the city Charter or the enabling ordinance or legislation for such board, commission or authority. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. V, § 1, 1-14-2008; Amd. No. 554, § 1, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 2-68. - Oath of office. 
Pursuant to section 2.14(d) of the Charter, no member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office as prescribed hereinafter and administered by the mayor as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of [member of board, commission or authority as the case may be] of the City of Oakwood and will to the best of my ability support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia and the Charter, ordinances and regulations of the City of Oakwood. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state or any foreign state which I, by the laws of the State of Georgia, am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. [I have been a resident of the City of Oakwood for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal charter of the City of Oakwood.*] I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Oakwood to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward or expectation thereof." 
(*If applicable) 
(Ord. No. 554, art. V, § 1, 1-14-2008; Amd. No. 554, art. V, § 2, 6-9-2008) 
Secs. 2-69—2-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-95. - Membership. 
The city planning commission shall consist of five members, each of which shall be residents of the city, appointed by the mayor of the city. The terms of the members shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the first city planning commission under the terms of this article, one of the members shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years, and two for a term of four years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor who shall also have the authoring to remove any city-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 1, 12-12-1977; Ord. No. 2016-CO-05-740, § 1, 5-16-2016) 
Sec. 2-96. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
The city planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the municipality. The planning commission shall make its own rules of meetings and determining its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and with the city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 2, 12-12-1977) 
Sec. 2-97. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then said planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957. (Act No. 353, as amended.) 
(Ord. No. 45, § 3, 12-12-1977) 
Sec. 2-98. - [Compensation.] 
Members of all boards, commissions and committees of the City of Oakwood shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. For all meetings which occur within Hall County, Georgia, each member shall receive a per diem for each meeting attended in an amount equal to the per diem for city officials set forth in section 2-6 of the Oakwood City Code. For approved travel outside of Hall County, Georgia, travel reimbursement shall be as set forth in section 2-7 of the Oakwood City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-CO-05-740, § 2, 5-16-2016) 
Secs. 2-99—2-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ETHICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Ethics in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-123. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that city council members avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-124 which might result in or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 3, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-124. - Acceptance of gifts. 
(a)  City council members shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation or group which: 
(1)  Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  In exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have a councilmember exercise a matter of discretion in his favor; 
(3)  In exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the councilmember. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 2, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-125. - Financial interests of members. 
The city council members may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. Aside from these restrictions, city council members are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 4, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6. 
Sec. 2-126. - Use of public property. 
A city council member shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities nor shall he direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 5, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-127. - Use of confidential information. 
A city council member shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 6, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-128. - Coercion by councilmembers. 
A city council member shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family or those with whom a councilmember has business or financial ties. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 7, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-129. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
A city council member shall not vote on an ordinance or amendment in a city council meeting that would directly affect his private business. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 8, 1-14-2008) 
State Law reference— Voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6. 
Sec. 2-130. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A city council member shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 9, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-131. - City attorneys used for private business. 
A city council member shall not use the attorneys who are under retainer by the city for personal or private business without paying just compensation. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 10, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-132. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A city council member shall not use his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business or political purposes; or 
(3)  Work for him personally without offering just compensation. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 11, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-133. - Travel expenses. 
A city council member shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention or conference without refunding the pro rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 12, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-134. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-01-654, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, deleted § 2-134 in its entirety. Former § 2-134 pertained to penalties. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 2-135. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition of the board of ethics: 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of three residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor and councilmembers shall each designate one qualified citizen to provide a pool of six individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these six qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified three members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board of ethics will elect one of its members to serve as chairperson. The city attorney shall serve as an ex officio member. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city manager shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of the complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; and 
(7)  To report its findings to the city council for such action as the city council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 14, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-136. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
The decision of the board of ethics and recommended penalty shall be rendered to mayor and council within five days of completion of the hearing by the board of ethics. The mayor shall call for a special called meeting within five days of receipt of the decision of the board of ethics to consider accepting or rejecting the decision. If accepted in whole or in part, the city council shall render its decision as to penalty at its next regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 15, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 2010-CO-01-654, § 2, 2-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-137. - Public reprimand or censure; member rights. 
(a)  Any member of the city council who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the city council. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the city council who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. II, § 16, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-138. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the city council or the complainant adversely affected by any findings or decision of the board of ethics upon acceptance or rejection by the city council may obtain judicial review of such final city council action as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Hall County within 30 days after the decision of the city council to accept or reject the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-01-654, § 3, 2-8-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-01-654, § 3, 2-8-2010, deleted § 2-138 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 2-138 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 2-139. - Conflict of interest. 
No employee of the city shall knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. III, § 1, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-140. - Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, special privileges. 
(a)  Employees shall not accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors or services that may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally nor to prohibit employees from accepting loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that employees guard against relationships which might be construed as or give the appearance of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(b)  Employees shall not accept payment from outside sources for professional services (e.g., teaching, instructing, speaking engagements, consulting, honorariums) when such activities are done on city time or when such services pertain to the purchase or sale of city property. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. III, § 2, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-141. - Proprietorship of creations. 
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions and other items produced or created by employees during working hours or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. III, § 3, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-142. - Confidential information. 
Employees shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. III, § 4, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-143. - Specific conflicts of interest. 
(a)  If an employee of the city is an officer, director, agent or member of, or owns interest in any entity which is subject to the regulation of, or which has financial commitments with the city, he shall file a sworn statement to this effect with the city clerk. 
(b)  Employees shall not transact any business in their official capacity with any business entity of which he is an officer, director, agent, member or in which he owns a controlling interest excluding civic, charitable or religious organizations. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. III, § 5, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-144. - Political activity. 
(a)  No person employed by the city shall either publicly or otherwise hold himself out as a candidate in any city election while holding employment with the city. 
(b)  City employees shall not take part in any political management of political campaigns in the election of mayor or any member of the city council during any period of time for which he is expected to perform work or receive compensation from the city. 
(c)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions or services for any political party from any employee during his hours of duty, service or work with the city. 
(d)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(e)  The city in no way seeks to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours or to campaign actively during off duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(f)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. III, § 6, 1-14-2008) 
Sec. 2-145. - Outside employment; limitations and approval requirement. 
(a)  City employment shall be considered to be the primary employment of all full-time employees. No employee may engage in outside employment which will interfere with the interests of city service. Standards by which such employment is not acceptable include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Illegal activity; 
(2)  Employment that by virtue of association will reflect upon the reputation of the city; 
(3)  High hazard or fatiguing work which might detract from or reduce city performance. 
(b)  Prior to beginning any regularly scheduled outside employment, employees will obtain specific written approval from their department head or his designee on request forms which indicate the name of the outside employer, the nature of the work, hours of work, address and telephone number where the employee can be reached. Such information will become a part of the employee's official personnel record. Employees are required to obtain approval from their department head or his designee for any change in a previously approved outside employment request. 
(c)  Any employee accepting or engaging in outside employment under the terms of this rule shall make arrangements with the outside employer to be available to respond immediately to any emergency call of duty whenever the department head or his designee shall determine that the employee's services are necessary. 
(d)  Employees sustaining injuries while engaged in outside employment are normally ineligible to receive benefits under the city's worker's compensation program. If an employee sustains an injury while engaged in outside employment but is performing duties within the scope of his city responsibilities (i.e., a police arrest), he may be eligible for partial city worker's compensation benefits. 
(e)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section will result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 554, art. III, § 7, 1-14-2008) 
Secs. 2-146—2-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget ordinances and resolutions, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-174—2-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGETS 

Sec. 2-200. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal (calendar) year which shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31. 
(Ord. No. 563, art. II, 8-11-2008) 
Sec. 2-201. - Budget proposal deadline. 
The city manager shall prepare the proposed budget goals and budget schedule for the city council's consideration no later than August 1 for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 563, art. III, § 1, 8-11-2008) 
Sec. 2-202. - Budget preparation schedule. 
The budget preparation schedule will include milestones for the following: 
(1)  Current year revenue and operating, salary and capital expenditure projections. 
(2)  Budget kickoff meeting with department managers. 
(3)  Public hearings for setting the tax millage rate. 
(4)  Work sessions for the city manager to present proposed operating budget, capital improvement program and capital budget to the mayor and city council for review. Scope, content and form shall be in accordance with generally accepted local government accounting practices. 
(5)  Adoption of tax millage rate. 
(6)  City manager presentation of the final fiscal budget at a public hearing. 
(7)  Adoption of fiscal budget by the mayor and city council. 
(8)  Distribution of adopted budget to department managers and mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 563, art. III, § 2, 8-11-2008) 
Sec. 2-203. - Execution of the budget. 
The city manager will operate the city in accordance with the adopted budget. Any proposed amendments to the budget will be submitted to the mayor and city council for consideration as needed. 
(Ord. No. 563, art. III, § 3, 8-11-2008) 
Secs. 2-204—2-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DELINQUENT TAXES 

Sec. 2-230. - Late fees. 
After due notice and demand for payment, the city council or an authorized representative may assess a flat, one-time penalty and late fee of $25.00 to defray the costs of the city in initiating collection procedures and thereafter may levy upon all property and rights to property, except such as are exempt by law, belonging to any individual liable for payment of any taxes authorized by sections 6.1 through 6.8 of the Charter and subsequently enacted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 233, § 1, 2-13-1995) 
Sec. 2-231. - Interest. 
Said unpaid tax for which executions are issued shall bear interest at the highest legal rate that is now or may hereinafter be established by state law and, in addition thereto, the cost for issuing, levying and settling such executions shall be the same as allowed the tax collectors, constables and sheriffs of the state for like services, such costs to be paid into the city treasury. 
(Ord. No. 233, § 2, 2-13-1995) 
Chapter 4 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 4-1. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Houston, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Dayton, Ohio; and Gwinnett County, Georgia; which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city, and based on documentary evidence and oral presentation during the meeting of the mayor and council; and based upon the record of the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners' public hearing and regular meeting on August 7, 2001, including the record of testimony by Colonel John Latty, Officer John Jenkins, and Investigator J. P. Droualt of the Gwinnett Police Department, and further comments in that meeting by representatives of the adult entertainment industry, and further based upon the record of the meeting of the Oconee County Board of Commissioners on January 28, 2003, the mayor and council of the city take note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within the country. 
(b)  It is the finding of the mayor and council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or adult entertainment, (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
(c)  Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment, are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this subsection. The mayor and council of the city find it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city, as well. 
(d)  Furthermore, it is the finding of the mayor and council of the city that other forms of adult entertainment, including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
(e)  The mayor and council find that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the city are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells videotapes depicting sexual activities. In addition, the county's experience with the adult bookstore located within the county has shown that a substantial amount of activity at the bookstore involves booths which an individual may enter, view videos depicting sexual activity, and sexually interact with a bookstore patron in an adjoining booth through a hole strategically placed in the wall of adjoining booths. 
(f)  The city therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of houses of worship (religious institutions), schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the mayor and council find that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The mayor and council of the city find that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further find that such will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression, which rights are expressly acknowledged herein. To that end, the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-1, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his specified anatomical areas, as defined herein. For purposes of this section, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment. 
(1)  The term "adult entertainment establishment" means and includes the following types of businesses: 
a.  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities; 
c.  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1)a and b of this definition; 
d.  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
e.  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein; 
f.  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel; 
(2)  The term "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or live theater (mainstream theater) which means a theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Children's day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. The term "children's day care facility" includes, but is not limited to, the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "preschool." 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether a room, shop or building, wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(b)  Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers, 2004 edition). 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-2, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-3. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in section 4-17(b) when the city manager fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within 30 days as required by this chapter. 
(b)  The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(c)  No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. 
(d)  Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the city in the amount of $1,000.00. 
(e)  The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the office of the city manager within ten days after the city manager approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the office of the city manager on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this chapter will be assessed. 
(f)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1 shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-3, 1-10-2005; Amd. No. 425, § 1, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 4-4. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-4, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-5. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the city shall make application to the office of the city manager. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment, and shall include the name of the operator as defined herein and of the owner as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee of $750.00, payable in cash or by certified check, shall be paid to the city to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The office of the city manager shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator and owner. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator and owner. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator and the owner, if any, for a period five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator and the owner are at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  The operator's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator and owner for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension. 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator and the owner, all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of his criminal records to the city police department. 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator. 
(13)  If the application is made on behalf of a person or business entity doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
(14)  At least three character references for the applicant, the operator and owner from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator or owner and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The city shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator and owner, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(15)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on. 
(16)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, house of worship (religious institution), school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, the president of the corporation; 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the city manager and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. 
(1)  The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator and owner. The city manager shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The city manager shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the city manager finds: 
a.  The required investigative fee has been paid; 
b.  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
c.  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator or owner has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of the term "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of five years. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
d.  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator or owner has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by the city or any other county or municipality located in or out of the state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
e.  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
f.  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
g.  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
h.  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this chapter from to any residential area, house of worship (religious institution), school, public park or children's day care facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
i.  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this chapter or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of the city, the county, the state or the United States. 
(2)  The city manager shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirements contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-5, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-6. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is in a residential zoning district (residential area); 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land on which a house of worship (religious institution), school, college campus, public park or children's day care facility is located; 
c.  In any zoning district other than a C-2 commercial district (in these zoning districts, adult entertainment establishments shall be considered a commercial recreation enterprise); 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; or 
e.  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located. 
(2)  For purposes of subsection (a)(1)a and b of this section, distance shall be measured by airline measurement from the main entrance of the adult entertainment establishment to the closest point on the property line of the parcel of land. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. For purposes of subsection (a)(1)d of this section, distance shall be measured by airline measurement from the main entrances of the adult entertainment establishments. 
(b)  Employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 4-5(d)(3) within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" means the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this chapter operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" means and includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(2)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainer on a licensed premises, as defined in subsection (b)(1) of this section, he shall file a notice with the city police department of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city police department and shall receive a permit for such employment from the police department. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of his criminal records to the city police department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his convictions of offenses described in section 4-5(d)(3) (including pleas of nolo contendere) within the past five years. The city police department permits unit shall approve or deny the permit within 15 days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection (b), then upon payment of the permit fee, the city police department shall issue a permit approving such employment within 48 hours. If such permit is not issued within 48 hours of such finding, the employee seeking the permit may commence work at the adult entertainment establishment which is the subject of the permit application without such a permit. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. 
(3)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors working as adult entertainers shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this chapter relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(d)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this chapter. 
(e)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(f)  Lighting. All interior building areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(g)  Opaque covering on doors and windows. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this chapter shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-6, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-7. - Appeals—Procedure. 
(a)  An individual permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination with regard to his qualifications, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for city council action. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-7, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-8. - Same—Council to determine procedure. 
(a)  When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for the hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(b)  If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-8, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-9. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-9, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-10. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-10, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-11. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in any administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-11, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-12. - Report by hearing officer. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the chief of police. 
(b)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-12, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-13. - Hearing; action by council. 
The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-13, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-14. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine, or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(d)  Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(e)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-14, 1-10-2005) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 4-15. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-16, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-16. - Condition and inspections. 
(a)  Condition of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city, the county and the state. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The county fire marshal shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the county. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The city police department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-17, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-17. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this chapter; 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator and owner, conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the city manager shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the city manager's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The city clerk shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the city clerk of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this subsection shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the city manager shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the city manager denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees or agents, pursuant to this chapter, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the superior court of the county or any other court of competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, a petition for writ of mandamus pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20 through 9-6-28, and the seeking of expedited review. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the city manager and the chief of police find reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the mayor and council shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The mayor and council shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees or agents, pursuant to this chapter, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the superior court of the county or any other court of competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, a petition for writ of mandamus pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20 through 9-6-28, and the seeking of expedited review. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-18, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-18. - Chapter provisions do not condone obscene, etc., behavior. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under an applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this chapter shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-19, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-19. - Automatic license forfeiture for non-use. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall, for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized shall, after the said three-month period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-21, 1-10-2005) 
Sec. 4-20. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any non-public areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the adult entertainment establishment is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use, shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 425, § 10-23, 1-10-2005) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, adopted April 11, 2011, repealed Ch. 6, Arts. I—III, §§ 6-1, 6-21—63, 6-55—6-69, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages on private parking lots, § 3-5-5. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. Title 3; local regulation of distilled spirits, OCGA § 3-4-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; local regulation of the sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-40 et seq.; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; ordinances on drinking or drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine from whatever source by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing alcohol and shall include, but shall not be limited to, malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits. 
Authorized catered function means an event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this chapter. 
Business means any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity which exerts substantial efforts within the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in and/or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly. 
BYOB or brown bagging means possession of an open glass bottle, can or other container containing an alcoholic beverage or consumption of an alcoholic beverage on premises: 
(1)  For which a city business/occupation tax certificate has been issued; and 
(2)  Which occurs at a location different from where said alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order: united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies, place where persons regularly assemble for worship, congregation or organization for religious purposes. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Election day means that period of time beginning with the opening of polls and ending with the closing of polls. 
Establishment means any physical location or section thereof for the operation of a business. 
Food caterer means any person who holds a valid business license and, for consideration, prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where adequate sleeping accommodations are offered for paid travelers and guests whether transient, permanent or residential. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant on the premises and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of the hotel thereunder. 
Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
License means the authorization by the city to engage in the sale or consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the state and who possesses a license by a local government in the state authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
Licensee means any person engaged in selling or conducting the sale, at retail or wholesale, of any alcoholic beverages. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 35. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, brewer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. 
Minor means any person less than 21 years of age. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purposes of operating under the license; except in that in the case of hotels and motels, "premises" shall include only the portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold; except further, in the case of private clubs, "premises" shall include the swimming pool, which is in the immediate vicinity of the main building of the private club which is open to members only and their guests and not the general public. Such swimming pool must have a minimum of 2,500 square feet of water surface and with required lifeguards. "Premises" is further defined as one physically identifiable place of business consisting of one room or two or more contiguous rooms operating under the same trade name where alcoholic beverages are sold. Any premises outlets which cannot be determined as one identifiable place of business shall require additional licenses regardless of such establishments having the same trade name, ownership, or management; provided nothing herein shall require additional licenses for service bars or portable bars used exclusively for the purpose of fixing or preparing drinks when such bars are accessible only to employees of the licensed establishment and from which drinks are prepared to be served in the licensed premises. In the case of a malt beverage and/or wine licensee where a golf course is located adjacent to and contiguous with a restaurant, "premises" shall include in playing area of the golf course. 
Private club (general) means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Private club (under the Internal Revenue Code) means an organization complying with Section 501(a) of the United States Internal Revenue Code for a tax-exempt status. A certificate of such compliance shall be submitted to the city clerk before an alcoholic beverage license is issued hereunder. Such private club shall have been in operation at least one year before an application for a license hereunder is made. 
Residence means the act or fact of living or regularly staying at or in some place for the discharge of a duty or the enjoyment of a benefit or the place where one actually lives as distinguished from his domicile or place of temporary sojourn. 
Resident means a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of the county. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioned, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least five days a week, except that restaurants that open for business more than five days a week, shall be required to serve at least one meal per day each day that the restaurant is open, with the exception of holidays, vacation and periods of redecoration and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall provide at least 35 seats for customers. 
School means an organized source of education or training: as an institution for the teaching of children with the presence of full-time faculty and full-time curriculum in which the traditional subjects and learning processes associated with the early grades of the common public schools are taught. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, OCGA §§ 3-1-2, 3-7-1. 
Secs. 6-2—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALE 0F ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-26. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in this chapter and in Article IV of the City Charter. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-27. - Distances. 
(a)  No malt beverage and/or wine shall be offered for sale, sold or dispensed within 100 yards of any school building, college building, school grounds or college campus. This subsection shall not apply to any college, university, bona fide non-profit charitable organization, non-profit civic organization or authorized catered function that qualifies for a special temporary event as provided in sections 6-45 and 6-46. 
(b)  No distilled spirits shall be offered for sale or sold in an unopened package within 100 yards of any church building. 
(c)  No distilled spirits shall be offered for sale, sold or dispensed within 200 yards of any school building, college building, school grounds or college campus. This subsection shall not apply to any college, university, bona fide non-profit charitable organization, non-profit civic organization or authorized catered function that qualifies for a special temporary event as provided in sections 6-45 and 6-46. 
(d)  No malt beverages and/or wine and/or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises may be offered for sale, sold or dispensed within 100 yards of any property containing 300 housing units or fewer, which property is owned or operated by a housing authority created by Chapter 1 of Chapter 3 of Title 8 of the Housing Authorities Law. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, or to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(e)  The distance provided for herein shall not apply: 
(1)  To any premises or location where an alcoholic beverage license was issued or approved prior to July 1, 1981 so long as alcoholic beverages are being sold or dispensed in compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  To any premises or location where alcoholic beverages are being sold or dispensed in compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and a school or church is built or erected within the minimum distances provided for in this section. 
(3)  To any premises or location licensed as an importer so long as the same is allowed by the state; provided, however, no signs or other forms of advertisement shall be placed on or near the licensed premises which directly or indirectly advertise that alcoholic beverages are stored or warehoused on the premises. 
(f)  A new retail package liquor licensed place of business or the relocation of an existing retail package liquor licensed place of business engaged in the retail package sales of distilled spirits shall not be located within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail. 
(g)  All measurements to determine distances required by this chapter shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  To the front door of the building of a church, government-owned treatment center or a retail package store; or 
(3)  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes. 
(4)  All renewal applications shall use the measurements required in the initial application and license. 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, school buildings, etc., OCGA § 3-3-21. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-28. - Manufacturer, importer, wholesale, retail and consumption on the premises licenses. 
(a)  Manufacturer, importer, wholesale, retail and consumption on the premises licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city will be issued by the city council and pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall manufacture, distribute, sell, possess for sale or otherwise deal in alcoholic beverages without first obtaining all applicable licenses issued by the city council. 
(c)  Each person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall display the license prominently at all times on the premises for which the license is issued. 
(d)  The city council designates the city manager for the purpose of administering this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to other city personnel. 
State Law reference— General local powers as to alcoholic beverage licenses, OCGA § 3-3-2; license required to distribute, sell, etc., alcoholic beverages, OCGA § 3-3-3. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-29. - Qualifications for licensing. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, applicant means the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship or other organization and the managing agent. 
(b)  Every managing agent applicant for a city alcoholic beverage license shall be at least 21 years of age, a U.S. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residency and a resident of the state and shall make application on forms furnished by the city and, in connection therewith, shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data as required thereby. 
(c)  Applicants and applications. 
(1)  Where the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and an officer or agent who meets the requirements as set forth in subsection (b). The officer or agent named as the applicant shall be an individual who does in fact have regular managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full-time by the corporation. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
(2)  Where the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license shall be issued jointly to the partnership and either the managing general partner thereof, or an individual who meets the requirements set forth in subsection (b) who does in fact have managerial authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full-time by the partnership. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent." 
(3)  Where the application is made on behalf of a sole proprietorship, the license shall be issued jointly to the sole proprietorship and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in subsection (b) who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full-time by the proprietor. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent". The "managing agent" may be the sole proprietor, if he/she otherwise qualifies under this section. 
(4)  Where the application is made on behalf of any other type organization, the license shall be issued jointly to the organization and an individual who meets the requirements set forth in section 6-29(b) who does in fact have management authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, who is employed full-time by the organization. Said individual shall be known as the "managing agent". In the case of a non-profit private club, the managing agent may be an officer of the organization in lieu of a full-time employee if the individual is otherwise qualified under setion 6-29(b). 
(5)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Hall County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of Hall County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written, notarized consent of such agent with the city in such form as may be prescribed. 
(6)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(7)  The written application for the license shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current as required by this chapter. Failure to maintain a current application shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(8)  In the event the "managing agent" changes, the licensee shall notify the city within five days of the change. A fee as set forth in chapter 22 of the Code will be charged for the processing of an application for the change of the "managing agent" and such applicant must be approved by the city council. 
(9)  In the event the "registered agent" changes, the licensee shall notify city within five days of the change. A fee as set forth in chapter 22 of the Code will be charged for the processing of a change in the "registered agent." 
(d)  No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership, interest in, share in the profits from or otherwise participate in the business of any alcoholic beverage licensee in the city unless a full description of such interest shall have been furnished the city council at the time such interest arose. It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the council, within five days, any change in any interest in such licensee's business including but not limited to: 
Any division of the profits; 
Any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
Any change in the ownership of any lease, building or land used in such business; 
Any change in the ownership of any corporation that has any interest in such business or the change of management of such corporation. 
(1)  After receipt of such notice, the council shall notify such person within a reasonable time of any objection to the ownership or interest set forth therein and it shall then be incumbent upon such person to dispose of such interest within 30 days after the mailing of the notice to do so by the council to such person at his address as shown on such notice of interest. In the event such interest is not disposed of within 30 days after the mailing of the notice by the council, or in the event no objections are filed within such thirty-day period, or in the event such person fails to notify the council of the transfer of any such interest within 20 days after the acquisition thereof, then the license as provided for herein may be revoked by the council until disposition of the interest has been made or notice given to the council of the transfer. 
(2)  The report required by this section shall be in the form required by the council and shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application on file with the council and as such shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required of license applications. 
(e)  The city may approve all applications for renewal of an existing license upon payment of the license fees for renewal of licenses where no objections have been filed and the application clearly shows no change in the ownership, managing agent, location or operation of the business. If objections have been filed or if there have been any changes in the ownership, managing agent, location or operation of the business, a new application must be approved by the city council. The city license issued shall be valid for the calendar year indicated thereon and shall expire at midnight on the date of the first regularly scheduled city council meeting of the following year unless a renewal license is approved by the city council at said meeting or previously renewed by the city marshal. Renewal licenses for subsequent calendar years become effective upon approval by the city council. A licensee that desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make application for such year and pay all renewal license fees set forth in chapter 22 for such year on or before December 15 of the preceding year. Any application and accompanying license fees submitted after the due date of December 15 shall not be considered at the regular January meeting of the city council and shall automatically lapse on January 1 and required the submission of a new application. 
(1)  No city license may be transferred from one person or from one location to another without permission and approval of the city council upon receipt of a written application made. Approvals as to any change shall be at the discretion of the city council. In the event of a change in the managing agent of a licensee, the city license shall remain in effect pending approval or denial of the transfer provided: 
a.  The licensee notifies the city clerk within five days of the change of the managing agent; 
b.  The licensee submits a proper written application for approval thereof; 
c.  The licensee pays a transfer fee as set forth in chapter 22 of the Code; 
d.  The transferee meets all qualifications required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section; and 
e.  There has been no change of ownership, location or operation of the business. 
(2)  Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representatives, his heirs or if the license holder was an officer of a corporation, post, chapter or club, then any other officer thereof may continue to operate under the existing license for the balance of the year without paying a transfer fee, if the persons who will continue to operate under said license qualify as license holders under subsections (a) and (b); or the license may be transferred to a transferee qualified under subsections (a) and (b) within 30 days after the condition of the estate of the deceased licensee will permit, provided that such transferee pays the original license fee required by chapter 22. 
(3)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at some other new location must make a complete new application for such new location. Upon proper application and provided that there has been no change of ownership or interest in the business, the city council may permit the license to be transferred upon payment of a fee required in chapter 22 for a change of location, provided that the licensee and the new location meet all qualifications required by this chapter. The fee for a change of location shall be in addition to the original license fee paid by the licensee for the calendar year. 
(4)  Upon the sale of an existing business, the city license issued for that business location shall remain in effect pending approval or denial of a new application by the city council, provided that the buyer or transferee meets all the qualifications required by subsections (a) and (b) and provided that the buyer or transferee has immediately upon the date of sale or prior to the date of sale made proper written application and has paid the original license fee required by chapter 22. 
(5)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business such license shall be invalid and the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the city council and return his license thereto. 
(f)  The city council may in its discretion require a personal statement of any employee of any licensed establishment for licensing purposes. 
(g)  When contrary to the public interest and welfare no license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be issued by the city council to or for: 
(1)  Any person as determined by the city council by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest or reputation in any community in which he has resided who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of application for such license. 
(4)  Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(5)  A location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the city council because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties or on the neighborhood. 
(6)  A location within an area where, in the judgment of the city council, the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(7)  A location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended and where, in the judgment of the city council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(8)  Which the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations. 
(9)  The operation of a distilled spirits package business licensed hereunder by any person already holding two such licenses. 
(10)  Any person who is an official of or employee of the city with the exception of the designated employee holding a license for city facilities. 
(11)  Any person who is as close kin as brothers or sisters, by blood or marriage, to one already holding two distilled spirits package licenses under this chapter. 
(12)  Any trustee or director of a private club, if disqualified under this chapter. 
(13)  Any person to operate a restaurant or club except as defined in section 6-1. Consumption on the premises sales shall be made in no other place or establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-30. - Excise tax on mixed drinks consumed on premises. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means the person designated by the licensee in his application for permit to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Drink or mixed drink shall include any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by water or other substance in solution. 
Licensee means a person who holds a license from the city to engage in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including receipts, credit, property or services of any kind or nature and also the amount of which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any distilled spirits by the drink. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this section. 
(b)  Imposition and rate of tax. There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchaser of a distilled spirit for beverage purposes by the drink within this city a tax in an amount equal to three percent of the purchase price charged to the purchaser of the mixed drink. 
(c)  Authority and requirement of licensee to collect the tax. Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed herein from purchasers of distilled spirits by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the city to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(d)  Collection of tax; records; rules and regulations. In all cases where the collection of food and drinks is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee is liable at the time of and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The city shall have authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for collection and payment of the tax. 
(e)  Determination, returns and payments. 
(1)  Due dates of taxes. The tax imposed by this section shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any mixed drink in this city. All amounts of such taxes collected by the licensees shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period for which the tax is imposed; provided, however, that upon a proper showing that the tax imposed will not be collected until after a regular billing period of the collecting agent, then the collection of the tax may be deferred by the city for an additional period not exceeding 30 days. 
(2)  Return; time of filing; person required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city in such form as the city may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder. All returns shall show the gross receipt of the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of tax collected on such drinks. 
(3)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951, as now or hereafter amended (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.). 
(f)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  City may compute. If the city has cause to believe that the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any monthly period. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes. 
(3)  Notice of determination; service. The city or its designated representatives shall give to the licensee written notice of its determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(g)  Determination if no return made. 
(1)  Estimates of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in possession of or may come into the possession of the city. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (f) (3) of this section. 
(2)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the tenth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof would have been returned until the date of payment. 
(h)  Penalty for nonpayment. Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed or fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the tax or amount of the tax in addition to the tax or the amount of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in subsection (g)(2) of this section. 
(i)  Action for tax; tax credit; penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of the state, any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees and other legal fees incident thereto. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. If the licensee determines that he has been overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it is paid or from his administrator or executors. 
(j)  Administration. 
(1)  Records required from licensee, etc.; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city may require. 
(2)  Examination of records; audits. The city or any person authorized in writing by the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee for sale of distilled spirits by the drink and any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(3)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this section, the city may require the filing of reports by any person having in such person's possession or custody information relating to purchases which are subject to the tax. Reports shall be filed with the city when required by the city and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase and such other information as the city may require. 
(k)  Violations. 
(1)  Criminal penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as follows: a maximum penalty of 90 days in jail or a $500.00 fine or both. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the section is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(2)  Civil penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, in addition to the other penalties and liabilities provided for herein, have his license or permit revoked as provided for previously herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-31. - Sale by posts, chapters and clubs or national veterans and fraternal organizations. 
The applicant under this section shall, in addition to all other applicable sections of this chapter, furnish evidence satisfactory to the city that such post, chapter or club of a national veterans organization or nonprofit social club has been approved as a tax exempt entity by the U.S.I.R.S. No license shall be issued or renewed for the sale of alcoholic beverages prior to the furnishing of said evidence to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-32. - Excise tax generally. 
(a)  Except as to the mixed drink tax provided for in section 6-30, excise taxes on alcoholic beverages shall be paid and collected in the following manner. Such tax shall be paid by persons selling alcoholic beverages to retail package and/or consumption on the premises licensees by the tenth day of each month following the month in which deliveries were made. Copies of the "summary of sales" showing delivery by each supplier to retailers and/or consumption on the premises licensees shall be furnished to the city clerk council with each monthly payment. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in reports or applications shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant or licensee liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(b)  In addition to such annual license fee there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling distilled spirits within the city, an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, the rate shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to a retail dealer without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of said tax. 
(c)  Persons selling malt beverages to retail package and/or consumption of the premises licensees shall comply with subsection (a) but will substitute "state form ATT-122" for "summary of sales." 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-33. - License applications; contents and terms. 
(a)  All applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be made in person by the applicant to the city manager or designee in writing on forms furnished by the city clerk; signed by the applicant in compliance with subsection 6-29(a) and shall contain but not be restricted to the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age, address and length of residency of applicant. 
(2)  The name of the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship or other organization applying for the license. Said name shall include the legal name as well as the trade name of the business. 
(3)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person with an interest in the application has made application at any previous time for any alcoholic beverage license and the disposition of such application. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any person with an interest in the application has ever been convicted of a crime other than for traffic violations. 
(5)  Whether a previous license issued to the applicant or any person with interest in the application has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government and the reason therefor. 
(6)  Whether any other person is to be interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses or both of the proposed business. 
(7)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete, detailed plans of such building and outside premises are attached to the application and an occupancy permit for this premises to be licensed has been issued by the building inspector for the city. The completed building shall comply with this Code and the regulations of the state. Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front on the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(8)  All new applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be accompanied either by lawful money of the U.S. or by a certified check or cashier's check, payable to the city for the proper amount of the license fee. If the application is denied or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, less an administrative fee as set forth in chapter 22 shall be retained by the city. 
(9)  All applications for renewal of alcoholic beverage licenses shall be filed with and approved by the city manager or designee and accompanied by full payment of the proper license renewal fees as set forth in chapter 22 hereof on or before December 15th of the preceding year. 
(10)  No application shall be acted upon by the city council except at a regular meeting of the council. 
(11)  Failure to submit a renewal application with all required fees by December 15 of the previous year shall result in the automatic lapsing of said license on January 1 and any subsequent application may not be considered by the city council until its regular February meeting. 
(12)  All applications for new or renewal licenses for consideration at any meeting other than the first regular meeting of the year shall be submitted by the 15 th of the preceding month to be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council unless waived in writing by the city manager upon a determination by the city manager, in his discretion, that said waiver would be in the best interests of the city. 
(13)  The financial responsibility of every applicant for an alcoholic beverage license must be shown to the satisfaction of the city council. Each applicant shall submit with the application a complete statement of his financial condition. 
(14)  Every application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied by a survey with standard notes prepared and stamped by a registered surveyor showing the nearest church, funeral chapel, school or college and that the proposed location of the business complies with section 6-27 hereof. 
(15)  No alcoholic beverage licenses (either new or renewal) shall be issued to any person unless the real estate property taxes for the building in which the building is located are current as of the date of application. 
(16)  No alcoholic beverage licenses (either new or renewal) shall be issued to any person unless the personal property taxes and business licenses associated with the business located on the premises of the alcohol license are current as of the date of application. 
(17)  All licensees shall provide a copy of the current state license to sell alcoholic beverages when issued and shall maintain a copy of the current license with the city clerk as it is updated. 
(b)  No application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be acted upon by the city council until after the applicant shall have published a notice of such application in a local newspaper in the city for at least four different days prior to the regular meeting at which such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship or organization and the name of the managing agent applying for the license and the location of the proposed business. This notice shall not be required from an existing alcoholic beverage license holder making application for the renewal of an existing license at the same location. 
(c)  The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be sufficient cause for the refusal, suspension, revocation or cancellation of such license, as the city council shall deem proper. 
(d)  The license fees for which provision is made within this chapter are due and payable immediately. Any person who is doing business on or after the first day of January shall pay the full annual license fee without proration; provided, however, that if an application is filed after July 1st, the license fee shall be ½ of the annual license fee for such calendar year. 
(e)  In the case of the revocation or surrender of an alcoholic beverage license before expiration, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city is a privilege and not a right, and the issuance of a license hereunder shall not create any property rights in the license holder. 
(g)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by a holder of an alcoholic beverage license, or his agent, or employee, shall be unlawful, and shall be punishable as provided in this Code and shall also subject the holder of such license to suspension or revocation of such license as the city council deems proper. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-34. - Violations; reporting and acting on. 
(a)  Upon a charge that there has been a violation of this chapter, the city council may order the place of business closed pending a hearing on the charge as provided for in section 6-41. 
(b)  The chief of police or any police department shift commander on duty at the time may close any location holding an alcoholic beverage license for a period not in excess of 24 hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare, safety or morals, when in the judgment of the chief of police or shift commander such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare, safety or morals. 
(c)  The city council shall have the right to suspend any alcoholic beverage license pending a hearing provided for in section 6-41 where, in the judgment of the city council, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals. 
(d)  Any suspension as provided for herein shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated and shall be delivered to a license holder, registered agent or person in charge of said business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-35. - Regulations. 
(a)  No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell less than 22 ounces of malt beverages, whether in one container or a multiunit container, unless he has a pouring license. 
(2)  Knowingly furnish or cause to be furnished or permit any other person in his employ to furnish any minor alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(4)  Knowingly sell alcoholic beverages to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(5)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
a.  The hours of sale of malt beverages and wine are: 
1.  Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight and Sunday 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m.; provided the regular store hours are the same as the hours that beer and wine are sold by the merchant. 
2.  The hours of sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption by the drink on the premises are 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. through 12:00 midnight on Sunday, provided the regular establishment hours of operation are the same as the hours that beer and wine are sold by the merchant and provided the establishment shall be in full compliance with all other provisions [of the] within the chapter including, but not limited to, the provisions of section 6-31 regarding the ratio of food sales to alcoholic beverages sold. 
3.  No malt beverages or wine will be sold within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
4.  The sale of malt beverages or wine at any other time is prohibited. 
b.  It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. The hours of sale of distilled spirits shall be as follows: 
1.  No distilled spirits shall be sold by the bottle or package in the city within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
2.  On all other days, Monday through Friday, the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package shall cease at 11:45 p.m. and not be resumed before 8:00 a.m. All premises upon which distilled spirits are sold by the package shall be closed and empty of people between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. On Saturday, the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package shall cease at 11:45 p.m. and not be resumed before 12:30 p.m. on Sunday afternoon. All premises upon which distilled spirits are sold by the package on Saturday shall be closed and empty of people between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday afternoon. On Sunday, the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package shall cease at 11:30 p.m. and not be resumed before 8:00 a.m. on Monday morning. All premises upon which distilled spirits are sold by the package on Sunday shall be closed and empty of people between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
3.  The hours of sale of distilled spirits for consumption by the drink on the premises for beverage purposes are 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 12:30 p.m. through 12:00 midnight on Sunday provided the regular establishment hours of operation be the same as the hours that distilled spirits are sold by the merchant and provided the establishment shall be in full compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the provisions of section 6-65 regarding the ratio of food sales to alcoholic beverages sold. 
(6)  Allow any person less than 18 years of age to be in, frequent or loiter in any lounge located within the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(7)  Allow any person less than 18 years of age to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(8)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. Such misconduct shall be immediately reported to the city police department. 
(9)  Sell any distilled spirits through or by means of a drive-in window. 
(10)  Sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages by use of vending machines. 
(11)  Sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not authorized under his license. 
(12)  Add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(13)  Receive or cause to be delivered at the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages by any means other than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a license from the city to make such deliveries. Transportation of alcoholic beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of all licenses concerned. 
(14)  All licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall end daily business operations and remove, or cause to be removed, from the area of the premises utilized by customers or patrons all alcoholic beverages at or before the closing time for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The following shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license. 
(1)  The violation by the license holder or his employee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors or any ordinance of the city other than traffic violations. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the city council and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(2)  The failure of the license holder or his employee to report promptly to the police department any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring on the premises. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the owner of the business, the license holder or his employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. While not to be considered a comprehensive or exhaustive listing of prohibited behavior, specific instances of prohibited behavior by the owner, the license holder and/or his employee include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Consumption or under the influence of alcoholic beverage while working or on duty; 
b.  Breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence; 
c.  The solicitation on the licensed premises by the owner, the license holder or by any employee of the license holder, for the license holder or employee or for any person other than a patron and guest of a patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic, or money with which to purchase the drink; the paying by a license holder of a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting the establishment of the license holder or to the agent, employee or manager of the license holder to solicit the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. For purposes of this subsection, neither the owner, the license holder nor any employee of such license holder shall be considered a guest of any patron; 
d.  The conviction of the owner, license holder or employee of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the license holder to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner; 
e.  The violation of any state law or regulation governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or transportation of alcoholic beverages; 
f.  The violation of any section of O.C.G.A. Tit. 10, Ch. 1, Art. 15, Pt. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.), the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, reasonably related to the operation of licensed establishments; 
g.  The conviction of the owner or the license holder of driving under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or drugs; 
h.  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the license holder or the license holder's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct; 
i.  The selling or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person that the license holder or the license holder's employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication; 
j.  The failure to comply with any and all federal, state or municipal tax laws and regulations applicable to the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages; 
k.  Failure by the license holder to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the owner or license holder, including but not limited to parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
l.  The advertising of alcoholic beverages in violation of applicable state law. 
(4)  Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. Any combination totaling three or more of the following occurrences within any thirty-day period shall constitute prima facie evidence that the license holder is operating or conducting an alcoholic beverage business in a manner which is contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance: Three or more violations of law, violations of municipal ordinances, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, all occurring on the premises. The business license holder shall, upon suspension for violations of this section, have the burden of proving such occurrences were beyond his control and not related to the operation of his business. 
(5)  The violation of any state law or regulation or municipal ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  The violation of any provision contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011; Ord. No. 2011-CO-12-687, § 1, 12-19-2011; Ord. No. 2016-CO-03-736, § 1, 4-11-2016; Ord. No. 2016-CO-11-746, § 1, 12-12-2016) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, election days and Christmas Day, OCGA § 3-3-20; sale, etc., of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons, OCGA § 3-3-22; furnishing to persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages, OCGA § 3-3-23; dispensing, serving, selling, etc., of alcoholic beverages by persons under 18 years of age, OCGA § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 6-36. - General regulations. 
(a)  Retail alcoholic beverage licenses shall be revoked if gross sales of merchandise other than malt beverages and wines fall below the sum of $1,500.00 monthly for four consecutive months. Upon written request from the city, a retail licensee shall provide such evidence by affidavit on or before the twentieth day of the month following the request and also attach to the affidavit copies of his state sales tax records. In the event the gross sales of merchandise other than malt beverages and wine fall below the monthly sum of $1,500.00 then the retail licensee shall, without request, provide such evidence by affidavit and by sales tax records on or before the twentieth day of the following month until such sales exceed $1,500.00. All records submitted pursuant to this section shall remain confidential. 
(b)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall maintain at least 50 percent of their business volume from the sale of food, private clubs excepted. Food sales shall include all consumable items sold on the premises except alcoholic beverages. The 50 percent ratio shall be determined on a calendar quarter basis on the monthly report submitted by each licensee. In the event food sales fall below 50 percent of the business volume of the license holder for any two consecutive quarters, then the license holder shall be placed on probation for the next succeeding quarter. At the end of the next succeeding quarter, if food sales have not attained 50 percent of business volume, then the city manager shall suspend such license in accordance with section 6-34. Nothing herein provided shall prevent the city council or the city manager from suspending or revoking such license for any other violations of this chapter. Authorized officials of the city may examine the records of businesses licensed hereunder at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this and other provisions of this chapter are met. 
(c)  Upon the failure of any person selling alcoholic beverages in the city to furnish to the city manager any report required by the ordinances of the city or to pay any tax due the city for the sale of such commodities, promptly when due, there shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due or shown to be due by any such report, in addition to such tax. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage by the drink or package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public use is prohibited, except that private parties and conventions, or a properly permitted wine tasting, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms, and provided further that this prohibition shall not apply at private clubs hereunder, nor to the sale for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
(e)  All alcoholic beverages shall be stored only on the premises for which the license is issued. 
(f)  All licensees, who open their place of business on Sunday for the sale of merchandise other than alcoholic beverages, shall post in conspicuous locations where alcoholic beverages are on display, the prohibition against sales on Sunday in such a manner as approved by the city council. 
(g)  The following acts involving minors are prohibited: 
(1)  No person knowingly, by himself or through another, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in his employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(6)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection (d) in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(h)  The prohibition contained in subsection (g) above shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  The sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
a.  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state. 
b.  At a religious ceremony. 
c.  In the home with parental consent. 
(2)  A person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. § 40-5-100 et seq. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(i)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to section 6-35(a)(3), nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment. 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured. 
(3)  Taking orders for, and having possession of, alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hold an alcoholic beverage license (package or consumption) who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any alcoholic beverage license (package or consumption) to accept or receive financial aid or assistance from the holder of any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's or wholesale dealer's license. 
(k)  The holder of every alcoholic beverage license hereunder shall have available in his place of business at all times a copy of this chapter and shall be responsible for compliance herewith by all persons on the premises. 
(l)  The city manager, the assistant city manager, the chief of police or any policeman of the city may enter upon the premises operated under the provisions of this chapter during operating hours for the purpose of inspecting the premises and enforcing this chapter and shall have access during the inspection of all books. records, and supplies relating to the sale, storage or possession of alcoholic beverages. 
(m)  Reserved. 
(n)  A retail dealer (sale by package only on licensed premises) license will entitle the licensee to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine at one location only, and only in the original and unopened container, and shall not permit the opening of containers in the package store where sold. All distilled spirits possessed by a licensee shall be kept in the package store and no distilled spirits retailer's place of business shall have more than one entrance, which must open on a public street or pedestrian way of a planned shopping center, except as approved by state law, and shall contain no vestibule, closet, booth, room or other place where persons may consume alcoholic beverages. Distilled spirits businesses operated under this license shall not be operated in conjunction with or open into or have access to or from any lunchroom, dining room, dance hall or store. The windows in such retail place of business shall not be obstructed or obscured but shall be so arranged that a passerby on the street can view the premises of such retailer by looking through windows opening onto such street. The licensee shall be allowed to construct restrooms for the use of owners and employees only, an office clearly visible in the package store and a storage area in each licensed package store. 
(o)  Upon receipt by the city clerk of any application for an alcoholic beverage license or for the transfer of any license, he shall forward the same to the chief of police for investigation who, following such investigation, shall attach thereto the entire police record of every person named in the application. The city clerk or designee shall then submit the application with such report attached to the city council. 
(p)  Every managing agent applicant, as defined in this chapter, for an alcoholic beverage license shall submit along with his or her application two fingerprint cards completed by a member of a law enforcement agency. Such fingerprints shall be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. 
(q)  Employee permits. 
(1)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders or mix alcoholic beverages or in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package or for consumption on premises or an establishment holding a license for beer or wine for consumption on premises unless such person has been approved by the chief of police or his designee. The individual named on the alcoholic beverage license for such establishment shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Upon approval by the chief of police or his designee, such person shall be issued an employee permit which shall contain the name, expiration date, fingerprint and photograph of such employee. Such employee permit shall remain the property of the city and shall be in the possession of the employee at any time he or she is working at any licensed establishment, and shall be produced upon the request of any law enforcement officer of the city. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the Oakwood Police Department and upon the payment of the non-refundable fee designated in chapter 22 of this Code. The applicant shall furnish, at the time of presenting the application, two forms of valid, current identification. Such application shall contain the following information: Applicant's name, date of birth, height, weight, race, sex, address, telephone number and disclosure of arrest record. Applicant must give permission to the police department to obtain and inspect any criminal history on such applicant which is in the possession of any law enforcement agency. 
(4)  No person shall be granted an employee permit that has been convicted, plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving the sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or any felony within three years of the date of the application. 
(5)  No person shall be granted an employee permit if he or she has been the holder of an alcoholic beverage license or employee permit which has been revoked within five years of the date of the application. 
(6)  An employee permit shall be valid for twelve months from the date of issue. At the expiration of twelve months, the employee permit may be renewed upon the submission of a renewal application, the payment of the appropriate fee as set forth in chapter 22 and upon determination that such individual remains qualified under this chapter. 
(7)  An employee permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police if it is determined that the individual has violated any provision of this chapter or committed any offense which would make him or her ineligible to hold such a permit. 
(8)  Notification of any denial, suspension or revocation of an employee permit shall be in writing and served either in person or by certified mail and shall contain the reasons for such action and the notice of the right to appeal the decision. 
a.  Decisions of the chief of police that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant, certificate holder or permit holder under this chapter may be appealed to the city council, as provided in this chapter of this Code. All appeals shall be submitted in writing to the chief of police within ten calendar days after notification of the adverse decision. 
b.  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of the filing of the written appeal unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the chief of police or unless the hearing is rescheduled by the city council. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. 
c.  The appellant shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the hearing at least seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
d.  The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the finding by certiorari to the Superior Court of Hall County. 
(9)  Falsifying or failing to disclose any information required by this chapter shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the employee permit. 
(10)  The employee permit is non-transferable and is valid only for the individual named on the permit. Such permit is valid for the individual named while employed in any establishment licensed in the city. 
(11)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold an employee permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid employee permit. Provided, however, that an individual may be employed for a period of time not to exceed 14 days pending the submission of the application to and the approval of the permit by the police department. 
(12)  It shall be the duty of the alcoholic beverage license holder to file with the police department on a monthly basis a report which lists all employees currently employed in a capacity which would require an employee permit. Such report shall include the name and date of birth of all such individuals, as well as the same information on all such individuals who have terminated employment during the reporting period. Failure to submit said report to the police department by the tenth day of each month shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-37. - City facilities alcoholic beverage license. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages and consumption of mixed drinks on the premises of city facilities shall be allowed. 
(b)  The consumption on the premises license provided for herein is exempted from the food sale requirements provided for in section 6-36 of this chapter. 
(c)  The city shall offer for bid an alcoholic beverage license, except as provided in subsection (f) below: 
(1)  For consumption on the premises of city facilities; 
(2)  Each bid shall be according to the terms and provisions set forth in the invitation to bid by the city council; 
(3)  The right to sell alcoholic beverages under this bid system shall go to the highest and best bidder which is deemed in the overall best interest of the city and shall entitle each license holder to the exclusive sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of city facilities; 
(4)  All sales of alcoholic beverages under each license shall be competitive and be of sufficient quality as is required by the franchise agreement that will be entered into between the city and the grantee of the franchise. 
(d)  The bidder must provide sufficient proof that he would be entitled to a business license and an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises under this chapter. 
(e)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed on the premises of city facilities unless the alcoholic beverages are delivered by or sold by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license provided for in subsections (c) and (f). 
(f)  A designated city employee may hold an alcoholic beverage license for city facilities so that the orderly operation of the city facilities will not be interrupted in the event the person or entity holding the alcoholic beverage license for the facility is unable to serve alcoholic beverages for any reason. There shall be no city license fee paid by the designated city employee. 
(g)  The hours of sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises of city facilities shall be the same as provided in section 6-35(a)(5) of this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-38. - General license fees, excise taxes. 
(a)  Malt beverages. 
(1)  The applicant for a retail package license for the sale of malt beverages shall pay to the city, at the time his application is submitted, the amount fixed in chapter 22 as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location or business where the products will be sold. 
(2)  The applicant for a consumption on the premises malt beverage license shall, in addition to all other fees, pay to the city, at the time his application is submitted, the amount fixed in chapter 22. Such sales shall be in connection with a business or club, as defined in section 6-1; sales shall be made in no other place or establishments. 
(3)  There is imposed and levied upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages in the city, an excise tax in the sum of $0.05 per 12 ounces, or proportion thereof, so as to graduate the tax on bottles and cans and containers of various sizes on the sale of malt beverages under this chapter. 
The holder of a wholesale dealer license shall not sell less than 24 ounces of beer or malt beverages, whether in one container or a multi-unit container, unless he is holding a pouring license with the following exceptions: 
a.  Draft beer may be purchased from a licensed wholesaler in kegs and dispensed on tap into one-half gallon and one gallon plastic containers. 
b.  Before making a sale of the draft beer, the wholesale dealer is required to place a sealed locking cap on the container in which said draft beer is sold. 
c.  The draft beer can only be sold at retail and consumption of same on the premises, inside or outside the building, shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Wine. 
(1)  The applicant for a retail package license for the sale of wine shall pay to the city, at the time his application is submitted, the amount fixed in chapter 22 as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location or business where the products will be sold. 
(2)  In addition to such annual license fee, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling wine within the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package, which tax shall not exceed $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(3)  The applicant for consumption on the premises wine license shall, in addition to all other fees, pay to the city, at the time his application is submitted, the amount fixed in chapter 22. Such sales shall be in connection with a business or club, as defined in section 6-1; sales shall be made in no other place or establishments. 
(c)  Distilled spirits. 
(1)  The applicant for a retail package license for the sale of distilled spirits shall pay to the city, at the time his application is submitted, the amount fixed in chapter 22 as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location or business where the products will be sold. 
(2)  In addition to such annual license fee there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling distilled spirits within the city, an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, the rate shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to a retail dealer without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of said tax. 
(3)  The applicant for a consumption on the premises distilled spirits license shall, in addition to all other fees, pay to the city, at the time his application is submitted, the amount fixed in chapter 22 for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. Such sales shall be in connection with a business or club, as defined in section 6-1; sales shall be made in no other place or establishments. 
(d)  Wholesale. Any wholesale dealer in malt beverages, wines or distilled spirits licensed by the state and not exempted by state law, or the agent of such wholesale dealer will be granted a permit upon payment of the amount fixed in chapter 22 for malt beverages and the amount fixed in chapter 22 annually for wine and the amount fixed in chapter 22 annually for distilled spirits to distribute such beverages in the city upon application for such permits to the city, and the presentation of evidence that he understands this chapter and the conditions under which licenses are issued. 
(e)  Manufacturer. The applicant for a manufacturer license shall pay to the city, at the time his application is submitted, the amount fixed in chapter 22 as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location where the products will be manufactured. 
(f)  Importer licenses. Any importer of malt beverages, wines or distilled spirits licensed by the state will be granted a license for the warehousing and distribution of malt beverages to other importers or wholesale dealers upon payment of the amount fixed in chapter 22 annually and will be granted a license for the warehousing and distribution of distilled spirits to other importers or wholesale dealers upon payment of the amount fixed in chapter annually, and will be granted a license for the warehousing and distribution of wine to other importers or wholesale dealers upon payment of the amount fixed in chapter 22 annually. Such licenses shall permit the warehousing of malt beverages, wines and/or distilled spirits within the city and the distribution of such to wholesale dealers or other importers within and without the state from the licensed location with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-39. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved as provided in this section. 
(b)  The requirements for approval are: 
(1)  The patio/open area must be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The only exception to this would be a fire exit as required by building and fire codes. Such fire exit would not be for general public use unless an emergency exists and would be of the type which sounds an alarm so that the establishment would be alerted of unauthorized use if no emergency exists. The height of such structure shall be a minimum of 3.5 feet above the patio floor. The structure does not have to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open area. 
(2)  The patio/open area shall not be required to be covered by a roof. However, patio/open areas that are covered shall be covered by a roof. As used in this section, the term "roof" shall mean a structural covering of the patio/open floor area which shall be of similar design and material as the primary structure to which it is attached, whether physically attached or by use. 
(3)  The patio/open area shall be used merely as an extension of the interior seating area. Service in the patio/open area shall be only by waiter or waitress or by customer self service at an interior selling location; i.e. no outside bar or service window. 
(4)  The patio/open area cannot be located within 75 feet of any public street or thoroughfare with the exception of licensees located within the central business zoning district. Such measurement shall describe the shortest straight line distance between the street curb and the patio. 
(5)  The patio/open area cannot be located within 150 feet of any residence, with the exception of licensees located within the central business zoning district. Such measurement shall describe the shortest straight line distance from the patio to the nearest residential structure. 
(6)  The licensee shall be responsible for patrolling said area and reporting all violations of this Code promptly to the Oakwood City Police. Failure to do so shall subject the license to immediate suspension and revocation. 
(c)  It is prohibited for an establishment: 
(1)  To allow any noise to be created in a patio/open area which may be heard from a distance of 100 yards from the patio/open area. Any measurement made pursuant to this section shall describe the shortest straight line distance from the patio to the point in question. 
(2)  Allow the operation of any sound amplification devices in the patio/open area. 
(d)  Patio/open area plans must be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city manager. Patio/open areas must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection and fire departments as required by the governing regulations or codes. 
(e)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms or patio areas of such hotel or motel provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. "Patio areas," as that term is used herein, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-40. - No outside consumption. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises of a consumption on premises licensee with alcoholic beverages and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of wine or malt beverages for consumption at a publicly owned or privately owned golf course, nor shall it prohibit the carrying out of a partially consumed bottle of wine as defined in section 6-47. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-41. - License; denial, transfer, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Before the denial of any application for an alcoholic beverage license or for the transfer of any alcoholic beverage license, or the revocation of any existing alcoholic beverage license, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing from the city clerk to show cause before the city manager or his designee at a time and place specified therein not less than three days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice, why such application for license or for transfer of license should not be denied, or why such license should not be revoked or suspended as the case may be, stating the grounds therefore, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why such application should not be denied or such license revoked or suspended after which the city manager or his designee shall take such actions as he or she in his or her judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. All decisions of the city manager or his designee shall be in writing with reasons therefore stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant or licensee. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the city manager or his designee to deny an application or request to transfer a license applied for under the provisions of this chapter or the revocation or suspension of a license shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city council within 30 days after the action or decision has been mailed to the person's address as shown on the license application form or to his last known address. 
(c)  An appeal shall be taken by filing with the clerk of the city council a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. 
(d)  The clerk shall transmit the written statement to the city manager within ten days of its receipt and the city manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal before the city council. 
(e)  A hearing shall be set not later than 30 days from the date of receipt of the appellant's appeal. 
(f)  The hearing herein provided for need not be at a regular meeting of the city council but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in such notice of hearing. 
(g)  At any hearing as provided herein, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(h)  The hearing herein provided shall be de novo. 
(i)  All decisions, denying, approving, suspending or revoking any application or request for transfer or license shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(j)  A decision to revoke or suspend any permit may provide for a specific time period of suspension or revocation. For the first revocation or suspension of a permit, the city council may revoke or suspend the permit for up to 12 months with reinstatement conditioned upon payment of a reinstatement fee as set forth in chapter 22 of this Code plus any renewal fees and taxes due and payable prior to the re-issuance of the permit. Upon a second or subsequent revocation or suspension of a permit, the city council may revoke or suspend the permit for up to 24 months with reinstatement conditioned upon payment of a reinstatement fee as set forth in chapter 22 of this Code plus any renewal fees and taxes due and payable prior to the re-issuance of the permit. 
(k)  The decision of the city council shall be final unless appealed by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-42. - Brew pubs. 
(a)  For all purposes of this section, a "brew pub" is defined as an eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a limited exception to section 6-36(j) shall exist for owners and operators of brew pubs provided that: 
(1)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brew pub without first obtaining a proper brew pub license from the city council. Each brew pub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. A brew pub license authorizes the holder of such license to (i) manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 5,000 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form and (ii) operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer and may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer for consumption on the premises only and, provided further, in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer. 
(2)  Possession of a brew pub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining any other license available under this chapter for the same premises. 
(3)  A brew pub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(4)  A brew pub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this chapter as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesale dealers. 
(5)  Except as set forth in this section, a brew pub license holder shall be subject to all sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-43. - Wine tasting. 
A request to conduct a wine tasting may be approved by the city manager when such request is made in writing on an application furnished by city and under the following conditions: 
(1)  A wine tasting must comply with all local and state laws and regulations pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state and the city; 
(2)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken package or container at retail; 
(3)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell wine in the unbroken package or container at retail unless 60 percent or greater of the total malt beverage and/or wine sales is derived from the sale of wine. 
(4)  All wines secured for a wine tasting must be obtained through a wholesale dealer possessing a valid current license to distribute wine issued by the city; 
(5)  A bona fide non profit charitable or civic organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3, 3-9-4, and 3-9-5 and must make application 25 days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the city; 
(6)  A for-profit organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting and is not licensed and shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-20 must make application 25 days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the city. 
(7)  A non refundable fee of $25.00 will be charged for the processing of an application for a wine tasting. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-44. - Brown bagging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other business establishment to allow customers to bring with them their own alcoholic beverages which is known as "BYOB" or "brown bagging." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be allowed to be brought into, served, stored, kept or consumed by any person on the premises of any business establishment for which a city business/occupation tax certificate has been issued and which business establishment has no alcoholic beverage license issued by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-45. - Special temporary event—Sales by bona fide non-profit charitable and civic organizations. 
(a)  Bona fide non-profit charitable organizations, non-profit civic organizations, colleges and universities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply and submit completed forms furnished by the commissioner of the state department of revenue and a permit from the commissioner authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for a period not to exceed three days as provided in rule 560-2-2-43 of the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue as amended. 
(b)  Bona fide non-profit charitable organizations, non-profit civic organizations, colleges and universities if approved for a temporary event, may sell distilled spirits and beer for consumption on premises only, wine may be sold for consumption on the premises and by the unopened package subject to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3, 3-9-4 and 3-9-5. 
(c)  Provided a permit has been issued to a non-profit charitable organization, non-profit civic organization, college and university, said organization, college or university shall be considered the same as any other licensee and subject to all laws, rules and regulations and other applicable sections of this chapter relating thereto. 
(d)  Upon the filing of an application and payment of a fee as set forth in chapter 22 by a bona fide non-profit organization, college or university, the city marshal may issue a permit authorizing the organization, college or university to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to subsection (b), subject to any law regulating the time for selling such beverages. If the temporary event is a wine tasting then the event shall also be subject to the provisions of section 6-4-43. 
(e)  No more than six permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. 
(g)  Applicants under this section do not have to obtain alcohol bonds. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-46. - Same—Sales by for-profit organizations. 
(a)  A for-profit organization desiring to sell alcoholic beverages may apply and submit completed forms furnished by the commissioner of the state department of revenue and a permit from the commissioner authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages as provided in rule 560-2-2-43 of the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue. 
(b)  A for-profit organization desiring to obtain a special temporary event permit must possess a valid consumption on premises license for beer, wine or liquor issued by the city. 
(c)  Provided a special temporary permit has been issued to a for-profit organization, said organization shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations and other applicable sections of this chapter relating thereto. 
(d)  Upon the filing of an application and payment of a fee as set forth in chapter 22 by a for-profit organization, the city clerk may issue a permit authorizing the organization to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to subsection (b), subject to any law regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
(e)  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the application. 
(f)  The licensee for a permitted special temporary event shall designate and clearly mark, by the use of ropes, barricades, stanchions or similar devices, a specific area that alcoholic beverages may be consumed. 
(g)  Applicants desiring to sell distilled spirits must obtain an alcohol bond. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-47. - Partially consumed bottles of wine purchased with a meal. 
(a)  Any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. 
(b)  A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. 
(c)  The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
(d)  If transporting in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-48. - Happy hour promotions. 
(a)  As used in this subsection, the term: 
•  Drink means a single portion beverage which contains any alcoholic beverage. 
•  Licensee means any person who holds a license from the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverage by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
•  Private function means any affair where attendance is by invitation only and where the cost of the drinks served is paid by the host or hosts. 
•  Wine tasting means an event as provided in rule 560-2-.05 of the rules and regulations of the department of revenue. 
(b)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to all alcoholic beverages including beer, wine and distilled spirits for consumption on premises by properly licensed establishments in the city. All on premises licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Serving multiple drinks for a single price or offering all you can drink for a set price during a set time. 
(2)  Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings. 
(3)  Serving alcoholic beverages by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(4)  Offering reduced-price drinks to any segment of the population for any period of time as an inducement to patronize the premises; except between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, drinks may be sold at a reduced price which is no less than half the price usually charged. 
(5)  Selling alcoholic beverages for less than half the normal retail price, or selling alcoholic beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes for less than the normal retail price. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of drinks in pitchers or in jumbo sizes, provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business and the usual, customary or established retail price for such drinks shall not be reduced. 
(6)  Using coupons or other special promotional items as an inducement to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  Sponsoring, conducting or allowing contests or other promotions which have as their primary purpose increasing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  Offering or delivering any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. 
(c)  The prohibitions and restrictions in the foregoing subsection which apply to licensees or agents or employees of licensees shall not: 
(1)  Apply at private functions; 
(2)  Prohibit the offering of free food or entertainment at any time; 
(3)  Prohibit including drinks as part of the price of a hotel, travel, entertainment or meal package; 
(4)  Prohibit the sale, offer to sell or delivery of wine or malt beverage by the bottle, pitcher or carafe; 
(5)  Prohibit any motel or hotel from offering room service to registered guests. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 6-49. - Sales; off premises for catered functions. 
(a)  Licenses may be obtained for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages by the drink on premises at which authorized catered functions are to be held. 
(1)  Such licenses shall be annual licenses and may be obtained only by those persons, firms or corporations already licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
(2)  The procedures for securing such licenses and the terms thereof shall be made in person by the applicant to the city clerk in writing on forms furnished by the city clerk and signed by the applicant in compliance with subsection 6-29(a). 
(b)  Before a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered function, such caterer shall obtain a permit from the city clerk at least ten working days prior to the event. 
(1)  The application for a permit shall include the name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, the caterer's license number and the date, address and time of the event. 
(2)  No permit fee shall be charged for the alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by the city. 
(3)  For caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, a permit fee of $50.00 per event shall be charged. 
(4)  If such off-premises permit is granted, it shall be good only for the specific event at the specified address and times set forth in the application, not in excess of four hours, except permits approved by city council by resolution. 
(c)  (1)  Caterers licensed by the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported for each event and shall make report and remittance of such taxes with their regular monthly reports to the city. 
(2)  Caterers licensed by a jurisdiction other than the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported into the city for the event and shall pay an excise tax to the city covering all such beverages at the rate provided herein. 
(3)  As a condition of permit issuance, alcoholic beverage caterers licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink by jurisdictions other than the city shall be provided a copy of the city's alcoholic beverages ordinances and shall indicate, by signature, that they have received such ordinances and acknowledge the applicability of such ordinances to their operations. 
(4)  Failure to report and remit the tax within seven days of the conclusion of the event shall be grounds for denial of subsequent permits to the caterer for similar events. 
(5)  The permit shall be kept in the vehicle used to transport alcoholic beverages to the event at all times during which the permit is in effect. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverages shall be transported, distributed or sold to other than licensed locations in the city, except to authorized, catered functions, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter or by state law. 
(e)  The hours and days of sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages under this section shall be the same by section 6-35. 
(f)  No licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall employ any person under 21 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages at authorized catered functions. 
(g)  No event permit will be issued for an event at any location with respect to which any alcohol license has been denied or revoked within the past 12 months; nor for any location with respect to which the conduct set forth in this chapter has previously occurred. 
(h)  Except as set forth above in this section, an off-premises permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(i)  Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties, fines, and provisions of section 6-34. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-03-668, § 1, 4-11-2011) 
Chapter 8 - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Fortunetelling, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice for pay, advertise or distribute advertising for the occupation of being a fortuneteller, palmist, clairvoyant, phrenologist, reader of spiritualism, astrologer or any occupation by whatsoever name called professing ability to foretell future events by any means whatever or selling any article and giving or offering to give therewith a reading of fortune, phrenology, spiritualism and/or astrology. 
(Ord. No. 247, § I, 8-24-1995) 
Secs. 8-2—8-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANCE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-07-661, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2010, repealed Art. II, §§ 8-31—8-35, in its entirety and renumbered Art. III, as Art. II. Prior to this amendment, Art. II pertained to Game Room and Amunsement Devices. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 8-59. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dance hall means an establishment which is characterized by a provision of a dance area or floor in conjunction with live music or taped and/or recorded music which has been approved by the state fire marshal to accommodate more than 25 participants or patrons. 
Dance studio means an establishment which is characterized by individual or group instruction consisting of 25 or less students, participants or patrons. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 1, 3-8-1993) 
Sec. 8-60. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to operate or conduct within the city a dance studio or dance hall without a license for the operation of the dance establishment. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 2, 3-8-1993) 
Sec. 8-61. - Location of business requirements. 
(a)  No dance hall entrance shall be located: 
(1)  Within 250 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for residential purposes; 
(2)  Within 250 feet of any parcel of land occupied by a church, school, educational institution, religious institution and governmental building; 
(3)  Within 250 feet of any parcel of land upon which there exists another establishment regulated or defined under this article. 
(b)  Each application for license hereunder for which there is no existing license for the operation of a dance hall then in effect shall include a blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, 8½ inches by 11 inches in size, with a scale of one inch per 200 feet, showing the proposed location of the building and the location of all customer entries in relation to all real property which falls within the distance requirements of this section, together with the zoning classifications and present uses of all real property and the proposed location. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 3, 3-8-1993) 
Sec. 8-62. - Building requirements. 
In addition to all requirements for building in the city, dance hall buildings shall have: 
(1)  Full sound insulation; and 
(2)  Enclosed foyers on every exterior entrance to the dance floor, excluding emergency fire doors. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 4, 3-8-1993) 
Sec. 8-63. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  A dance establishment shall provide on-site parking of one full parking space per two-person occupancy approved by the state fire marshal for the licensed establishment plus one full parking space per employee and/or entertainer, musician, disc jockey or performer. 
(b)  The dance establishment shall not permit its patrons to park off site on public or private property. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed on the dance floor. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed on the premises except in conjunction with a properly licensed restaurant holding a valid license for consumption on the premises of beer, wine or spirituous liquor. 
(e)  Security shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  When occupancy exceeds 50 patrons but less than 150 patrons, the establishment shall have no less than one uniformed security officer on duty on the premises. 
(2)  When occupancy exceeds 150 patrons, the establishment shall have no less than two uniformed security officers on duty on the premises. 
(f)  No speakers shall be permitted outside the building enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 210, § 5, 3-8-1993) 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 8-64. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Applicant means any person, firm, corporation or other entity applying for a regulatory fee certificate to practice massage or operate a massage establishment as defined herein. 
Employee means any person over 18 years of age, including a massage therapist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
Massage means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity therefor. 
Massage establishment means any commercial establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage as defined in this section and which has a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities defined as "massage." 
Massage therapist means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. 
Outcall massage service means providing any of the services which constitute massage as defined above from or at any place or location other than a fixed place of business licensed as such under this chapter as a massage establishment. 
Patron means any person over 18 years who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
Physical therapist means a person licensed by the State of Georgia to practice physical therapy as defined by the O.C.G.A. § 43-33-3. 
Recognized school means an educational program or course of study of not less than 500 hours in duration which is accredited by the Commission on Massage Training Accreditation/Approval (COMTAA) or recognized by a state licensing agency such as the Nonpublic Post Secondary Education Commission of the State of Georgia. The curriculum of such program or course of study shall include, but not be limited to, massage theory and technique, anatomy and physiology. 
Sexual or genital area means genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-65. - Regulatory fee certificate requirements. 
(a)  A regulatory fee certificate to provide massage services is required for any person who will practice the art of massage as defined in this article. Such persons must be 18 years of age, a graduate of a recognized school as defined in this article or, if not a graduate, must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two years under the direct supervision of a massage or physical therapist who would otherwise qualify for a license under this article. Additionally, such applicant must have received training and experience in areas which include, but are not limited to, the following: physical culture, anatomy, physiology, massage, hydro-therapy, electrotherapy, hygiene or health service management. The applicant in this instance must furnish with the application an affidavit of previous employment, together with an affidavit of the person(s) under whom his or her apprenticeship or practical experience was obtained, providing the necessary requirements for qualification under this section. Further, the applicant must have successfully passed the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork administered by the National Certification Examination Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork and be certified by such board or be certified by an agency which adheres to similar standards. 
(b)  A regulatory fee certificate is required for any person, firm, corporation or other entity operating a massage establishment. Such applicant must be at least 18 years of age, employ one or more massage therapists meeting the requirements set forth in subsection (a) above and, if a corporation, is an officer of the corporation which is organized and authorized to do business pursuant to the laws of this state. The applicant to operate a massage establishment must be the owner of the premises wherein the business will be conducted or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the certificate. 
(c)  An applicant must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence for at least one year prior to application. 
(d)  Therapists' certificates shall be good for a period of three years and renewable upon verification that there has been no material change in applicant's status and applicant remains qualified under this article to hold such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-66. - Application requirements; investigation; contents. 
In addition to the requirements contained in section 8-65 hereof, every applicant for a regulatory fee certificate to practice massage or to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the city upon a form provided by the city clerk and pay a nonrefundable fee of $100.00. Copies of the application shall within five days be referred to the chief building official and the police department. These departments shall, within 30 days, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written verification to the city clerk concerning compliance with the codes of the city which they administer. The city clerk shall also make an investigation of the applicant's character and qualifications. Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A definition of service to be provided; 
(2)  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
(3)  The name and residence of each applicant; 
a.  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence address of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation and the address of the corporation itself if different from the address of the establishment; 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself if different from the address of the massage establishment; 
(4)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant including stockholders and partners if applicable; 
(5)  Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age including stockholders and partners if applicable; 
(6)  Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and sex; 
(7)  Copy of identification such as driver's license and Social Security card including stockholders and partners if applicable; 
(8)  Any applicant for a regulatory fee certificate under this article is required to submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation, fingerprinting and a portrait photograph. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a ten percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this article. Each applicant authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the certificate applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the certificate applied for, whether before or after the issuance of the certificate. Each applicant waives any rights which he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information. A certified check or money order in the amount charged by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation to cover the cost of fingerprint analysis and investigation shall be submitted with each application for a certificate. A $100.00 fee is to be submitted to the police department for a background check and photograph; 
(9)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application including stockholders and partners if applicable; 
(10)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city, county or state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(11)  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted; 
(12)  The name and address of each massage therapist who is or will be employed in the establishment; 
(13)  The applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school as defined in this article; however, if the applicant will not engage in the practice of massage as defined herein, such applicant need not provide a diploma or certificate of graduation; 
(14)  The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (c) where in the business or profession of massage is carried on; 
(15)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant; 
(16)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
(17)  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least three bona fide permanent residents of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. Preferably, the statement will first be furnished from residents of the city, then the county, then the state and lastly from the rest of the United States. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates. Upon completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of all foregoing information, the city clerk shall accept the application for the necessary investigations; 
(18)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application; and 
(19)  The holder of a regulatory fee certificate to practice massage or operate a massage establishment shall notify the city clerk of each change in any data required to be furnished by this article within ten days after such change occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-67. - Inspections authorized. 
The city manager or his/her authorized representatives shall and the police may, from time to time, make inspections during regular business hours of each massage business establishment for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or licensee hereunder to fail to allow the inspection officer or police officer access to the premises or to hinder the inspection in any manner. The city manager or his/her authorized representatives or the police may require a masseur to identify him or herself by presenting valid photo identification and by supplying his or her name, age, and address during such an inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-68. - Operating requirements; unlawful acts. 
(a)  The premises shall be kept clean, neat and sanitary and shall comply with all sanitary and health requirements of the State of Georgia, Hall County, and the City of Oakwood. 
(b)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or provided to customers on the premises. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a massage establishment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place his or her hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to massage a sexual or genital area, as defined in this article, of any person or to act in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust, passions or sexual desires. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage clinic unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician or written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any person or firm to provide "outcall" massage in any hotel, motel, rooming house or similar place offering short term lodging to the public. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment to knowingly cause, allow or permit in or about such massage establishment any agent, employee or other person under his supervision or control to perform any acts prohibited under this section. 
(i)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall post and maintain a copy of the human trafficking notice available on the Georgia Bureau of Investigation internet website (as per O.C.G.A. § 16-5-47) in each employee breakroom or kitchen for the establishment and in another conspicuous location in clear view of the employees where similar notices are customarily posted. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment with storefront windows that have material and glazing applied or affixed that reduces light transmission through the windows to less than 32 percent, plus or minus three percent, or increase light reflectance to more than 20 percent. 
(k)  Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall ensure that storefront windows are not blocked by curtains, blinds, or any other screening material during those times when the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(l)  During all hours of operation, it shall be unlawful to lock or otherwise bar entry to the front door of the massage establishment and the doors of any interior treatment rooms in which massages are being performed. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful to perform any and all massage services pursuant to this article unless the person performing said service has valid photo identification on their person. 
(n)  It is specifically declared that any violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance, the same being subject to abatement in the municipal court of the city as provided by charter. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(o)  Any provision of state law notwithstanding, a violation of the provisions of this article shall be further punishable as provided in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-69. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths and physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state. 
(3)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under laws of this state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes. 
(4)  Physical therapists licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-70. - Posting of regulatory fee certificate; transfer of regulatory fee certificate. 
(a)  Every person obtaining a regulatory fee certificate under this chapter shall display such certificate in a prominent place. 
(b)  No regulatory fee certificate whether for a massage establishment or a massage therapist shall be transferable or assignable from person to person or from location to location. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-71. - Revocation or suspension of regulatory fee certificate. 
A regulatory fee certificate granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation. Whenever, in the opinion of the city manager, there is cause to revoke this certificate, a written notice of intention to revoke the certificate shall be furnished to the holder thereof. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the applicant may present his/her case before the mayor and council. After the hearing, the mayor and council may revoke this certificate if, in their discretion, revocation is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(1)  The regulatory fee certificate of a massage therapist may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds (but is not limited to such grounds): 
a.  The applicant is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage or fraud or deceit in obtaining a regulatory fee certificate to practice massage therapy; 
b.  The applicant is engaged in the practice of massage therapy under a false or assumed name or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
c.  The applicant is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his or her duties; 
d.  The applicant is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or practices; 
e.  The applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of a lascivious nature; 
f.  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
g.  Noncompliance with any section of this article; 
h.  Any violation of state or local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The regulatory fee certificate of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds (but is not limited to such grounds): 
a.  Failure of the applicant to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license; 
b.  The applicant is guilty of employing any person who is not a licensed massage therapist and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in said establishment; 
c.  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants; 
d.  The premises are in violation of the building codes; 
e.  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
f.  The applicant or any of his employees or agents has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of a lascivious nature; 
g.  The applicant or his employees have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article; 
h.  The failure of the applicant to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers; 
(3)  Any massage therapist or massage establishment operator who has his or her or its regulatory fee certificate revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a certificate for 12 months immediately following revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-72. - Responsibility of owner or operator. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of any service described herein as "massage" to ensure that each person employed as a masseuse shall have in his or her possession a valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-73. - Record of treatment to be kept and register of massage practitioners. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the person administering this treatment. These records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the City of Oakwood Code Enforcement and Police Department. Records shall be kept for a minimum of three years. 
(b)  No massage therapy shall be performed by any massage practitioner in the home of any client or in any place except for the place of business of a licensee hereunder unless a written memorandum is first made in a log or record kept at the place of business for the purpose of recording consecutively the date, time of treatment, place of treatment, name and address of person to receive treatment, type of treatment to be received, name of person to render treatment, time the practitioner leaves to render treatment and the fee charged. The practitioner shall record the time each treatment was completed immediately upon his return to the place of business. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain a correct, accurate and current register of every massage practitioner employed. The register shall contain the following information concerning each employed massage practitioner: name, age, residential address, state license number, a photocopy of a valid form of photo identification and a recent photograph. These records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the City of Oakwood Code Enforcement and Police Department. Outdated registers shall be kept for a minimum of three years. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 8-74. - Compliance. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or firm to engage in, conduct or carry on within the city any business as a massage establishment or to act as a massage technician without first obtaining and possessing a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter or without complying with all regulations contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-12-755, § 2, 12-18-2017) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1, adopted April 19, 2010, deleted Ch. 10, Arts. I—VII, §§ 10-1—10-9, 10-37—10-43, 10-75—10-78, 10-100—10-108, 10-130—10-146, 10-176—10-181, 10-201—10-207, in its entirety. Exhibit A of said ordiance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 10 pertained to similat subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
State Law reference— Animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment means to place upon public property, within a public building or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or attendant of the private property, any domesticated animal or agricultural animal that is unattended or uncared for. Any owner shall also be considered to abandon the domesticated animal or agricultural animal, for the purposes of this chapter, if the animal has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended and without adequate food and water or if the owner of the animal was evicted from the premises where the domesticated animal or agricultural animal was kept and said owner fails to immediately remove the animal from the premises. 
Adequate food means food which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Adequate food shall not include garbage, spoiled, rancid or unhygienic food or food containing worms, insects or insect larvae. 
Adequate size means a structure or container of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure or container comfortably. 
Adequate space means a sufficient space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal, which, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, shall include at least: 
(1)  An enclosure with a minimum of 144 square feet per animal except for an animal in transport by vehicle, an animal being boarded at a licensed facility or any animal under 25 lbs. that shall be provided with space of adequate size; or 
(2)  A provision of at least a ten-foot metal chain or metal cable (does not include a rope) that cannot become tangled or prevent the animal from having access to adequate food, water or shelter for any animal tethered or chained outside. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply but does not include snow, ice, rancid, unhygienic water or water containing worms, insects or insect larvae. 
Aggravated habitual violator means a habitual violator as provided for in this chapter that has been found guilty of more than one violation of article III of this chapter or any other provision of this chapter wherein the animal involved in the violations inflicted a bite breaking the skin on another animal or human. 
Agricultural animal means any hoofed animal including, but not limited to, bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine and, more specifically, cows, donkeys, goats, horses, llamas, mules, sheep and pigs as well as all other animals used or suitable for either food, fiber or labor including chickens, roosters, turkeys or other fowl on agricultural property. 
Agricultural property means, for the purpose of this chapter only, any parcel of land two acres or more in size or property that is less than two acres in size that is contiguous or adjacent to parcels of land that are at least five acres or more in size. 
Animal means any animal including those of the amphibian (amphibians), reptilian (reptiles), aves (fowl) and mammalia (mammals) classes. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control officer means any officer; agent or employee of the Hall County Animal Services designated by the city or Hall County to perform the duties of animal control and enforcement of this chapter and to perform the duties of dog control officer pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), as amended from time to time. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by or under contract for the state, county, a municipal corporation or a political subdivision of the state for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians which operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes and any facility operated, owned or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society or other organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
Animal under restraint means any domesticated animal or agricultural animal is considered under restraint unless otherwise provided herein if: 
(1)  It is controlled within the property limits of its owner by: 
a.  A visible physical barrier that the animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape from on its own volition, that is securely locked by key or combination lock at any time the animal is left unattended and that is not an invisible electronic fence; or 
b.  A metal chain or metal cable of sufficient strength to restrain the animal; 
(2)  It is controlled by a leash by a person physically able to control the animal; 
(3)  It is entirely contained within the occupant enclosure of a vehicle; 
(4)  If entirely contained within the cargo area of a truck being driven or parked on the streets, it is safely restrained by a harness or tether of sufficient strength to restrain the animal or confined in a kennel or cage; or 
(5)  It is within the fenced enclosure of any dog park approved and operated by the city. 
Board of health means the Hall County Board of Health. 
Classified dog or animal means any animal or dog that has been classified as either a dangerous animal or a vicious animal pursuant to this chapter. 
Cock fighting tools means any instrument attached to the spur of a rooster intended for fighting. 
Dangerous animal means any animal other than livestock maintained on agricultural property, that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans, domesticated animals or agricultural animals without provocation after the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Dangerous dog or animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog. 
Domesticated animal means an animal that is living in or about the habitation of people including, but not limited to, cats, chickens, dogs, ducks, cows, fowl, geese, horses, rabbits, swine and livestock whether or not they are further classified by this chapter as hazardous animals, dangerous animals or potentially dangerous animals but shall not include agricultural animals. Pen raised skunks are categorized as those skunks acceptable by the State of Georgia and may be kept in Georgia as pets. 
Feral animal means an animal that has escaped from a domestic or captive status and is more or less living as a wild animal or is born of a feral animal. 
Fowl means chickens, ducks, geese, roosters, turkeys, poultry and other birds of the aves class. 
Guard animal means any animal which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any animal which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Habitual violator means any owner that is found guilty of violating two or more of the same sections of this chapter more than once in any six-month period when the violations for two or more of the same sections occur on separate days. 
Hall County Animal Shelter means the animal shelter operated by Hall County, Georgia. 
Hazardous animal means any animal: 
(1)  For which a permit or license is required for possession of pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 27-5-1 et seq.; 
(2)  That is a hybrid animal which is part wild animal in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia or 
(3)  That is a Reticulated Python (Python reticulatus), Amethystine Python (Morelia amethistina), Green Anaconda (Eunectes murinus), Indian Python (Python molurus—the Burmese python P. m. bivittata is a subspecies of the Indian) or African Rock Python (Python sebae)). 
Hoarder means a person or entity that is the owner of more than one animal maintained without adequate food, water, sanitation or space. 
Humane society means the Humane Society of Hall County or any corporation, organization or association existing for the purpose of prevention of cruelty to animals, education for humane treatment of animals or animal adoption for stray animals. 
In distress means the condition of an animal that, because of lack of necessary veterinary care, is in pain, anxiety or acute physical or mental suffering requiring immediate assistance to prevent death of the animal or an animal suffering to the extent that necessary veterinary care is required to prevent further physical harm to the animal. 
In heat means a female animal that is in her estrous cycle. 
Law enforcement agency means the Hall County Sheriff's Office, Hall County Marshal's Office, Oakwood Police Department or other law enforcement agency of the city. 
Livestock means any hoofed animal including, but not limited to, bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine and, more specifically, cows, donkeys, goats, horses, llamas, mules, sheep and pigs. 
Necessary veterinary care means medical care of an animal from or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian and necessary to maintain the health of an animal based on the age, species, breed, etc., of the animal or to prevent an animal from suffering from: 
(1)  Ongoing infections; 
(2)  Infestation of parasites; 
(3)  Disease; or 
(4)  Any other medical condition/injury where withholding or neglecting to provide such veterinary care would further endanger the health or welfare of the animal or promote the spread of communicable diseases. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, trust or parent or legal guardian of any minor who or which: 
(1)  Owns; 
(2)  Possesses; 
(3)  Harbors; 
(4)  Keeps; 
(5)  Cares for; 
(6)  Feeds; 
(7)  Maintains; 
(8)  Has custody or control of; or 
(9)  Knowingly permits to be harbored or kept or to remain on or about their premises an animal within the jurisdiction of the city. If an animal has more than one owner, any one of such owners may be prosecuted for violations whether or not any other owners are also prosecuted. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal, other than livestock maintained on agricultural property, with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or any animal that when unprovoked: 
(1)  Inflicts injury on a human being on public or private property; 
(2)  Chases or approaches a human being upon the street, sidewalks or any public grounds or the private property of another in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(3)  On more than one occasion causes injury to or death of another domesticated animal or agricultural animal unless the other domesticated animal or agricultural animal was not under restraint at the time. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal while on the owner's property securely confined and enclosed in a manner suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping as specified in the criteria set forth in section 10-107(2) of this chapter. 
Public or private animal refuge means harborers of unwanted animals of any breed, including crossbreeds, who provide food, shelter and confinement for more than four animals of any kind. 
Records of appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; records of a dog control officer as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) or records of an animal control officer as provided by this chapter. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Sexually mature animal means any dog or cat that has reached the age of 180 days or six months or more. 
Sterilization means the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat in order to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
Un-owned animal means any animal that is not wearing a collar or other identifying information such as a micro-chip and no information is known about a possible owner. 
Vicious dog or animal means any animal other than livestock maintained on agricultural property, that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans, domesticated animals or agricultural animals without provocation after the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or 
(3)  Inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 1, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-2. - Animal services division. 
The Animal Services Division of Hall County shall be comprised of Hall County Animal Control and the Hall County Animal Shelter. Hall County Animal Control shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter and such other duties as assigned by the animal services director as per the agreement for the same with the city. The Hall County Animal Shelter shall be responsible for sheltering animals impounded by Hall County Animal Control, the adoption of animals released to it from Hall County Animal Control and such other duties as may be assigned in this chapter and the animal services director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-3. - Dog control officer. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), the duties of the dog control officer shall be vested in the animal services division director and his designees which shall include all individuals employed by said division to enforce the provisions of the chapter as animal control officers. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-4. - Cooperation with animal control officer. 
(a)  An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. All law enforcement agencies of the city shall cooperate with the animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To interfere with, fail to cooperate with or fail to respond to any request of a Hall County animal control officer or any law enforcement officer acting pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  To refuse to comply with any Hall County animal control officer's command to place an animal in quarantine or to provide an animal to Hall County Animal Control for quarantine; 
(3)  To take or attempt to take any animal from a Hall County vehicle, trailer or any other vehicle or trailer used by Hall County to transport an animal pursuant to this chapter without the authorization of Hall County Animal Services; 
(4)  To take or attempt to take any animal from the Hall County Animal Shelter or other impounding area used by Hall County Animal Services for the purposes of this chapter without the authorization of Hall County Animal Services; 
(5)  To relocate, interfere with, or alter the operation of any device, equipment or item of Hall County Animal Services without the express authorization of Hall County Animal Services; 
(6)  To place their own animal into or remove any animal confined within a trap or cage operated by Hall County Animal Control without the authorization of Hall County Animal Services; or 
(7)  To give a false name, address or date of birth to any officer, employee or agent of Hall County Animal Services in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties with the intent to mislead such officer, employee or agent in any way. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-5. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The primary responsibility for the administration and implementation of this chapter shall be vested in Hall County Animal Services with the enforcement of all of said chapter to be vested in Hall County Animal Control, which may call upon such other officers and employees of any law enforcement agency of the governing jurisdiction as may also be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-6. - Summons. 
Upon information known to, or a complaint lodged with, any officer or member of Hall County Animal Control or any law enforcement agency employee of the city that any owner or possessor of an animal is in violation of this chapter, a summons or citation shall be issued requiring the owner or possessor of such animal to appear before the judge of the Magistrate's Court of Hall County acting as the Municipal Court of the City of Oakwood pursuant to the contract for the same on a day and time certain and to answer said summons or citation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-7. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be guilty of a misdemeanor amenable to the process of the Magistrate court of Hall County as per the contract providing for said court to act as the Municipal court of Oakwood, Georgia for violations of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1(c) and 36-35-6(a)(2) unless otherwise provided in the Charter for the City of Oakwood, Georgia. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as a part of the sentence, may include conditions prohibiting the offender from owning, possessing or having on the offender's premises any animal. 
(c)  A habitual violator or aggravated habitual violator shall be sentenced to at least a fine of twice the amount imposed on the defendant's last conviction for a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Should any contract or renewal thereof, with the Magistrate Court of Hall County expire and not be renewed, violations hereof shall then be amendable by the process of the Municipal Court of Oakwood, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 2, 12-9-2013) 
Secs. 10-8—10-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DUTIES TOWARDS ANIMALS 

Sec. 10-30. - Duty of owner to keep animals under control—No tethering of dogs as primary means of restraint. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal or agricultural animal or anyone having a domesticated animal or agricultural animal in his possession or control to permit such domesticated animal or agricultural animal to be at large and not under restraint unless said animal is livestock and is maintained in accordance with section 10-33 of this chapter. However, all hazardous animals shall be maintained in accordance with section 10-35(d) of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal to ensure that it is confined by way of a fence, restraint, or other enclosure or in some other manner under the control of a competent person so that it cannot wander off the real property limits of the owner, it being the intent of this article that all animals be prevented from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of their owners. 
(c)  The above requirement notwithstanding, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to utilize a tether, chain, cable, rope, or cord as the primary method of restraining a dog, it being the intent of this section that tethering a dog shall be used only as a temporary restraint mechanism. The prohibition in this subparagraph shall have no application if the dog is in a park or recreational area where the rules of said park or recreational area require the tethering or physical restraint of dogs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 3, 12-9-2013) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-3-1—4-3-12. 
Sec. 10-31. - Rabies vaccination; vaccination fee; display of tag. 
(a)  When any animal as may be required by state law to be vaccinated for rabies is being kept in the jurisdiction of the city, it shall be the duty of any owner or possessor or custodian of said animal to procure current rabies vaccination if said animal is three months of age or older. The owner, possessor or custodian shall affix to the collar or harness of the animal the current vaccination tag as prescribed by the board of health. 
(b)  The veterinarian administering the rabies vaccine required by this section shall collect, in addition to the charges for vaccination, the sum of 50 cents for each dog vaccinated. The fees collected under this provision shall be delivered to the general fund for the Board of Commissioners of Hall County by the veterinarian collecting said fees on or before the 20th day of the month following the month in which said fees were collected. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog, cat or other animal required to have a rabies vaccination by state law to allow such animal in any area of the jurisdiction of the city without a visible collar which shall have attached a valid and current rabies vaccination tag as required by the board of health. It shall be the duty of each animal owner required to have a rabies vaccination to provide a collar with a rabies vaccination tag for each animal, except when such animal is participating in an animal show or exhibition. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
State Law reference— Responsibility for control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40. 
Sec. 10-32. - Limitation of ownership. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of article III of this chapter or who is a habitual violator under the provisions of this chapter shall not own, possess or have on his premises with him any animal for one year from the date of conviction without a written waiver from the Hall County Animal Services Director. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time as a part of any sentence imposed for a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who is an aggravated habitual violator under the provisions of this chapter shall not own, possess, or have on his premises with him any animal for three years from the date of conviction without a written waiver from the Hall County Animal Services Director. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time as a part of any sentence imposed for a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-33. - Maintaining livestock. 
(a)  All livestock shall be: 
(1)  Confined within the property limits of its owner by: 
a.  A visible fence enclosure(can be electric); or 
b.  A metal chain, metal cable or rope of sufficient strength to restrain the animal; 
(2)  Controlled by a leash or lead in the possession of a person physically able to control the animal; 
(3)  Contained within the occupant enclosure of a vehicle or any D.O.T. approved trailer suitable for carrying and containing said animal; 
(4)  Contained within the cargo area of a truck being driven or parked on the streets if it is safely restrained by a harness or tether of sufficient strength to restrain the animal or confined in a kennel or cage; or 
(5)  If the livestock is otherwise restrained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for having an animal under restraint or as may otherwise be provided. 
(b)  Any fenced enclosure containing livestock shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any livestock from escaping the property of its owner. 
(c)  Any person providing boarding or pasturing space or such services for hire shall have the same responsibility for maintaining the livestock and the enclosure it is kept within in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this section unless an applicable livestock owner lease agreement or other agreement between the livestock owner and the property owner specifies the livestock owner is responsible for maintaining livestock. 
(d)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any livestock within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place within the jurisdiction of the city or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place. 
(e)  Unless kept in accordance with standard agricultural practices and as otherwise permitted pursuant to this Code, only one livestock animal shall be permitted for each 15,000 square feet of land area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-34. - Guard animals. 
In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, any person maintaining a guard animal in an area for the protection of persons or property shall meet each of the following requirements: 
(1)  The animal shall be confined to an enclosed area adequate to insure that the animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape from on its own volition and that is securely locked by key or combination lock at any time the animal is left unattended. 
(2)  When not securely enclosed, the animal shall be under the absolute physical control of a handler at all times that is capable of restraining and controlling the dog, muzzled and restrained by a secure leash which is not in excess of six feet in length and which is of sufficient strength to prevent escape of the animal. 
(3)  The owner or other persons in control of the premises upon which a guard animal is maintained shall post warning signs over or next to all exterior doors stating that a guard animal is on the premises. At least one such sign shall be posted at each driveway or entranceway to said premises. Such sign shall be in lettering clearly visible from either the curb line or at a distance of 50 feet, whichever is greater, and shall contain a telephone number where some person responsible for controlling such guard animal can be reached 24 hours a day. 
(4)  The owner or custodian of any guard animal shall report to Hall County Animal Control within 24 hours any of the following: 
a.  Escape of the guard animal; 
b.  An attack on a human or animal by the guard animal; 
c.  Transfer of ownership of the guard animal by sale, gift or otherwise; 
d.  Any change in the location of the guard animal is being kept; or 
e.  Death of the guard animal. 
(5)  Prior to the placing of a guard animal on any property, the person or persons responsible for the placing shall inform Hall County Animal Control, all law enforcement agencies of the city as well as the fire chief, in writing, of their intention to post said animal, the number of animals to be posted, the location where said animal will be posted, the approximate length of time said animal will be guarding the area and the breed, sex, age and rabies tag number of said animal. Said notice must be renewed in writing every 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-35. - Hazardous animals. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep, harbor, house or permit to be kept, harbored or housed any hazardous animal within the jurisdiction of the city unless said animal is registered in writing annually with the Hall County Animal Control director in accordance with subparagraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Written registration shall be made to the Hall County Animal Control director and shall include: 
(1)  Photographic evidence that the animal will be kept under restraint or confined and will be provided adequate space as is common for the hazardous animal species being registered; 
(2)  Proof that the animal is registered as required by state or federal law; and 
(3)  Payment of any required registration fee for hazardous animals as required chapter 22 of this Code. 
(c)  The owner of any hazardous animal shall keep the animal: 
(1)  In a container, kennel, crate or fence that it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape from on its own volition and that is securely locked by key or combination lock at any time the animal is left unattended; 
(2)  Controlled by a leash or lead by a person physically able to control the animal; or 
(3)  Entirely contained within the occupant enclosure of a vehicle. 
(d)  The owner of the hazardous animal shall notify animal control: 
(1)  Immediately if the animal has attacked a human or other animal; 
(2)  Within 24 hours if the animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has died or has been sold, transferred or donated; 
(3)  Within 72 hours if the animal has been sold, transferred or donated and provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the animal as well as the address for the location of the animal; 
(4)  Within 72 hours of any change in the property location where the hazardous animal is kept; and 
(5)  Within 72 hours of the death of the hazardous animal. 
(e)  The owner of any hazardous animal must obtain all necessary state and federal permits and meet all state and federal requirements for keeping such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-36. - Confining dogs and cats in heat. 
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such manner that such female animal cannot come into contact with another sexually intact animal of the same species except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
State Law reference— Permitting dogs in heat to run free prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 10-37. - Loud noises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any domesticated animal or agricultural animal that makes, continues or causes to be made or continues any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the jurisdiction of the city and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than 100 feet from the point of origin of this sound or noise. Anyone who keeps or maintains a domesticated animal or agricultural animal that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person or persons because the domesticated animal or agricultural animal is emitting frequent or long continued sound or noise and who continues to keep, maintain or allow any domesticated animal or agricultural animal to so disturb the comfort or repose of any person or persons shall be deemed in violation of this section. This section shall apply to horses, livestock, poultry and other farm animals unless on agricultural property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-38. - Sterilization of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Any public or private animal shelter including the Hall County Animal Shelter, animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of this state including Hall County Animal Control, humane society or public or private animal refuge shall make provisions for the sterilization of all dogs or cats acquired from such shelter, agency, society or refuge by: 
(1)  Providing sterilization by a licensed veterinarian before relinquishing custody of the dog or cat; or 
(2)  Entering into a written agreement with the person acquiring such dog or cat guaranteeing that sterilization will be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days after acquisition of such dog or cat in the case of a sexually mature animal or by the sexual maturity of the animal in the case of a sexually immature animal. 
Provided, however, that the requirements of this paragraph shall not apply to any privately owned dog or cat which any such shelter, agency, society or refuge may have in its possession for any reason if the owner of such dog or cat claims or presents evidence that such dog or cat is the property of such person. 
(b)  All costs of sterilization pursuant to this section shall be the responsibility of the person acquiring such dog or cat and, if performed prior to acquisition, may be included in any fees charged by the shelter, agency, society or refuge for such dog or cat. 
(c)  Any person acquiring a dog or cat from a public or private animal shelter including the Hall County Animal Shelter, an animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of this state including Hall County Animal Control, humane society or public or private animal refuge, which dog or cat is not sterile at the time of acquisition, shall submit to the animal shelter, animal control agency, humane society or public or private animal refuge from which the dog or cat was acquired a signed statement from the licensed veterinarian performing the sterilization required by subparagraph (a)(2) of this section within seven days after such sterilization attesting that such sterilization has been performed. 
(d)  Every public or private animal shelter including the Hall County Animal Shelter, an animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of this state including Hall County Animal Control, humane society or public or private animal refuge selling or offering for sale or exchange any dog or cat that is not sterilized shall maintain and furnish to any person acquiring a dog or cat from such shelter, agency, society or refuge, a current list of veterinarians licensed in this state who have notified the shelter, agency, society or refuge that they are willing to perform sterilizations and the cost for such procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-39. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  If a domesticated animal or agricultural animal other than livestock or fowl shall die: 
(1)  The owner must bury the carcass within 24 hours after the death and discovery of the carcass; and 
(2)  The animal shall be buried at least three feet below the ground level and have not less than three feet of earth over the carcass and must not contaminate the ground or surface water. 
(b)  If livestock or fowl shall die, it shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(c)  In the event the public works director of the city shall be designated by said city to remove said carcasses, then it is unlawful to bury said carcass and said carcass shall be removed at the expense of the owner of the animal, if known, and the finance director of the city shall collect the fee for the same as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 10-40—10-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL ABUSE 

Sec. 10-60. - Animal abuse—Abandonment. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal or agricultural animal to knowingly abandon the animal or commit the act of abandonment within the jurisdiction of the city. However, the following exceptions shall apply: 
(1)  A domesticated animal or agricultural animal that is deserted when premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a disaster or emergency hospitalization shall not be regarded as abandoned under this section where the owner or custodian lacked sufficient time or resources to make reasonable arrangements for the adequate care and custody of the animal. 
(2)  A domesticated animal or agricultural animal left unattended when its sole owner dies shall not be deemed abandoned, and shall be impounded by Hall County Animal Control until animal control can locate a family member to take custody of the animal. If a family member cannot be located within a period of seven days or does not claim the animal within three days, then the animal will be held in compliance with article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-61. - Animal abuse—Physical harm. 
Any person who causes undue suffering, deprives their injured or sick animal of necessary veterinary care, tortures, torments, disfigures, maims, mutilates, kills without legal justification, beats, bruises, wounds or poisons any domesticated animal or agricultural animal or exposes the animal to any poisonous substance with the intent that the poisonous substance should physically harm any domesticated animal or agricultural animal, whether belonging to himself or another, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-62. - Animal abuse—Food, exercise, space and air. 
Any person who confines any animal shall be in violation of this chapter if the person: 
(a)  Fails to supply it with adequate food and adequate water; 
(b)  Keeps the animal in an enclosure without adequate space; or 
(c)  Keeps the animal without wholesome exercise and change of air. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-63. - Animal abuse—Shelter and sanitation. 
(a)  Any owner, custodian or possessor of any animal who fails to provide shelter of adequate size with at least a roof, a floor and three sides or an "igloo" type of structure for the animal it is intended for and sufficient to protect said animal from the elements shall be in violation of this chapter. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. All livestock maintained in pastures are exempt from this section. 
(b)  Any owner, custodian or possessor of any animal who fails to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition and free from extreme and unreasonable objectionable odor all structures, pens, yards and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept shall be in violation of this chapter. Unclean and unsanitary conditions shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Crates, kennels and indoor premises where the animal is kept that are malodorous from more than a day's waste of urine and feces from said animal or whose floor of the container it is in is more than 25 percent covered in urine and feces; and 
(2)  Premises where the animal is enclosed with garbage, trash outside of trash containers or sewage or effluent from human waste that can be reached by the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-64. - Animal abuse—Hoarder. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be a hoarder within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-65. - Animal abuse—Leaving in autos. 
(a)  Any person who transports any animal in any vehicle or leaves an animal in a vehicle unattended with the outside temperature higher than 80 degrees shall be in violation of this chapter unless sufficient ventilation is provided to prevent the animal from being in distress. 
(b)  No animal shall be transported in the closed trunk of a vehicle. 
(c)  When the conditions inside a parked vehicle provide reasonable cause to believe the animal may die if not immediately removed as shown by the animal's physical appearance and a violation of subparagraphs (a) or (b) is present, any animal left in a parked vehicle may be removed from that vehicle by animal control, any law enforcement agency or fire agency. Hall County shall not be liable for any damage caused to such vehicle in order to remove said animal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-66. - Animal abuse—Fighting. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Own, possess, keep or train any animal with the intent that such animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting; 
(2)  Build, make, maintain or keep a pit on premises owned by him or occupied by him or allow a pit to be built, made, maintained or kept on such premises for the purposes of an exhibition of animal fighting; 
(3)  In any manner encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an exhibition of animal fighting or intentional combat; 
(4)  Charge admission, be an assistant, umpire or participant or be present as a spectator to any exhibition or animal fighting or combat; or 
(5)  Own, possess, keep or make any cock fighting tools. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-67. - Animal abuse—Dying or coloring certain animals for display, sale, gift, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away or display animal which has been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color except for medically necessary reasons. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-68. - Animal abuse—Procuring another to do act. 
Any person who procures another person to do any of the acts prohibited in this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for any other violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-69. - Animal abuse—Exemptions. 
(a)  A person who is: 
(1)  Lawfully engaged in any sporting or hunting activity; 
(2)  Slaughtering animal for the purpose of providing food; 
(3)  Engaged in the lawful euthanasia of an animal; 
(4)  Is a veterinarian or is working under the direction of a veterinarian and performs any procedure, handles or transports an animal pursuant to the standard practices for a veterinarian or their practice; or 
(5)  Acting as a law enforcement officer or animal control officer in the line of duty to protect against a case of aggression of an animal shall not be charged with a violation of this chapter if a violation of this article is from any such lawful activity. 
(b)  Any person who maintains agricultural animal on agricultural property that keeps the agricultural animal in accordance with standard agricultural practices shall not be charged with a violation of the following provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Section 10-62(b) (Adequate Space); and 
(2)  Section 10-63 (Sanitation, Adequate Shelter and Adequate Size) and shall otherwise be exempt from the provisions of this article for the handling, treating and transporting of agricultural animals using accepted agricultural practices and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 10-70—10-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT AND REQUIRED EUTHANASIA 

Sec. 10-80. - Impoundment of animals, generally. 
(a)  Any animal may be impounded if: 
(1)  It is not under restraint or is at large as provided in section 10-30 of this chapter; 
(2)  It is livestock and is not being maintained in accordance with section 10-33 of this chapter; 
(3)  It is a hazardous animal that the owner has not registered with the Hall County Animal Services director or the hazardous animal is not being confined as required pursuant to section 10-35(d) of this chapter; 
(4)  It is a guard animal and is not kept in accordance with the provisions of section 10-34 of this chapter; 
(5)  It does not have a visible collar with a valid and current rabies vaccination tag affixed as required by section 10-31(c) of this chapter; 
(6)  It has been abandoned as prohibited in section 10-60 of this chapter; 
(7)  It has bitten or is reasonably suspected of biting another animal or human and is being held for the required quarantine period under the rules of the board of health; or 
(8)  It has been abused as prohibited in article III of this chapter. 
(b)  Said animal shall be impounded according to such rules and regulations now or hereafter prescribed by law or this Code for the detention, control and disposition of animals. All impounded animals shall be housed and cared for at the Hall County Animal Shelter or such other facility as may be required to securely confine the animal if the animal cannot be maintained at the Hall County Animal Shelter. 
(c)  Any animal impounded after a finding by an animal control officer that it has been abused pursuant to article III of this chapter or a violation of sections 10-34 or 10-35 of this chapter shall not be released to the owner unless the owner demonstrates to animal control that the animal will not be subjected to the same or different conditions upon its release that originally led to or will lead to a violation of article III of this chapter or sections 10-34 or 10-35 of this chapter within seven days of animal control's impoundment of the animal. 
(d)  Any animal whose owner fails to comply with paragraph C of this section within the required seven days shall be released by Hall County Animal Control to the Hall County Animal Shelter for adoption or euthanasia. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
State Law reference— Impoundment of animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.2; impoundment of equines, O.C.G.A. § 4-13-4. 
Sec. 10-81. - Impoundment, housing and care of dangerous and vicious animals. 
(a)  Upon a finding by animal control that an animal is dangerous or vicious and that the owner knew the animal was dangerous or vicious or upon confiscation pursuant to section 10-124 of this chapter, the animal may be impounded by Hall County Animal Control or any law enforcement agency employee of the city until such time as the owner of the dangerous or vicious animal provides proof of compliance with the duties of the owner of dangerous or vicious animals as set forth in articles V and VI of this chapter. 
(b)  All animals impounded under this section shall be housed and cared for at the Hall County Animal Shelter unless another facility which meets the requirements for housing a dangerous or vicious animal is expressly agreed upon between the animal control officer and the animal's owner. 
(c)  A dangerous or vicious animal whose owner has not complied with the provisions of this article V and VI of this chapter within 20 days of the date the animal was impounded or whose owner has failed to pay the fees required for release of the animal pursuant to section 10-82 of this chapter within three days of the impoundment of said animal as well as every seven-day period thereafter, shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(d)  Any animal classified as dangerous or vicious under this chapter that is not reclaimed by the owner as provided in this section shall not be released for adoption but shall be humanely euthanized instead. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 4, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-82. - Notice to owner of impounded animal; impound fees; redemption by owner. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of Hall County Animal Control to immediately notify the owner of each domesticated animal or agricultural animal impounded if the owner of the domesticated animal or agricultural animal is known or can be reasonably ascertained. The owner of any domesticated animal or agricultural animal impounded may reclaim such domesticated animal or agricultural animal by the payment of: 
(1)  Any impoundment fee as set forth in chapter 22 of this Code; 
(2)  Any charges assessed by the Hall County Animal Services pursuant to chapter 22 of this Code for boarding, quarantine boarding and veterinary services for the animal; 
(3)  If required due to the animal not wearing a current rabies inoculation tag, the cost of the rabies vaccination as per the animal services fee set forth in chapter 22 of this Code; and upon proof of payment of any fine already imposed for a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Owners of animals who have been identified and notified but who refuse to reclaim their animals will be responsible for all fees charged pursuant to this chapter by Hall County Animal Services within ten days of the animal's impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-83. - Release to shelter of impounded animals. 
Hall County Animal Control shall release to the Hall County Animal Shelter for adoption or euthanasia any domesticated animal or agricultural animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after 72 hours except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-84. - Biting animals. 
All animals, other than a dog or cat, which are known to have bitten a person or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the State Department of Epidemiology for testing and control of rabies in accordance with the rules of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-85. - Suffering animals. 
Any impounded animal which: 
(1)  Represents a real immediate danger to persons or other animals; or 
(2)  Is suffering due to a life threatening disease or injury, and a licensed veterinarian recommends euthanasia as the most humane course of action, and the animal services control director agrees that the best interest of the animal would be served by euthanizing said animal, then the animal shall be humanely euthanized without regard to the period of confinement as provided in section 10-83 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-86. - Livestock impoundment. 
All livestock impounded by Hall County Animal Control shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-3-4 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 10-87. - Disposition of feral animals and un-owned animals. 
Feral and un-owned animals which have been captured by or come to be in the custody of Hall County Animal Control need not be retained for any required time under this article. Wildlife and wild animals received by animal services will be disposed of in accordance with federal and state guidelines. All other feral and un-owned animals shall be euthanized or released for adoption in the discretion of the Hall County Animal Services director unless otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 10-88—10-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CLASSIFICATION AND REGISTRATION OF DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, adopted December 9, 2013, repealed Ch. 10, Art. V, §§ 10-100—10-109 in its entirety and added a new Ch. 10, Art. V, §§ 10-100—10-110 to read as herein set out. Formerly said article was entitled classification and registration of dangerous and potentially dangerous animals and derived from Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-2010. 

Sec. 10-100. - Animal control officer; duties generally. 
The animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous animals and dangerous animal owners within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-101. - Classification of dangerous or vicious animals; notice to owner required; contents of notice. 
(a)  When a dangerous animal or vicious animal is classified as such or when a vicious animal is reclassified as a dangerous animal, the animal control officer shall notify the animal's owner of such classification. 
(b)  Notices to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and either mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address or hand-delivered to the owner. Such notice shall be complete either upon its mailing or, if hand-delivered, upon personal receipt; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the animal's classification or reclassification as a dangerous or vicious animal; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous or vicious animal; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the city or its designee and shall specify the name of the agency which shall conduct the hearing; 
(5)  The notice shall state that either a filing fee in the amount of $250.00 or a sufficient pauper's affidavit showing that the owner is unable without undue financial hardship to pay the filing fee shall be filed with the hearing request to the city or its designee for said hearing; 
(6)  The notice shall state that, if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that an animal is a dangerous or vicious animal will become effective for all purposes under this chapter on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(7)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the city or its designee and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the governing designee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-102. - Liability of owner of dangerous or vicious animal. 
The notice procedures provided for in this article are not an essential condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The owner of a dangerous or vicious animal is held to know that such animal is dangerous or vicious if the animal has, at any time, displayed any one or more of the behaviors described in the definition of dangerous animal or vicious animal as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-103. - Presiding body at hearings on dangerous or vicious animals. 
The city may conduct hearings provided for in this article, may designate an animal control board to conduct such hearings or may designate the board of health to conduct such hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-104. - Procedure for hearings on dangerous or vicious animals. 
When the city or its designee receives a request for a hearing as provided in section 10-101 of this chapter along with payment of the fee or a sufficient pauper's affidavit showing that the owner is unable without undue financial hardship to pay the filing fee required for said hearing, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The city or its designee shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing and such notice shall be mailed to the animal owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the city or its designee shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the city or its designee may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-105. - Notice of determination regarding dangerous or vicious animal. 
Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the city or its designee shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the animal is a dangerous animal or a vicious animal, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. If such determination is that the animal is not a dangerous animal or a vicious animal, then the city or its designee for said hearing may, in its discretion, return any filing fee paid to the animal owner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-106. - Certificate of registration required for dangerous or vicious animals. 
It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the jurisdiction of the city a dangerous animal or vicious animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No more than one certificate of registration shall be granted per person or owner for a dangerous animal or vicious animal. No more than one certificate shall be issued per tax parcel of property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-107. - Certificate of registration for dangerous or vicious animal; proof of proper enclosure and posting of premises. 
Subject to the additional requirements of section 10-108 of this chapter, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous or vicious animal if the owner complies with the following requirements including presenting to the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finding sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous animal or vicious animal is located with a clearly visible sign of the type specified by animal control warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property and containing a symbol designed to inform children of the presence of a dangerous animal. Said signs shall be exempt from any requirements for signs under this Code but, in no event, shall the signs be placed on the right of way of any road. 
(2)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous animal or vicious animal as per the following requirements: 
a.  All proper enclosures located outdoors shall: 
1.  Have a securely attached top; 
2.  Have the fence bottom embedded no less than 24 inches in the ground or attached to a concrete or asphalt floor; 
3.  Be constructed of no less than six gauge wire for the sides of the fence; 
4.  Have tubing that the fence is attached to no less than 18 gauges thick; 
5.  Be no smaller than 12 feet in length and 12 feet in width, although the height and any further width and length of the enclosure are left to the owner's discretion; 
6.  Provide protection from the elements for the animal; 
7.  Have only one gate that shall be of the inward opening type that is kept locked by key or combination lock except when the owner is inside the proper enclosure for the purpose of cleaning the kennel, providing food and water or otherwise tending to the animal; and 
8.  Be inside a perimeter or area fence of the property on which the proper enclosure is located. 
b.  Any structure other than a residence approved as a proper enclosure shall meet all other building codes as well as the following: 
1.  Have a securely attached top; 
2.  Provide protection from the elements for the animal; and 
3.  Not have any holes or other means of escape in walls, floors, windows, doors, ceiling, vents and all walls, floors, windows, doors, vents and ceiling are securely attached to the frame of the building. 
c.  A proper enclosure shall not include the owner's residence with the exception of a proper enclosure for a vicious animal that is 25 lbs. or under in which event the proper enclosure may be comprised of the following: 
1.  Have a securely attached top; 
2.  Be a kennel of no less than five-foot in length by five-foot in width and five foot in height located inside the residence; 
3.  Have a locked gate that shall remain locked by key or combination lock except when the owner is inside the proper enclosure for the purpose of cleaning the kennel, providing food and water or otherwise tending to the animal; 
4.  Have six gauge wire fencing; 
5.  Have tubing that shall not be less than 18 gauges thick; and 
6.  Be allowed only if the owner and the owner of the property on which the proper enclosure is located consent to allow animal control to inspect the inside of the residence where the proper enclosure is maintained or any other area where the animal is found randomly and without notice for compliance with maintaining the animal in the proper enclosure. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a dangerous or vicious animal to have the animal permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by Hall County Animal Services and pay the required fee for the insertion of the microchip in accordance with the chapter 22 of this Code. 
(4)  Consent from the owner of the animal and the owner of the property that animal control shall have the right to inspect, randomly and without notice, a dangerous animal or vicious animal on the property of the person to whom the certificate of registration is issued to include its proper enclosure, if the animal is therein, or the entire property until the animal is found if the animal is not in the proper enclosure for the purpose of assuring compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-108. - Certificate of registration for vicious animal; proof of insurance or bond. 
In addition to the requirements of section 10-107 of this chapter, the owner of a vicious animal shall present to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(a)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 per occurrence issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious animal against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the vicious animal and a letter or other written verification to that effect from the insurance company through which the policy is maintained to the effect that the company is aware of the vicious animal and is otherwise providing insurance as required in this section for the owner of the animal; or 
(b)  A surety bond in the amount of $100,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the vicious animal and a letter or other written verification to that effect from the company issuing the surety bond to the effect that the company is aware of the vicious animal and is otherwise providing insurance as required in this section for the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-109. - Dangerous or vicious animals; exemptions. 
(a)  An animal that inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous or vicious animal within the meaning of this chapter. An animal shall not be a dangerous or a vicious animal within the meaning of this chapter if the injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(b)  No owner of a dangerous or vicious animal shall be held criminally liable under this chapter for injuries inflicted by said owner's animal to any human being while on the owner's property if said owner is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter at the time of the injuries being inflicted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-110. - Applicability of provisions. 
Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a potentially dangerous dog in this state shall on or after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a dangerous dog or vicious dog in this state shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. The owner of any dog referred to in this section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article by January 1, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 5, 12-9-2013) 
Secs. 10-111—10-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MAINTAINING DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 6, adopted December 9, 2013, amended Ch. 10, Art. VI, to read as herein set out. Formerly said article pertained to maintaining dangerous or potentially dangerous animals and derived from Ord. No. 2010-CO-04-657, § 1(Exh. A), adopted 4-19-2010. 

Sec. 10-120. - Notice of escape, death or change of ownership of dangerous or vicious animal. 
(1)  The owner of a dangerous animal or vicious animal shall notify the animal control officer immediately if the animal has attacked a human or other animal or within 24 hours if the animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has died or has been sold or donated. 
(2)  If the animal has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the animal as well as the address for the location of the animal. 
(3)  In the event the animal is deceased, the owner shall not dispose of the body until written authorization is received from animal control. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 6, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-121. - Dangerous or vicious animals; annual registration fee. 
An annual registration fee as set forth in chapter 22 of this Code shall be charged by the animal control officer to defray the cost to register dangerous animals and vicious animals as required in this chapter. Said fee shall be due and payable at the time an application is made for a certificate of registration to be issued as well as on January 1 of each year thereafter with any required late fee as set in chapter 22 of this Code to be assessed if the annual registration fee is not paid by February 1 of the year in which it is due. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 6, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-122. - Vicious animals; muzzling. 
It is unlawful for an owner of a vicious animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. The leash shall not be in excess of six feet in length and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 6, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-123. - Dangerous animals; restraint. 
It is unlawful for the owner of a dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The leash shall not be in excess of six feet in length and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 6, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-124. - Dangerous or vicious animals; confiscation; return to owner or destruction. 
(a)  A vicious animal shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer, by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if: 
(1)  The owner of the animal does not secure and maintain the liability insurance or bond required by this chapter; 
(2)  The animal is not validly registered as required by this chapter; 
(3)  The animal is not maintained in the proper enclosure approved by animal control; 
(4)  The premises where the animal is located are not posted as required by this chapter; or 
(5)  The animal is outside the proper enclosure approved by animal control in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  A dangerous animal shall be confiscated in the same manner as a vicious animal if: 
(1)  The animal is not validly registered as required by this chapter; 
(2)  The animal is not maintained in the proper enclosure approved by animal control; 
(3)  The premises where the animal is located are not posted as required by this chapter; or 
(4)  The animal is outside the proper enclosure approved by animal control in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Any animal that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon the payment of all required impoundment, boarding, veterinary and other fees set forth in chapter 22 of this Code. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this chapter within ten business days of the date the animal was confiscated, said animal shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 6, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-125. - Destruction of dangerous or vicious animals. 
If impracticable to impound a dangerous or vicious animal due to its viciousness or if the delay or attempt to impound the same be attended with danger, it shall be the duty of any law enforcement agency with authority in the jurisdiction of the city or the animal control officer to destroy the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 6, 12-9-2013) 
Sec. 10-126. - Citation and court appearance for violations relating to dangerous or vicious animals. 
Upon information known to or upon a complaint being lodged with an animal control officer or any law enforcement agency employee of the city that an animal is dangerous or vicious and not being kept by its owner under restraint in compliance with this chapter, the animal control officer or any law enforcement agency employee of the city shall issue a citation for the violation to the owner of the animal to appear before the judge of the Magistrate Court of Hall County (or the Municipal Court of Oakwood, Georgia if no intergovernmental agreement is in effect with Hall County) on a day and time certain for a hearing to determine if the animal is dangerous or vicious as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-717, § 6, 12-9-2013) 
Chapter 12 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Housing generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State building, plumbing, electrical, and other technical codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.; application of building- and fire-related codes to existing buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 

Sec. 12-19. - Adopting codes. 
The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced in the city and are hereby adopted by reference thereto as though each code were set forth in its entirety herein: 
(1)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code (International Building Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
(2)  Georgia State Minimum Standard One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings with Georgia State Amendments). 
(3)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code (International Fire Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
(4)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
(5)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code (International Mechanical Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
(6)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code (International Fuel Gas Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
(7)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code (National Electrical Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
(8)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code (International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia State Supplements and Amendments). 
(Ord. No. 328, § 1, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 559, art. I, 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— State building, plumbing, electrical, and other technical codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.; application of building- and fire-related codes to existing buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 
Sec. 12-20. - References to officials and departments in adopted technical codes. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the technical codes adopted by reference in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
Corporation counsel means the city attorney. 
Municipality means the City of Oakwood. 
(b)  When references are to the duties of certain officials or departments named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this article, then that designated official or department of the city, who has duties corresponding to those of the official or department named in the technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Secs. 12-21—12-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 12-44. - General. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, alteration, demolition, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of buildings or structures, plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems within the city. Any and all requirements of this article shall expressly include any and all technical codes as amended by the city pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 201, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-45. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally; conflict. The provisions of this article shall apply to all matters affecting or related to buildings, structures, equipment or systems as set forth in section 12-44. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this article specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. 
(b)  Existing installations. Buildings, structures, plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property is created by such building, structure or system. 
(c)  Work to conform to codes. No building, structure, system, appliance or equipment, as hereinafter specified in this article, shall be constructed, erected, installed, altered or repaired, except in conformance with the provisions of this article and the ordinances of the city. 
(d)  Public utility services. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of services up to and including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of a system owned or operated by a public utility service corporation, water department, gas company, railroad company, pipeline company, or other public utility in the exercise of its normal functions or in rendering its duly authorized service as such. 
(e)  Other laws. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(f)  Referenced codes and standards. The state codes adopted pursuant to section 12-19 shall be considered part of the requirements of this article to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between provisions of this article and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(g)  Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs to any building, structure or system shall conform to that required for a new building, structure or system without requiring the existing building, structure or system to comply with all requirements of this article. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing building, structure or system to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded. 
(h)  Ordinary repairs. Ordinary repairs shall be permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided that such repairs or replacements are not hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(i)  Change in occupant/occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupant or occupancy of any building or structure that does not meet the requirements of this article. Prior to the issuance of any business occupation tax certificate, the finance director shall advise the building official that an application for a business occupation tax certificate has been submitted to the city for review. Prior to the issuance of the business occupation tax certificate, the building official shall inspect the building to be occupied and certify that such building or structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupant or occupancy and that such change of occupant or occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(j)  Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure or system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 202, 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Minor alterations or repairs, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-215; application of state codes to existing buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 
Sec. 12-46. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Department of building safety created. The department of building safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. Said department shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Deputies and authorized representatives. In accordance with prescribed procedures of the city, the building official shall have the authority to request through the city manager the appointment of a deputy building official, authorized representatives, technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as authorized by law and delegated by the building official with the concurrence of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 203, 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Authority to create department, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2. 
Sec. 12-47. - Duties and powers of the building official. 
(a)  Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article and the adopted state codes. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this article. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this article or in the adopted state codes. 
(b)  Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and plans, issue permits for the erection, construction, alteration and demolition of buildings and structures and installation of mechanical, plumbing, gas and electrical systems, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable city ordinances. 
(c)  Other state law authorization. The city building official is authorized to do any act or take any action which is authorized by the Georgia State Construction Industry Licensing Board Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24-3 et seq.). 
(d)  Cooperation of other officials. The building official may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city. 
(e)  Appointment. The city building official shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(f)  Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
(g)  Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved qualified agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized with the concurrence of the city manager to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(h)  Identification. The building official, deputy or authorized representative shall carry proper identification when inspecting buildings, structures or premises in the performance of duties under this article. 
(i)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this article which makes the building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this article, provided that if such building, structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(j)  Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained for the period required by state law for retention of public records. 
(k)  Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this article, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this article or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. 
(l)  Approved materials, equipment, appliances and devices. Materials, equipment, appliances and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this article for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devises shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. 
(m)  Areas prone to flooding. The building official shall not grant modifications to any provisions related to areas prone to flooding as established by the flood insurance rate map, as may hereinafter be amended, without the granting of a variance to such provisions by the board. 
(n)  Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this article, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon application of the owner, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reasons make the strict letter of the ordinance from which this article is derived impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this article and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety or structural requirements. The details of the action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered into the files of the department of building safety. 
(o)  Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment and appliances. The provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the installation of any materials or to prohibit any designs, methods of construction, equipment or appliances not specifically prescribed by this article, provided that any such alternatives have been approved by the building official in writing. Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment or appliances shall be approved in writing where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent and purpose of the provisions of this article, and the material, methods of work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this article in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(p)  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this article, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this article, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the city. Such tests shall be paid for by the person seeking to rely on such alternative materials or methods. 
(q)  Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this article or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. 
(r)  Testing agency. All tests shall be performed by an agency approved by the building official. 
(s)  Test reports. The building official shall retain reports of tests for the period required for retention of public records. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 204, 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Personal liability of officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; exemptions from code provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
Sec. 12-48. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, erection, alteration or repair to a building or structure, mechanical system, gas system, plumbing system, electrical system and energy conservation system, other than ordinary repairs. 
(b)  Exception to permit requirement. A permit shall not be required for ordinary repairs to a single-family residential building or structure for which the wholesale cost does not exceed $3,000.00. 
(c)  Work commencing before permit issuance. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, any person, contractor or company commencing any work on a building or structure, mechanical, gas, plumbing, or system electrical system before obtaining the required permit shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee. 
(d)  Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from the permit requirements of this section shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this article or any other laws or ordinances of the city. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Fences not over eight feet high. 
b.  Retaining walls which are not over four feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. 
c.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1. 
d.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar finish work. 
e.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
f.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches deep and are installed entirely above ground. 
g.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one-family and two-family dwellings. 
h.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall. 
i.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches in height. 
j.  Signs which are subject to the permit requirements of section 54-246. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
b.  Radio and television transmitting stations. Electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but permits are required for equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installation of towers and antennas. 
c.  Temporary testing systems. The installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(3)  Gas. 
a.  Portable heating appliances. 
b.  Replacement of any minor component of equipment that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Portable heating appliances. 
b.  Portable ventilation equipment. 
c.  Portable cooling unit. 
d.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this article. 
e.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
f.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
g.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower or less. 
(5)  Plumbing. 
a.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this article. 
b.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipe, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(e)  Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the development department for that purpose. Such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by street address, legal description or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or structure or work. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by construction plans and documents and any other information that the planning director may require to ascertain whether the proposed building meets the requirements of this article. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Contain the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant/contractor and the property owner and shall be signed by the applicant/contractor and the property owner. 
(7)  The building official may require any additional information to be provided so that an understanding of all work to be performed can be ascertained from the permit application. 
(f)  Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing but no later than 60 calendar days after the filing of a complete application in conformity with this section. If the application or the construction plans or documents do not conform to the requirements of this article, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(g)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless a permit has been issued. The building official is authorized to grant up to three written extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each before such application is declared abandoned. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(h)  Validity. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any provisions of this article, of any local, state or federal law or any provision of other city ordinances. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this article or other provisions of other city ordinances shall not be valid and are void. The issuance of a permit based on construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a building or structure where there exists any violation of this article or of any other provisions of city ordinances, or where there exists a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public or the occupants of the building or structure. 
(i)  Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid and of no force and effect if the work on the site authorized by such permit is not commenced or if no city inspection has been performed within one year after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit has been commenced and has been suspended or abandoned or no further city inspection has been performed for a period of 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant one written extension of the permit for a period of not more than 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(j)  Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this article if the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any applicable provision of other city ordinances. 
(k)  Contractor change, reissuance. 
(1)  No permit shall be reissued on any work or job site for which a permit already exists except after notification in writing from the owner of the change in contractor and that the new contractor is authorized by the owner to re-permit the work. Reissuance of a permit shall make the new contractor responsible for the complete job or system and all work or code deficiencies, if any, as built, erected or installed by the previous or former contractor. 
(2)  The contractor who re-permits the work or job shall pay a re-permit fee in an amount shown in the permit fee schedule maintained by the clerk. 
(l)  Placement of building permit, inspections card, and construction plans. The building permit or copy, inspections card and construction plans shall be kept on the site of the work until completion of the work. The inspections card shall be posted facing the street or in a window of the structure under construction in a manner where it is visible from the street and, if outside, in a weatherproof cover. The construction plans shall be kept on the construction site in a manner that they can be produced upon demand by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 205, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-49. - Construction plans and documents. 
(a)  Submittal. 
(1)  Construction plans and documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. When the building official is unable to make a determination as to the grant or denial of a permit based upon the plans submitted with a permit application, the building official is authorized to require additional construction plans and documents to be prepared by the applicant or a registered design professional. 
(2)  The building official is authorized to waive in writing the submission of construction plans and documents and other data required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction plans and documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this article. 
(b)  Information. Construction plans and documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media construction plans and documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction plans and documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this article and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(c)  Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection systems shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this article and the construction plans and documents and shall be approved by the building official prior to the start of system installation. 
(d)  Exterior wall envelope. Construction plans and documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this article. The construction plans and documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane, and details around openings. 
(e)  Manufacturing installation instructions. The construction plans and documents shall include manufacturing installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction plans and documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system that was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. 
(f)  Site plan. The construction plans and documents submitted with the application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site plan approved by the development department showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades. The site plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show the construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or lot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify in writing the requirement for a site plan. 
(g)  Examination. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction plans and documents and shall ascertain by such examination whether the proposed construction indicated and described is in compliance with the requirements of this article and other pertinent provisions of city ordinances. 
(h)  Approval of construction plans and documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction plans and documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as being in compliance with this article. However, the approval of construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. One set of construction plans and documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official. 
(i)  Previous approvals. The enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not require changes in the construction plans and documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been issued prior to enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived and the construction of which has been pursued and not abandoned within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(j)  Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction plans and documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that construction plans and documents and adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this article. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the approved part of the building construction operation and without any assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted by the building official. 
(k)  Design professional in responsible charge. 
(1)  When it is required and requested by the building official that construction plans and documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The owner shall notify the building official in writing if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties required by this article. 
(2)  The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal plans and documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 
(l)  Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. 
(1)  Deferral of any submittal items shall require prior approval by the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction plans and documents for review by the building official. 
(2)  Submittal construction plans and documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to be in general conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until their design and submittal plans and documents have been approved by the building official in writing. 
(m)  Amended construction plans and documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction plans and documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction plans and documents shall be resubmitted by the holder of the building permit for approval as an amended set of construction plans and documents. 
(n)  Retention of construction plans and documents. One set of approved construction plans and documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work or as required by state or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 206, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-50. - Temporary structures and uses. 
(a)  General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant one written extension of 90 days. The request for extension shall be in writing and shall specify the justifiable cause. 
(b)  Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this article as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. Temporary uses authorized by the building official remain subject to applicable zoning ordinances. 
(c)  Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion or occupancy has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the National Electrical Code, as adopted in section 12-19. 
(d)  Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued for violation of this article or applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 207, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-51. - Permit fees; revocation. 
(a)  Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law and the city council have been paid. No amendment to a permit shall be released to the applicant until the additional permit fee, if any, has been paid. 
(b)  Schedule of permit fees. Permit fees for buildings, structures, mechanical, gas, plumbing and electrical systems shall be determined by the city council. The schedule of fees approved by the city council shall be maintained by the city clerk and the planning director shall also retain a copy available for public inspection. 
(c)  Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(d)  Refunds. The city council is authorized to adopt a written refund policy that applies to the refund of permit fees authorized by this article. 
(e)  Revocation of certificates. A certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or certificate of change of tenant issued pursuant to any provision of this article shall be suspended or revoked by the director, and considered void, if: 
(1)  The application for a certificate of occupancy contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  Changes or alterations in the type of permitted use or occupancy occur without approval required by city ordinance; 
(3)  Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate occur without approval required by city ordinance; 
(4)  Alterations, additions or improvements to the building, structure or systems occur without approval or without obtaining all necessary permits required by city ordinance; 
(5)  The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of city ordinance, state or federal law or codes; 
(6)  The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare. 
(f)  Previous denial or revocation. No certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or certificate of change of tenant shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article the same applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity requesting a certificate has been denied a certificate or had a certificate revoked for any location based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material facts in any application. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 208, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-52. - Inspections. 
(a)  Applicability; accessibility. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this article or of other applicable provisions of city ordinances. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this article or of other provisions of city ordinances shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the city shall be liable for any expense entailed in the removal of any material required to allow inspection. 
(b)  Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(c)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth as follows: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation and slab inspection. The foundation and slab inspection shall be made after trenches are excavated, forms are erected, and reinforcement is installed but before concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and functional. 
b.  Frame/insulation inspection. The frame/insulation inspection shall be made after wiring, piping, chimneys, duct and vents to be concealed are in place and all rough inspections approved, fire blocking is in place and the insulation in walls and inaccessible ceilings is installed. Insulation values must meet documents submitted with permit application. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after the building or structure is completed in compliance with this article prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground and slab inspection. The underground and slab inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, and conduit or cable are installed, and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. The rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, bracing, and wiring are in place and prior to the installation of insulation and wall and ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after the building or structure is complete, all required electrical outlets, switches and fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the building or structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground and slab inspection. The underground and slab inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, and piping installed and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and functional. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. The rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all water, soil, waste and vent piping is complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after the building is complete, and all plumbing fixtures and appliances are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.  Testing. Plumbing work and systems shall be tested as required in section 312 of the Standard Plumbing Code. Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the building official. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground and slab inspection. The underground and slab inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, underground duct and fuel piping is installed and before any backfill and concrete is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. The rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all duct and fuel piping to be concealed are complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system and appliances are in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough-in inspection. The rough-in inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered and concealed or any fixtures or appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection. The final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed, after all portions which are to be covered or concealed by wall and ceiling membranes, plastering, stone or brickwork have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. Log lighters shall be permitted separately and inspected. 
c.  Testing. Testing shall include a gas pressure test. 
d.  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by the new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(d)  Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
(e)  Other inspections. In addition to any other inspections, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable provisions of the code that are enforced by the planning and development department. 
(f)  Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to request and accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(g)  Inspections requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide safe access to and a safe means for inspection of such work for any inspections that are required by this article. 
(h)  Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this article. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(i)  Reinspection fee. Reinspection fees shall be required in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the city council when work performed is required to be reinspected due to the following reasons: 
(1)  The reinspection is not approved due to a failure to correct a previously noted code violation on a prior inspection; 
(2)  The job is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed; 
(3)  The building or structure is not accessible and inspection cannot be performed; 
(4)  Work to be inspected has been covered or concealed and proper inspection cannot be performed; or 
(5)  Prior issuance of a stop work order requires reinspection. 
(j)  Right of entry. Inspections required under the provisions of this article shall be made by the building official or designee. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or designee may enter the premises between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to perform any duty imposed by this article provided that the building official or designee has consent to enter the premises or has obtained and presents an inspection warrant as described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 209, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-53. - Certificates of occupancy, tenancy. 
(a)  Required. No building or structure or portion thereof shall be occupied or a change made in the type of occupancy or the nature of the use of an existing building or part thereof until after an appropriate certificate as required by this section has been issued. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Issuance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the building official until the building, structure and intended use complies with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance, all construction is complete and all required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electric, fire, health, vegetation protection and site drainage inspections have been performed and approved. 
(2)  Scope. The certificate of occupancy certifies that all final inspections have been completed and the structure has been erected, to the best of the city's knowledge, in compliance with applicable code requirements at the time of the issuance of the certificate. However, issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not excuse the builder, contractor, tenant, or property owner from liability for any violation of the code or any other applicable laws. Occupancy shall be limited to the area or portion of a building or structure defined by the building permit for which the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(c)  Temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Scope. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for nonresidential buildings or portions thereof for a specified period of time when it has been determined by the building official or designee that no outstanding Code violations or deficiencies exist and the building may be safely occupied for the use and time requested. A request for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be made on such form as prescribed by the building official. 
(2)  Issuance. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for stated purposes only when construction has not been fully completed and all final inspections have not been performed. 
(3)  Revocation. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be revoked at the option of the building official for any and/or all of the following reasons: 
a.  Violation of any building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations. 
b.  Failure to complete any stage of construction and/or site improvements required by the building official in a timely manner. 
c.  Unauthorized occupancy or use of any part or portion of the building or structure other than the area or portion for which a temporary certificate of occupancy has been granted. 
d.  Any other conditions that may affect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property. 
(d)  Certificate of completion. A certificate of completion shall be issued upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, and/or plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical system, when a certificate of occupancy is not required. The certificate of completion does not grant authority to occupy a building or structure or change the type of occupancy or nature of use prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(e)  Contents of certificates. Certificates shall contain the following: 
(1)  The building permit number (or in the case of a certificate of completion, the appropriate trade permit number). 
(2)  The address of the structure. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner. 
(4)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(6)  The name of the building official. 
(7)  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
(8)  If nonresidential, the use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of the International Building Code. 
(9)  If nonresidential, the type of construction as defined in chapter 6 of the International Building Code. 
(10)  If nonresidential, the design occupant load. 
(11)  If an automatic sprinkler is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(12)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
(f)  Revocation of certificates. The building official or his designee may revoke certificates of occupancy and certificates of completion issued under provisions of this article where it is shown that there have been either one or more of the following: 
(1)  Changes or alterations in construction, type of permitted use or occupancy without written approval by the building official or his designee. 
(2)  Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate without written approval by the building official or his designee. 
(3)  Alterations, additions, or improvements to the building, structure, or systems without permits and inspections required by this article. 
(4)  Violation of any zoning, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations. 
(5)  Any condition that may affect the building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the planning director, renders the building, structure or service system unsafe, dangerous or uninhabitable. 
(6)  After a certificate has been revoked, a valid certificate shall not be issued until all violations, changes, alterations, additions or improvements meet all requirements of this article as determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 210, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-54. - Utility service connections. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this article for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official. 
(b)  Permanent electrical service connection. Permanent electrical service connection and meter shall not be authorized until all required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electrical, drainage, vegetation, fire and health inspections have been performed and approved by the appropriate city or state department or official. 
(c)  Permanent gas service connection. Permanent gas service connection and meter shall not be authorized until the gas supply house line has been tested, inspected and approved and all appliance and equipment connections have been inspected and approved. 
(d)  Temporary electrical and gas service connections. Temporary electrical and gas service and meter connections may be authorized for a specified period of time when the system has been inspected and found to be safe for the connections and use authorized. Such temporary service connections shall be authorized only for the following reasons: 
(1)  Testing of appliances and equipment. 
(2)  To provide heat during the winter months to prevent freeze damage to water systems and equipment and including, but not limited to, installation of wallpaper or painting. 
(3)  Temporary occupancy of the building or structure only for the training of employees or stocking of merchandise. 
(4)  Single-tenant occupancy buildings and multi-tenant occupancy buildings for which temporary service connections have been authorized shall not be allowed access by the general public for business activity other than those allowed in subsections (d)(1), (2), and (3) of this section. 
(5)  Application for temporary service connections and meters shall be made on such forms as prescribed by the planning director. 
(e)  Authority to disconnect utility services. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this article in case of an emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate danger to life or property. Where possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified of the decision to disconnect utility service prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(f)  Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connections from any energy, fuel, power supply or water distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment regulated by this article that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 211, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-55. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Created; appointments; rules of procedure. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this article, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. Members of the board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor in consultation with the city council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business consistent with chapter 2. 
(b)  Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this article or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this article do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this article. 
(c)  Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 212, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-56. - Violations, remedies and penalties. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure, system or equipment regulated by this article, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this article or other applicable city ordinances. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removing, demolition, or occupancy of a building or structure, system or equipment in violation of the provisions of this article, or in violation of a permit or certificate of occupancy under the provisions of this article. Such notice or order shall direct the discontinuance or correction of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 213, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-57. - Stop work order. 
(a)  Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this article being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(b)  Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 214, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 12-58. - Unsafe conditions. 
(a)  Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, uninhabitable, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Structures that are deemed an unsafe condition shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary unless the notice of an unsafe condition is appealed to the board in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 12-55. 
(b)  Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the building, structure or system found to be unsafe, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the building official written acceptance or rejection of the terms of the notice. 
(c)  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered to the owner personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address with the return receipt requested. 
If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or about the building or structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the building or structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner. 
(d)  Restoration. The building, structure, system or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations, or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the building, structure, system or equipment, such repairs, alterations or additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 215, 5-12-2008) 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Commercial class of business means a business in those business categories that have standard industrial classification (SIC) numbers in which the first two digits are other than between 20 and 39 (with the SIC number set out for each business as found within the appendix attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and incorporated by the reference herein). 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from by the providing of a service or product, or both. 
Employee means any individual who, for compensation, exerts substantial effort within the state for the purpose of soliciting business or servicing customers or clients. Part-time, seasonal and temporary employees shall be considered to be employees of the business or practitioner. 
Industrial class of business means a business in those business categories that have standard industrial classification (SIC) number in which the first two digits are between 20 and 39 (with the standard industrial classification number set out for each business as found within the appendix attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and incorporated by reference herein). 
Location of office means a fixed place located within the city from which a person conducts business but shall not include a temporary work site located in the city for less than one month for the purpose of serving a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation including, but not limited to, those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 2, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-20. - Purpose and scope. 
The tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 8, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-21. - Required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or a location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the corporate limits pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in any place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city, such as business tax certificate shall be shown to any proper agent of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 1, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-22. - Tax structure; administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $5.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will only be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 3, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-23. - Levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients within the corporate limits of the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  For the industrial class, the tax shall be levied on the number of employees of the business or practitioner; 
(2)  For the commercial class, the tax shall be levied on the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. 
(1)  Industrial class business. The occupational tax schedule for an industrial class business shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(2)  Commercial class business. The occupational tax for a commercial class business shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(c)  If a business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business or practitioner's sales or services in the state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall only be required to pay an occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This article shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local governments. 
(4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(5)  The city shall require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies who maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(6)  Each insurance company doing business in the city shall pay an annual fee in accordance with the fee schedule maintained by the city clerk. 
(7)  Independent insurance agencies or brokers doing insurance business not taxed under subsection (c)(6) of this section shall be subject to the occupation tax based on number of employees as set out in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(8)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed to require attorneys at law to pay an occupation tax or otherwise register with the city as a precondition to the practice of law. Any requirements herein that a copy of the occupation tax certificate be posted shall in no way be construed as a precondition to the practice of law at said offices. Finally, any audit conditions contained hereinafter shall not be deemed to require an attorney to provide confidential information and shall so expressly allow an attorney at law to remove any such confidential information from billing records to the extent that the city uses said billing records to determine if an attorney has properly paid the taxes due pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 4, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-24. - Paying tax on business with no location in the state. 
The city requires a registration and assessment of an occupation tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 5, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-25. - Number of businesses operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one office or location within the corporate limits of the city, the city shall not require a business or practitioner to pay more than one occupation tax for each office or location. However, the total number of employees from all of the offices or locations within the corporate limits shall be used to calculate the tax owed. For business or practitioners with more than one type of service or product, the city shall classify the business or practitioner for occupation tax purposes according to the dominant line of business. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 6, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-26. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 7, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-27. - When tax due and payable; effect when delinquent. 
(a)  The registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by February 1 of each year and be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade or calling, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty shall be imposed if not paid within 30 days of the commencement of the business. The tax certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk. If any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any of the kinds of professions, trades or callings in this article specified without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, in addition to remedies provided herein, upon conviction, be punished as provided herein. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies of this section, the city, through a proper agent including, but not limited to, the city attorney, may proceed to collect any delinquent taxes and/or penalties in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 9, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-28. - Counting of employees. 
For both the commercial and industrial classes, only the employees or agents who work or exert substantial efforts for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients within the corporate limits of the city will be counted for tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 10, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-29. - Exemption on grounds that business operated charitable purposes. 
No business on which business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 11, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-30. - Evidentiary requirements of ownership, state licensing and United States citizenship or permanent legal residency. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia (the state licensing exam boards) shall provide evidence of proper and current state license before the registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person operating a home-based business shall provide the driver's license of the owner, officer, partner or managing member residing in the business premises upon initial registration and with the annual return if residency changes. The address on the driver's license must be the same as the home-based business. 
(c)  Each person operating a commercial-based business shall provide proof of lease/ownership of business premises by submitting a copy of the lease agreement or warranty deed. 
(d)  Each registrant/applicant who is the sole owner of a business must execute the following affidavit for United States citizens or legal Permanent Residents required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1(d)(1): 
AFFIDAVIT FOR UNITED STATES CITIZENS  AND LEGAL PERMANENT RESIDENTS 
Instructions: As required by O.C.G.A. Section 50-36-1(d)(1), any natural person who applies for a state or local public benefit must execute one of two affidavits concerning the applicant's legal presence in the United States. Select one of the following: 
A ____________ I am a citizen of the United States or a legal permanent resident 18 years of age or older. 
OR 
B ____________ I am a qualified alien or non-immigrant under the Federal Immigration and Nationality Act and 18 years of age or older and lawfully present in the United States. 
Alien registration number for non-citizens: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (required) 
A front and back copy of one of the following documents must be attached: 
a)  Valid foreign passport with I-94; 
b)  Temporary resident card (I-688); 
c)  Employment authorization card (I-766 or I-688A); 
d)  Employment authorization document (I-688B); or 
e)  Refugee travel document (I-571) 
Any person who knowingly and willfully makes a false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation in this affidavit shall be guilty of a violation of O.C.G.A. Section 16-10-20. 

 
(e)  Each person submitting an affidavit as required by subparagraph (d) of this section shall pay the applicable charges and fees for verification services as set forth in chapter 22 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 12, 10-25-2004; Ord. of 3-9-2009(1), § 1; Amd. No. 424, § 1(12), 7-13-2009; Amd. No. 424, § 1(12), 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-659, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 14-31. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory manner shall first, before the issuance of a city business, do so before the registration is issued. 
(b)  Any business required to submit any annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 13, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-32. - Registration required; liability of officers and agents. 
All persons subject to the occupation taxes provided in this article shall be required to take out the necessary registration for said business prescribed in this article and, in default thereof, the office or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as the other person who fails to obtain a certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions or occupations set forth hereto without first having so obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties provided herein and, upon conviction, be punished as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 14, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-33. - When due and payable; penalty when delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain appropriate business registration and pay all taxes and fees as provided herein before January 1 of each year. On January 2 of each year thereafter, the penalty of failure to comply with this section shall be assessed in the amount of ten percent of the administrative fee and occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this article for the first 30 days or fraction thereof delinquency and an additional one percent of the administrative fee and occupation tax for each additional month or fraction thereof of delinquency. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk. If any person whose duty is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any kinds of business, trades, profession or occupations in this article specified without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-02-667, § 1, 3-14-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-CO-02-667, § 1, adopted Mar. 14, 2011, repealed § 14-33, in its entirety and enacted new provisons to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 14-33 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 14-34. - Requirements of compliance with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
In order to ensure the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, any applicant for, registrant with or holder of a business license in the city shall be required to fully comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city as a condition for the issuance, maintenance or renewal of its business license from the city. Specifically, all real and personal city property taxes (including personal if the business is a sole proprietorship) must be brought current. Additionally, the Certificate of Occupancy (CO) for the business premises shall be verified prior to the issuance of a business license therefore. Failure to do so for any of the above mandatory requirements, upon determination by the city council or upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be grounds for the immediate cancellation or nonrenewal of such business license by the city council upon a hearing before the city council. Each such offender shall, in addition to remedies provided heretofore, be subject to prosecution in the municipal court of the city for violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-02-667, § 1, 3-14-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-CO-02-667, § 1, adopted Mar. 14, 2011, repealed § 14-34, in its entirety and enacted new provisons to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 14-34 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 14-35. - Business inspector. 
The mayor, the city clerk, any member of the city council, the city attorney or other proper agent of the city may act as a business inspector on behalf of the city with subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 18, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-36. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provision of this article but may be assessed by an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law or ordinance: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products but not including an agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 19, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-37. - Levied on the number of employees as of January 1 or beginning date of business; levied on businesses commenced on or after July 1. 
All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied in accordance with the number of employees of the businesses as of January 1 of each year. In the event that a business begins operation within the city after January 1 of any year, the occupation taxes levied by this article are levied as of the beginning date of business. On or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed the entire year. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 21, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-38. - When tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amounts of occupation tax shall be payable to the city at City Hall, 4035 Walnut Circle, Oakwood, Georgia, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 22, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-39. - Filing of return showing actual number of employees during calendar year. 
After the end of each year and on or before April 1 of the succeeding year or as of the start of business for a new business, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city clerk, an informal statement constituting the tax return of the business and which sets out the number of employees of the business, to be employed by the business during the year. If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 23, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-40. - Confidential information of the taxpayer. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city, or any other person, to divulge or make known in any manner any information of the taxpayer which is held to be confidential under state law but which is required to be disclosed to the city in accordance with this article. Any information of the taxpayer which is held to be confidential under state law shall be open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks ofthe city using said information for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of specific confidential information or the inspection of records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States and other local governments. Information provided by a business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupational tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 24, 10-25-2004) 
State Law reference— Confidentiality of information, penalty, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15. 
Sec. 14-41. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case, the mayor, any member of the city council, the city clerk, the city attorney or other proper agent of the city may inspect the books of the business for which the returns (number of employees) are made. The city's agent shall have the right to inspect the books or records of the business for which the return was made in the city and, upon demand by the proper agent of the city, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination of the books or records. If it is determined that the number of employees was under reported, a penalty of ten percent of the occupation tax that should have been paid, plus any deficiency, shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 25, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-42. - Certificate revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns or permit inspection of books. 
Except for a person whose qualifications to practice their profession is determined by the general laws of the state, the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 14-41, any business tax certificate granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year, shall be automatically revoked by operation of law. No new business tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid or to a person who has failed to submit the informal statement requested by the proper agent of the city in accordance with the provisions found in sections 14-38 and 14-40. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 26, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-43. - Execution of lien for delinquency. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the mayor, any member of the city council, the city clerk, the city attorney or other proper agent of the city, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for said tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent and the lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax; all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the mayor, any member of the city council, the city clerk, the city attorney, or other proper agent of the city upon the property of the person liable for said tax and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution with interest and cost. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the mayor, any member of the city council, the city clerk, the city attorney or other proper agent of the city against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest, penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due the person for services rendered as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 28, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 14-45. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution, which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01-CO-690, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-01-CO-690, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, repealed § 14-45, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 14-45 pertained to "Enforcement provisions." See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 14-46. - Enforcement provisions. 
(a)  It is hereby made the duty of the mayor, any member of the city council, the city clerk, the city attorney or other proper agent of the city, including, but not limited to, the police department of the city, to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed. As a result, all certificates issued by the city are subject to inspection by any city personnel listed above as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. All businesses operating within the city shall display the certificate as required in section 14-21 hereof. 
(b)  For first and second violations of the provisions of this division, written notice of same citing the sections violated shall be served upon the business owner via first class mail at the address provided in the application for a business license and occupational certificate. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the city manager shall issue a "stop work" order requiring that all business activities be stopped pending correction of the violation. 
(c)  If no certificate has been issued for the business being conducted on the site and the violation is the conducting of business without first obtaining a business license, the city manager shall issue an immediate "stop work" order which shall be served on the business owner or employee thereof at the location of the business by the Oakwood Police Department or the city code compliance officer. 
(d)  For third and subsequent violation under (b) above, the city manager shall issue an immediate "stop work" order. 
(e)  All "stop work" orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action has occurred. 
(f)  "Stop work" orders shall apply to all business activity on the site and the Oakwood Police Department is hereby expressly authorized and directed to issue citations for each person violating the "stop work" order. Each instance of business activity shall constitute a basis for a separate citation for violation hereof. Similarly, each day of activity shall constitute a separate violation hereof. 
(g)  All citations shall summon the violator to appear before the Municipal Court for the City of Oakwood. The minimum fine for each violation hereof shall be $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01-CO-690, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-01-CO-690, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, repealed § 14-46, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 14-46 pertained to "Requirement of public hearing before tax increase." See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Secs. 14-47—14-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 14-60. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. as amended in 2008 by Senate Bill 379 (the "amended law") to collect due compensation from telegraph and telephone companies that maintain and operate lines and facilities occupying municipal street and rights-of-way equal to no more than three percent of actual recurring local service revenues received by such company from its retail, end user customers located within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(b)  If a company does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to the city in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the state department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
Sec. 14-61. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9). 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city, the payment by such company to the city in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the state department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
Sec. 14-62. - Authorized designee. 
The city manager shall, on behalf of the city, exercise the day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq., and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the city council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this division. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between the telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to amended law and this division. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexation and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
Secs. 14-63—14-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 14-74. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 11-14-1983) 
State Law reference— Taxation of depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 14-75. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city, shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city, on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 104, § 2, 11-14-1983) 
Secs. 14-76—14-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 14-94. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, public club or private club or any other place containing guestrooms, lodgings or accommodations which are occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by guests whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise are regularly furnished for value. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, the right to use or have possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or have possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license or use or other agreement or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for more than ten consecutive days. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money whether received in money or otherwise including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 1, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-95. - Required. 
(a)  There is hereby set and levied on each occupant of a guestroom of any hotel located within the corporate limits of the city a tax in the amount of five percent of the rent for such occupancy. 
(b)  No tax shall be levied under this section for the use of meeting rooms and the aggregate of taxes levied upon the rent for such occupancy shall not exceed ten percent of such rent. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 2, 6-12-2000) 
State Law reference— Authorization for tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
Sec. 14-96. - Use of funds generated by additional taxes. 
Upon approval by the city council on an annual basis, the additional tax imposed hereby in excess of the first three percent as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) shall be paid to the Greater Hall Tourism and Convention Bureau as long as: 
(1)  The majority of the funds generated hereby are used for advertising and promoting the city and its surrounding area; and 
(2)  The city has representation on the bureau. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 3, 6-12-2000; Amd. No. 165, § 1, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 14-97. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the city to collect the tax on occupants as imposed in section 14-95. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 4, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-98. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article: 
(1)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder on accommodations furnished a permanent resident. 
(2)  No tax shall be levied for the use of rooms as meeting rooms or upon the fees or charges for any guestroom used for a period of one or more days by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 5, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-99. - Registration of operator. 
(a)  Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register such business with the city clerk on a form provided by the clerk for such purpose. Persons engaged in such business must so register no later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived but such grace period for registration shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such tax on or after the date of imposition of such tax. The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership, or by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
(b)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 6, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-100. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator under this article, the city clerk shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 7, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-101. - Due date and required report. 
All taxes levied by this section shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 8, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-102. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied under this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from the state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 9, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-103. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any hotel operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this article, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the hotel operator written notice of his determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(c)  The amount of the determination made hereunder shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 10, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-104. - Required records. 
Each hotel operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 11, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-105. - Administration and enforcement. 
The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax herein imposed and, in so doing, shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To examine or authorize the examination of the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to persons subject to the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(2)  To require the filing of reports by any person having in his possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax herein levied. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 12, 6-12-2000) 
Sec. 14-106. - Action for collection of tax. 
At any time within three years after any tax levied under this article or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the city attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect such amount due together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 13, 6-12-2000) 
State Law reference— Penalties for failure to make a return and pay the excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58.1. 
Sec. 14-107. - Successors or assignees of operator. 
If any hotel operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this article and subsequent thereto sells out his business or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. If the purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he shall become personally liable therefor to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Amd. No. 165, § 14, 6-12-2000) 
Secs. 14-108—14-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GROSS RECEIPTS TAX 

Sec. 14-128. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts means all revenue as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that is received, directly or indirectly, by a local exchange carrier or affiliated persons from or in connection with, the provision of telecommunications services that originate or terminate within the corporate limits of the city. 
Local exchange carrier means any person that is engaged in the provision of telephone exchange service or exchange access. The term "local exchange carrier" does not include a person insofar as such person is engaged in the provision of a commercial mobile service including wireless telecommunications services. 
Streets means the surface of as well as the spaces above and below any and all streets, alleys, avenues, highways, bridges, tunnels and any other public rights-of-way of the city within the corporate limits of the city as the same now exist or may be hereafter constructed, developed, extended or altered and any location thereon and any portion thereof. 
Telecommunications means the transmission between or among points specified by the user of information of the user's choosing without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Telecommunications equipment means equipment other than customer premises equipment used by a carrier to provide telecommunications service. 
Telecommunications service means any telecommunications service, interconnection service, access service and any other telecommunications service provided by a person or entity acting as a local exchange carrier in connection with the telecommunications equipment except for cable services as that term is defined at 47 USC 522(6). 
(Ord. No. 310, § 2, 10-1-1998) 
Sec. 14-129. - Tax imposed. 
A tax of three percent is imposed upon the gross receipts of any local exchange carrier, person or entity providing telecommunications service over telecommunications equipment located in the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 3, 10-1-1998) 
Sec. 14-130. - Provisions not applicable to certain providers. 
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to any local exchange carrier, person or entity paying a franchise fee to the city for use of the public streets for the provision of telecommunications service. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 4, 10-1-1998) 
Sec. 14-131. - Payment and due date. 
The tax imposed by this article shall by due and payable in quarterly installments. The tax due for gross receipts revenue received from January through March of each year shall be due and payable on or before May 15. Payments for subsequent calendar quarters shall be due on August 15, November 15 and February 15 of each year. All payments of such taxes shall be remitted simultaneously with a completed quarterly report form indicating the revenue sources and amounts on which the taxes were calculated. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 5, 10-1-1998) 
Sec. 14-132. - Delinquency; penalty and interest. 
Delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any portion thereof. In addition, a penalty of ten percent shall be imposed on the amount of the tax if the tax is not paid within ten days of the due date set forth in section 14-131. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 6, 10-1-1998) 
Sec. 14-133. - Audits. 
The city, or its authorized representative, is authorized to perform such audits as may be necessary to ensure the taxes imposed by this article have been paid. Should any audit reveal an underpayment in excess of five percent, the local exchange carrier shall bear the cost of the audit. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 7, 10-1-1998) 
Sec. 14-134. - Regulation of use of streets preserved. 
Nothing in this article restricts the authority of the city to regulate the use and occupancy of the streets by any person or entity providing telecommunications service. Persons or entities subject to paying a tax pursuant to this article shall not be exempt from municipal regulations relating to the time, manner and method of construction, installation, maintenance, repair or upgrade of the telecommunications equipment located within the city's streets. Pursuant to applicable provisions of the city Charter and other general law, the city expressly reserves its right to grant a telecommunications franchise to any local exchange carrier providing telecommunications service whose telecommunications equipment occupies the city's streets. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 8, 10-1-1998) 
Sec. 14-135. - Gross receipts tax not in lieu of ad valorem taxes. 
Payment of a gross receipt tax pursuant to this article shall not be in lieu of ad valorem taxes or pole attachment fees. There shall be no deduction for ad valorem taxes paid against the gross receipt tax imposed nor a deduction for gross receipts taxes paid against ad valorem taxes owed except for any credit against ad valorem taxes required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 9, 10-1-1998) 
Secs. 14-136—14-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX 

Sec. 14-154. - Insurers license fees. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount shown in the fee schedule maintained by the city clerk. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 14-155, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount shown in the fee schedule maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 1, 12-10-2001) 
State Law reference— Authorization for tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 
Sec. 14-155. - Fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional-business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee in the amount shown in the fee schedule maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 2, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 14-156. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 14-154. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 3, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 14-157. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 14-154. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 4, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 14-158. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 14-154 and 14-155 shall be due and payable on January 1. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 5, 12-10-2001) 
Chapter 16 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemeteries and funeral services are regulated by the Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery or city cemetery means the cemetery owned and managed by the city, known as Oakwood City Cemetery, including any new land added thereto at any time henceforth. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 1, 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 16-2. - Regulations. 
(a)  The city may promulgate regulations, rules or other restrictions at any time to carry out the purposes of this chapter, to allow for the efficient operation of the city cemetery and to attempt to ensure compliance with necessary rules, regulations and procedures concerning the present or future operation of the cemetery. 
(b)  The city shall have no liability whatsoever to any person concerning the use, erection of monuments or burial of persons within the cemetery. In accepting any conveyance of a burial lot, each purchaser agrees to be bound by the provisions of this chapter, together with all regulations promulgated hereunder and any amendments thereto. Unless due solely to the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the city or its agents, neither the city nor the city's agents shall be liable to the purchaser or the purchaser's agents, representatives or visitors and the purchaser shall and does hereby indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against any and all loss, cost, liability, claim, damage or expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and costs of investigation) incurred in connection with or arising from: 
(1)  Any default by the city in the performance of any of the terms and provisions under this chapter to be performed by the city; 
(2)  The purchaser's use and occupancy of the premises purchased hereunder; or 
(3)  Any acts, omissions or negligence of the city and any such person in or about the premises of the municipal cemeteries. 
The purchaser and all those claiming or entering the premises of the city cemetery by, through or under the purchaser or pursuant to the terms of this chapter, hereby release the city, to the full extent permitted by law, from all claims of every kind, including, without limitation, personal injury, property damage, loss or other damages occurring by theft or mysterious disappearance unless cause by or due solely to the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the city or its agents. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 2.01, 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 16-3. - Management and supervision. 
The responsibility for the management, operation, maintenance and general supervision of the city cemetery shall be vested in the city manager. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 2.02, 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 16-4. - Appointment of superintendent; duties. 
(a)  Appointment. The city manager shall appoint a superintendent of the city cemetery, which officer shall be subject to removal at any time by the city manager or mayor and council. 
(b)  Duties. The superintendent of the city cemetery shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To look after and take proper care of the city cemetery and see that no lot in any cemetery is used or occupied in violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated by the mayor and council (except the city manager may vary the rules, regulations and requirements hereof in instances of extreme hardship or need); 
(2)  To keep full and detailed accounts of the receipts and expenditures on account of the city cemetery and, at least once a month, to turn over to the city treasurer all monies collected on such accounts; and 
(3)  To see to the digging of graves and to the proper interring of the dead when called upon to do so. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 2.03, 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 16-5. - Purchase and conveyance of lots. 
(a)  Lot valuation. The price for all unsold lots in the city cemetery shall be as set forth in the fee schedule maintained by the city clerk adopted in accordance with section 22-1 of the Code. A minimum purchase of two grave lots (sites) shall be required. 
(b)  Reservation for city residents. All lots in the city cemetery are reserved for the use of city residents. Upon application to the city, the city manager, upon a finding of one or more of the following special circumstances, may exercise discretion conferred upon him hereby to issue and sell a maximum of two lots to a nonresident of the city: 
(1)  The nonresident has a close relative buried in the city cemetery; 
(2)  The nonresident was a longtime resident of the city; 
(3)  The nonresident was a longtime employee of the city; 
(4)  The nonresident had a close affiliation with the operation of the city; or 
(5)  The nonresident is or was a major benefactor of the city. 
The city manager, should he exercise his discretion hereunder, shall report such to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  Method of purchase. Any resident of the city desiring to purchase lots for the purpose for which such are intended shall be permitted to do so upon payment of the price fixed for such lots or upon making arrangements, according to rules and regulations that may be established by the city manager, for the purchase of such lots on a written installment plan. Failure to pay in accordance with the written installment plan shall result in a forfeiture of the right to use said lots and all payments made. There shall be no discrimination in the sale of lots on any basis other than on the requirement of residency in the city. 
(d)  Corner markers required. All purchasers of city cemetery lots shall, at the time of purchase, be required to have corner markers placed on said lots. 
(e)  Manner of conveying. Conveyances of burial lots shall be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and city clerk and have affixed thereto the seal of the city. Such conveyances shall not convey fee simple title but shall convey to the purchaser of each burial lot an easement for the exclusive right of interment and sepulcher in each lot; shall state the maximum number of graves allowed on each such burial lot as shown by the plat; and, by reference therein made, shall convey each lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter as fully as if set out in each such conveyance. 
(f)  Filing of deed. At the time the city conveys any burial lot, the city clerk, in addition to collecting the purchase price thereof, shall file a second original of the deed of the right to the use of said lot in the records of the city. No sale or transfer of any burial lot or any right therein nor any subdividing of any burial lot by any purchaser or those claiming under him shall be valid unless approved in writing by the city and until the deed of transfer and such written approval are filed in the city clerk's office. 
(g)  Records of ownership. The city clerk shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all lot easements in the city cemetery, of the burial capacity of each lot, of the location of each grave and of the names and ages of the persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be used. 
(h)  Deeds. All deeds by the city conveying cemetery lots shall be signed in the name of the city by the mayor and the city clerk and shall have the city corporate seal attached. 
(i)  Transfer of title. No sale or transfer of title from one lot owner to another of or to any cemetery lot or part of a lot shall be effective unless authorized by the city manager. No such sale or transfer shall be at a greater price than that for which the lot was purchased from the city. City residency shall not be a mandatory requirement for a transfer of title. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 2.04, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 2010-CO-10-664, § 1, 11-11-2010) 
Sec. 16-6. - Lot restrictions. 
(a)  Enclosures. No curbing, fencing or enclosure of any sort may be accomplished in any area of the cemetery or in any closed alley within the cemetery except stone coping. The city reserves the right to erect fencing or curbing along the walks and driveways. 
(b)  Plantings. No flowers, shrubs, decoration or adornment for any grave site shall be done until the plans for such work have been submitted and approved by the superintendent of the city cemetery. 
(c)  Stones and monuments. Owners of cemetery lot easements shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking the burial site; provided, however: 
(1)  No slab shall be set other than in a horizontal position and flush with the ground; 
(2)  Headstones shall not exceed 36 inches in height above the ground and 36 inches in width for single headstones and 72 inches in width for double headstones and shall be set in a concrete foundation; and 
(3)  Monuments of cut stone or marble shall not exceed ten feet in height and the erection of same must be authorized and supervised by the superintendent of the city cemetery. 
(d)  Interments. No deceased person shall be interred in any city cemetery until the burial lot has been fully paid for, the party arranging the burial has been determined to have the right of use of the lot and such lot is not beyond its appropriate use capacity. The superintendent of the city cemetery shall ensure that these requirements and restrictions are complied with and that a proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and the exact location of the grave. It shall be the ultimate responsibility of the user, owner, funeral home, vault company, etc., to ensure that interment is entirely within the proper cemetery lot and does not violate the provisions of this section. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 2.05, 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 16-7. - Application of city ordinances. 
All provisions of the city ordinances now in force or hereafter enacted relating to and defining public offenses in the city shall, insofar as the same shall be applicable, be in full force and effect in the city cemetery. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 3.01, 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 16-8. - City authority to regulate cemetery; additional regulations. 
The city, pursuant hereto, reserves the right to regulate conduct, activities and uses within its city cemetery. These activities shall be promulgated by rules and regulations generally as authorized pursuant to section 16-2. Violation of any of the following regulations shall, as to each such violation, authorize the imposition of such fines and penalties as are generally provided in the city Charter. In addition to the regulations established pursuant to section 16-2, the following regulations are hereby promulgated: 
(1)  Restricted hours. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than duly authorized officers, officials or employees of the city, to enter into or be upon the cemetery grounds of the city during the time after sunset and before sunrise of any day without first obtaining the permission of the city manager or superintendent of said cemetery. It shall further be unlawful at all times for any person to enter or leave the grounds other than by the established and open entrances or gateways. 
(2)  Loitering prohibited; minors under 16 years to be accompanied. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or trespass upon lots and graves of the city cemetery or for the parent or guardian of any child under the age of 16 to permit such child to be within said cemetery grounds unless accompanied by an adult person; provided that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any person having lawful business in the cemetery in connection with improvement thereof or person visiting the graves of relatives or friends from being in said cemetery in accordance with the rules. 
(3)  Time limit on items left on lots. It shall be unlawful to leave any items on any cemetery lot in excess of 15 days. 
(4)  Gates; closed at dusk. Gates will be installed at both entrances to the cemetery and closed at dusk. 
(5)  Speed limit. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in the cemetery faster than ten miles per hour. 
(6)  Vehicular traffic. 
a.  No person shall drive or move any vehicle within the cemetery except over a roadway open for vehicular traffic or obstruct any path or driveway within the cemetery open to vehicular traffic. No person shall use the cemetery grounds or any driveway therein as a public thoroughfare or drive any vehicle through said grounds except for purposes of making deliveries in the cemetery, attending a graveside service or burial service or visiting any grave site. 
b.  It shall be the duty of the cemetery superintendent and his assistants to direct all vehicular traffic, and the superintendent of the cemetery is authorized to direct the parking or standing of all vehicles in said cemetery. No person shall disobey or disregard the directions of the superintendent of the cemetery or any police office of the city relating to the movement or standing of all vehicles within said cemetery. 
(7)  Walls. 
a.  No new walls may be erected. 
b.  Only existing walls may be repaired. 
c.  Deteriorating walls, loose brick, etc., may be repaired by the owner or removed by the city if hazardous to employees while working. 
(8)  Flower placement; removal after 15 days. 
a.  The placing of cut flowers or plastic flowers over individual graves shall be permitted; however, the city shall not be responsible for the care of such flowers or the containers that they are placed in. 
b.  The city shall remove, without notice, all flowers, real or artificial, that remain over 15 days or are deteriorated. 
(9)  Containers. Only clay, plastic, or recessible-type containers for flowers shall be permitted in the cemetery. No glass, tin or wire shall be allowed due to the danger to the employees when mowing. 
(10)  Flag display, etc., restrictions. American flags may be displayed in the cemetery on national holidays only. All other items are prohibited. 
(11)  Permanent plantings restricted to city. No permanent planting of any kind shall be allowed in the cemetery. The city will plant trees and shrubs as space allows to prevent interference with other lots in the future. 
(12)  Littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any rubbish, trash, waste materials, litter or debris of any kind in the city cemetery other than in approved receptacles. 
(13)  Defacing of headstones, disturbing graves, etc., prohibited. No person shall remove, injure, mar, deface, throw down or destroy any headstone, monument, survey marker, corner marker, tomb, vault or mausoleum or any cemetery lot in said cemetery or open or disturb any grave or place of burial therein. This shall not prohibit acts by cemetery officers and employees or public officials in carrying out their duties. 
(14)  Injuring or cutting landscaping without permit prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to plant any tree, shrub or other plant in the cemetery except those permitted by the general landscape plan approved by the city council. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to cut down, injure, break or destroy any tree, shrub or other plant growing in the cemetery or to pick, pluck or cut any flower or decorative plant except as authorized by the cemetery rules. 
(15)  Riding horses, motorcycles, etc., prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any part of a city cemetery, its streets and/or drives for riding a horse thereon or riding a motorcycle or motorbike thereon. 
(16)  Advertising prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertisement or sign or to solicit any work in a city cemetery. 
(17)  Ground level vaults prohibited. No ground level vaults shall be allowed in the cemetery. 
(18)  Authorization required for interment. It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of a city cemetery without the express authorization of the superintendent of the city cemetery. 
(19)  Authorization required for disinterment. Disinterments shall be made only when authorized by the city manager and superintendent of the cemetery. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 3.02, 9-9-2002) 
Sec. 16-9. - City right to correct errors. 
If an error is committed in the interment of the remains of any person, the city reserves the right to remove and re-inter the remains in such other property of equal value and similar location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu of the mistaken property. 
(Amd. No. 314, § 3.03, 9-9-2002) 
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-CO-10-707, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 2012, deleted Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-7, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 18-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2012-CO-10-707, § 1, 10-15-2012) 
Sec. 18-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the City of Oakwood. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city council may, by resolution and in accordance with the city Charter, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of local emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan . A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Hall County Emergency Management Director (EMD) or designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites pursuant to Resolution 2010-10-03. 
2.  In responding to the emergency and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the EMD (see section 18-2(a)(4)a.1.) or his designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
3.  The EMD (see section 18-2(a)(4)a.1.) is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification by the city council. 
4.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate. If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city council is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 18-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The EMD (see section 18-2(a)(4)a.1.) shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
4.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
5.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
6.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
7.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
8.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
9.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the City of Oakwood, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor of the City of Oakwood, Georgia there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Oakwood, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the applicable local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
(2)  That the following sections of the City of Oakwood Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 18-5, Overcharging; Section 18-6, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section 18-7, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 18-2(a)(4)c, d or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE]. 
[Signed] 
Mayor, City of Oakwood." 
(c)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. No. 2012-CO-10-707, § 1, 10-15-2012) 
Sec. 18-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the EMD (see section 18-2(a)(4)a.1.) or city council during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the EMD (see section 18-2(a)(4)a.1.) or city council upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMD (see section 18-2(a)(4)a.1.) is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the city council during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this ordinance may be enforced by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-CO-10-707, § 1, 10-15-2012) 
Sec. 18-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Any E-Verify affidavit or other state required affidavit shall be obtained from any contractor if otherwise required by law. 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city council may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-CO-10-707, § 1, 10-15-2012) 
Sec. 18-5. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required. 
(9)  Copy of license from Secretary of State, if required. 
(10)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(11)  At least one secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2. 
(d)  Effective date. 
This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city council, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three months. 
(Ord. No. 2012-CO-10-707, § 1, 10-15-2012) 
Sec. 18-6. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMD (see section 18-2(a)(4)a.1.). 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-CO-10-707, § 1, 10-15-2012) 
Chapter 20 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 20-19. - District boundaries. 
It is designated and established that the shaded area on exhibit A attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and adopted by reference composes a watershed protection district. This area includes all lands north of the Hall/Gwinnett County line draining to Big Creek, Flowery Branch and Mud Creek in Hall County. Municipalities located within the district include the cities of Flowery Branch and Oakwood. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 1.02, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 20-20. - Intent and scope. 
Pursuant to Rule 391-3-6, Lake Sidney Lanier and its tributaries are exempt from the state department of community affairs and state department of natural resources large water supply watershed protection rules since the reservoir is managed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. To provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the county and the region, it is essential that the quality of public water supplies be ensured. The ability of natural systems to attenuate the negative effects of stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the aquatic integrity and storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces can introduce toxicants, nutrients and sedimentation into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 1.03, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 20-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the protection of the Big Creek, Flowery Branch and Mud Creek watersheds in the county. This protection is necessary for the enhancement of public health, safety and welfare as well as to ensure that surface waters are of high quality to meet state and federal standards. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 1.04, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 20-22. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural and nonstructural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances such as trails, picnic areas and underground utility installations. 
Clean Water Act (CWA), section 401, requires that an applicant for a federal license or permit provide a certification that any discharges from the facility will comply with the act including water quality standard requirements. 
Clean Water Act, section 404 (33 USC 1344), regulates the disposal of dredged and fill material into waters of the United States including wetlands. Other activities which destroy wetlands such as drainage, flooding, pumping and burning are not regulated under the CWA unless they entail discharges of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States. 
County board of health means the Hall County Board of Health established by the state health code (O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1) or the executive officer and his designated representative acting on the board's behalf for the administration and enforcement of septic tank rules. 
District means those areas shown in exhibit A, attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived and incorporated herein by reference, showing the drainage Big Creek, Flowery Branch and Mud Creek in southwestern Hall County. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water or gravity. 
Filling means the natural or manmade placement of any soil or solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
Grading means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools or patios. 
Intermittent system means a stream that flows in a well-defined channel during wet seasons of the year but not for the entire year. They generally exhibit signs of water velocity sufficient to move soil material, litter and fine debris. They are usually identified as blue lines separated by three dots on United States Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps and as black lines separated by two or more dots on Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) soil maps. Large aquatic organisms such as some fish often are difficult to find or not present at all in these storms. 
Issuing authority refers to the city council. 
Land disturbing activity means a land change or construction activity for residential, commercial, silvicultural, industrial and institutional land use that can result in soil erosion from water or wind or movement of sediments or pollutants into state waters or onto lands of the state or in accelerated stormwater runoff. These activities include but are not limited to clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means a numerical unit of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by fine particles of a substance in suspension. 
Non-point source pollution (NPS) refers to water pollution that is: 
(1)  Induced by natural processes including precipitation, seepage, percolation and runoff; 
(2)  Not necessarily traceable to any discrete or identifiable facility; and 
(3)  Better controlled by using BMPs. 
Perennial stream means a stream which flows in a well-defined channel throughout most of the year under normal climatic conditions. Some may dry up during drought periods or due to excessive upstream uses. They are usually identified as solid blue lines on USGS topographic maps and as either solid black lines separated by one dot on NRCS soil maps. Aquatic organisms are normally present and easily found in these streams. 
Protected area means any stream channel and the land area extending outward 50 horizontal feet from the top of the banks of Flowery Branch, Mud Creek and Big Creek, the waters of which eventually enter Lake Lanier. The protected area encompasses all streams referenced in this article which are shown as perennial and intermittent streams on the Flowery Branch USGS 7.5-minute quadrangle maps. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Riparian zones or riparian environments means the areas that border streams, rivers, lakes and wetlands. Riparian zones can be floodplains, streamside forests or just plain steam banks. They are usually different from surrounding lands because they have unique soil and vegetation characteristics and are strongly influenced by water. Riparian zones are basically the interface between the water and the land and they serve many functions which make them valuable to people. 
Sediment means soils or other superficial materials transported and/or deposited by the action of wind, water or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the action or process of forming or depositing sediment. 
Silt fencing means a web of mechanically or melt bonded polymer netting, monofilament or fibers entangled to form a strong and dimensionally stable matrix to catch stormwater runoff and soil particles. Pursuant to the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia and as follows: 

 
Notes. 
(1) Minimum roll average of five specimens. 
(2) Percent of required initial minimum tensile strength. 
Source: Georgia Department of Transportation Uniform Code System For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control. 
Stabilization means the prevention of soil erosion by surface runoff or wind through the establishment of a soil cover through the implementation of vegetative or structural measures. 
State waters means any and all waters, public or private, on the surface of the earth which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
Stormwater means the stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this article. It shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stream bank means, as defined by Department of Natural Resources (DNR) rules, the uppermost part of the riverbank usually marked by a break in slope. Stream bank is not necessarily the water's edge. 
Structural erosion and sediment control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. More information on such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most effective application. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 1.05, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 20-23. - Sedimentation and erosion control. 
Section IV of General Permit No. GAR10000, authorization to discharge under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity, July 19, 1999, requires those persons conducting a construction activity of five acres on sites greater than five acres or part of a common development greater than five acres to prepare and implement an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan (the plan) and a comprehensive monitoring program (the program). The plan will describe those best management practices (BMPs) which will be used at the site to control the discharge of sediment and other pollutants. BMPs will be designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year 24-hour rainfall event. The program will describe how the receiving waters will be monitored for turbidity. A summary report of monitoring and weekly inspections is required to be submitted to the state environmental protection division each month. The installation of these BMP devices may be subject to section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Persons conducting construction activities are also responsible for meeting water quality and wetland-related requirements found in sections 404 and 401 of the Clean Water Act. General Permit No. GAR10000 provides that a discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 NTU for waters supporting warm-water fisheries. In addition to the specifications outlined in General Permit No. GAR10000, developments within the district will comply with the following items: 
(1)  Sedimentation and erosion control fencing. Sedimentation and erosion practices will be required on all construction sites ranging from one-half to five acres in size. Requirements for larger sites are covered under the general permit discussed in this section. The following requirements are based on the Manual for Sediment and Erosion Control in Georgia: 
a.  Type A silt fencing will be required on projects where the life of the project is greater than six months or the slope gradient is steeper than 2:1. 
b.  Type B fencing will be required on projects where the life of the project is less than six months and if the slope gradient is less than 2:1. 
c.  Type C fencing is required for all land disturbing activities with a fill slope exceeding a vertical height of 20 feet. 
d.  Agricultural practices (silviculture, row crops and livestock operations) and small family gardens are exempt. 
(2)  Biweekly erosion control inspection/certification by professional engineer. 
a.  Erosion control measures at construction sites must be inspected and certified by a registered engineer or licensed surveyor on a biweekly basis to ensure that activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion, sedimentation and runoff. Additionally, the certified engineer shall identify other measures that need to be implemented to address deficiencies observed. The monitoring results must be reported to the appropriate governing entity within 48 hours of the biweekly inspection. 
b.  If, through inspection, it is determined that a person has failed to comply with permit conditions or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served to that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time at which such measures will be completed. The city may issue a stop work order directing that all work on the site, except that work necessary to achieve compliance with this article, cease until compliance is achieved. While a stop work order is in effect, no inspection shall be conducted on the property by the building inspection department. 
c.  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may deem reasonably necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting. 
d.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 2.01, 2-14-2000) 
State Law reference— Authorization for ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 
Sec. 20-24. - Stream buffer and setback. 
A protected area shall be maintained on both sides of all streams within the watershed protection district as measured from the top of the stream banks. The protected area encompasses all streams referenced in this article which are shown as perennial and intermittent streams on the Flowery Branch USGS 7.5-minute quadrangle maps. The protected area buffers and setbacks as follows: 
(1)  The protected area for Mud Creek, Flowery Branch and Big Creek shall include a 50-foot buffer zone in which natural vegetation is left intact and only uses that minimize the disturbance of the natural terrain are allowed. 
(2)  A setback of 100 feet shall be maintained along both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. No impervious surfaces, septic tanks or septic tank drainfields are permitted within this setback. 
(3)  All recorded plats at the time of approval of the ordinance from which this article is derived will be grandfathered except for compliance with a minimum 50-foot buffer. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 2.02, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 20-25. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  Stormwater runoff within the district must be managed to control the velocity at the point of discharge so as to minimize accelerated erosion of the site and increased sedimentation of the streams. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures and devices shall be so planned, designed and constructed as to provide for a range of design flows for flood control. These design flows should be demonstrated for two-year through 100-year storm events using the procedures as outlined in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's Technical Release 55 Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds or other acceptable calculation procedures. All disturbed land must drain to an approved BMP and stormwater runoff must be managed for the entire drainage area above the detention system or BMP. 
(b)  Temporary and permanent detention systems. 
(1)  During construction. During construction, all land disturbing activities (to include all land uses) must comply with sedimentation and erosion control procedures/program as defined by General Permit (No. GAR10000). These activities must capture runoff from the first inch of rainfall to be released over not less than 48 hours. Dry ponds may be used. 
(2)  After construction. After construction, all land disturbing activities must maintain runoff from the first one inch of rainfall and maintain peak flows for a 25-year storm at the property boundaries equal to or less than the flow under undeveloped conditions. 
(3)  Permitting process. All land disturbing activities must demonstrate compliance with the stormwater control plan to the city prior to approval of any building or subdivision permit request. After development runoff from the first one inch of rainfall must be captured and retained for not less than 48 hours before discharging to waters of the state. Alternative practices which meet this intent are acceptable if they are approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 2.03, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 20-26. - Septic systems. 
(a)  Homes, structures and facilities constructed in the district on or after April 1, 2000, must meet the following applicable requirements as a condition for establishing new water service: 
(1)  Septic tanks and absorption fields shall be constructed in accordance with the county health department design and construction standards. 
(2)  Septic tanks and absorption fields shall not be allowed where the area of the lot is less than one acre. 
(3)  Septic tanks and absorption fields shall not be located in a protected area or buffer as defined in section 20-24. 
(4)  Septic tanks shall be properly pumped once every five years or according to the frequencies cited in the county public health regulations (table LT-1) whichever is less often. Proof of pumping must be made available to the county health department upon request. 
(b)  Homes, structures and facilities constructed in the district before April 1, 2000, must meet the following applicable requirements prior to the establishment of new water service: 
(1)  Provide proof that the septic tank serving the home structure and/or facility has been pumped within five years of the request for water service. 
(2)  Implement the septic tank, erosion control, stormwater management and buffer requirements, if any, identified by the city and any other agency having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 2.04, 2-14-2000) 
Sec. 20-27. - Prohibited activities. 
No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity or otherwise alter the hydraulic or vegetative characteristics of a protected area without first having obtained a written permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 3.01, 2-14-2000) 
Secs. 20-28—20-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 20-58. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service national wetlands inventory maps for the city. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1344), as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States, excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. II, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-59. - Purpose. 
(a)  The wetlands in the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(b)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. I, 1-29-2001) 
State Law reference— Authorization for ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 
Sec. 20-60. - Establishment of district. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service national wetlands inventory maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)  The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitted requirements. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. III, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-61. - Requirement for local permit. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the city zoning administrator using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. IV, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-62. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. (The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.) 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does on affect waters of the state or the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. V, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-63. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VI, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-64. - Site plans—Contents. 
Application for a local development permit within the city wetlands protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § A, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-65. - Same—Conformance with specifications. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the city zoning administrator or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § B, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-66. - Same—Exemptions. 
The following are exemptions to site plan requirements: 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § C, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-67. - Same—Review procedures. 
The application shall be made to the city zoning administrator or a designated appointee and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees as provided in the fee schedule maintained by the city clerk may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the city zoning administrator or designated appointee. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the city zoning administrator or designated appointee. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the city zoning administrator or a designated appointee. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the city zoning administrator or designated appointee may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § D, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-68. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(c)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the city zoning administrator or a designated appointee. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § E, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-69. - Penalties. 
(a)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the city zoning administrator. 
(b)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city zoning administrator. 
(c)  If the city zoning administrator discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city council shall issue written notification of the violation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the land owner. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § F, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-70. - Suspension; revocation. 
The city zoning administrator or a designated appointee may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The city zoning administrator or a designated appointee shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § G, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-71. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the city zoning administrator or its designee may, within the time specified by the county superior court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of this article. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § H, 1-29-2001) 
Sec. 20-72. - Relief assessment. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Ord. No. 346, art. VII, § J, 1-29-2001) 
Secs. 20-73—20-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 20-103. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by this article) lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. The term "impervious cover" includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by this article extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 201, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-104. - Findings, purpose and intent. 
(a)  Findings. The city council finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits, including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 101, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-105. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 20-103. These requirements are in addition to and do not replace or supersede any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 301, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-106. - Grandfather provisions. 
This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities, including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 302, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-107. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following specific activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements regardless of paving material except for access for the uses specifically cited in this subsection (a). 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time of the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time of the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 20-108(b). 
(c)  Exemption of the activities in subsection (a) of this section does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 303, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-108. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet measured horizontally on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. This buffer shall not be altered or reduced by any method set forth hereinafter. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained beyond the natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Stormwater management structures shall be allowed within this setback; however, all other grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized. The setback shall be either of the following dimensions: 
a.  For a uniform distance of 25 feet, measured horizontally, from the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer boundary. 
b.  For a variable distance, measured horizontally, from the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer boundary, provided that the total area encompassed by this impervious setback on the land development activity is equal to, or greater than, the total area that would be encompassed by the uniform distance of 25 feet. 
(3)  On properties between ten acres and 49.9 acres, the impervious setback area may be reduced such that the sum of the undisturbed buffer area and the impervious setback area do not exceed 12 percent of the total property area of the development activity. However, in no case shall the 50-foot undisturbed buffer be reduced or altered to achieve this percentage. 
(4)  On properties of 50 acres or larger, the impervious setback area may be reduced such that the sum of the undisturbed buffer area and the impervious setback area do not exceed eight percent of the total property area of the development activity. However, in no case shall the 50-foot undisturbed buffer be reduced or altered to achieve this percentage. 
(5)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback except that existing septic systems constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be maintained or replaced but not enlarged within the required buffer and setback area. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the buffer and setback requirements in subsection (a) of this section may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article and the city finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the city council. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(c)  Conditions for variances. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
(1)  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
(2)  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(d)  Variance request contents. At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
(1)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features as determined by field survey; 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(3)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover and the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(4)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
(5)  At least one alternative plan which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
(6)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
(7)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
(8)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(e)  Consideration factors. The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
(1)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(2)  The locations of all streams on the property including along property boundaries; 
(3)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
(4)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(5)  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
(6)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 401, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-109. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements and, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 501, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-110. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that this article is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  During development activities, and all phases of construction, the buffer perimeters shall be marked with a temporary sign at an interval of one per parcel, or every 100 feet, whichever is less. Signs shall remain in place prior to and during approved construction activities. The sign shall contain the following statement: 
"Streamside Buffer—Do Not Remove or Alter Existing Native Vegetation." 
Other plainly visible marking methods are acceptable in lieu of the signage including, but not limited to, tree save fencing, painted markings on trees or orange silt fence. 
(c)  Replanting of the buffer shall be required where buffer disturbance has occurred. The replanting shall be accomplished within 14 days of the buffer impact using native vegetation or by following current Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) conservation practice standards. The city manager or his designee shall approve the revegetation plan. 
(d)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 601, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-111. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 701, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-112. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article and, for this purposes, to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 801, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-113. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in section 20-115 shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 901, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-114. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 436, § 902, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-115. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in this section, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court for the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for 90 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 903, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-116. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of city may appeal in writing within 15 days after the issuance of such decision or order by the city manager and/or his designee and shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of city, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 1001, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-117. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements and, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 1101, 10-8-2007) 
Sec. 20-118. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city manager and or his designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 436, § 1103, 10-8-2007) 
Secs. 20-119—20-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, adopted June 14, 2010, deleted Art. V, §§ 20-150—20-154, 20-170—20-174, 20-190—20-193, 20-210—20-214, 20-230—20-233, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. V pertained to Soil Erosion and Sedimentaton Control. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

DIVISION I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-150. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMP's) shall include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. See O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means a Certificated Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Envirocert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. The term "cut" is also known as excavation. 
Department means the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology or land surveying; or a person that is Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Envirocert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) or an authorized representative. 
District means the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of DNR. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7 that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices and requirements in section 20-172 hereof. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and that, for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 20-151(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request or computer design or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes or surveyor markings indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party that has: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance leaves a facility or site or, if there is receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means the sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the GSWCC as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission as of the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of DNR under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010; Ord. No. 2017-CO-03-748, § 1, 4-10-2017) 
Sec. 20-151. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the LIA; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 (definitions) to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer as established in section 20-172(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities except for normal forest management practices shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters and, for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the LIA from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1) through (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state toll way authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state toll way authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1 except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority or the state road and toll way authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the LIA, the LIA shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the LIA shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-152. - Education and certification. 
(a)  All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have a minimum of one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-153. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the LIA upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of the city Code; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 day[s] after receipt by the LIA of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the LIA, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Hall County. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-154. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the LIA or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Secs. 20-155—20-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL USING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 

Sec. 20-170. - General provisions. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 20-171 and 20-172. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with the requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-171. - Minimum requirements/BMP's. 
(a)  Best management practices as set forth in this section and section 20-172 shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(b)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a LIA or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(c)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a LIA or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f)), for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(e)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 20-172(15). [See section 20-108.] 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-172. - Local regulations to be comparable with state regulations. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosion elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 20-171; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events, that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round, for which ground water is not a source of water and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.) shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-173. - Authority of local issuing authority (lia) to adopt additional rules, etc. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any LIA from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 20-171 and 20-172. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-174. - Damage to property of another. 
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Secs. 20-175—20-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICATION/PERMIT PROCESS 

Sec. 20-190. - Procedure. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The LIA shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the code provisions concerning zoning (chapter 54), stormwater management (chapter 40), subdivisions (chapter 44), flood damage prevention (chapter 26) as well as this article and any other code provision, rules, regulations or permits which regulate the development of land within the city. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-05-672, § 1, 6-13-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-CO-05-672, § 1, adopted June 13, 2011, repealed § 20-190, in its entirety and enacted new provisons to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 20-190 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 20-191. - application requirements. 
(a)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the city jurisdictional boundaries without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of the NOI submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 20-192. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in a manner that the provisions of sections 20-171 and 20-172 will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(c)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the LIA shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the LIA. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 20-172(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid and bonding, if required as per subsection (f) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the LIA and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the LIA to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The LIA with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the LIA with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(e)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the LIA may deny the permit application. 
(f)  The LIA may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the LIA may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the LIA with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-192. - Plan requirements. 
(a)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 20-171 and 20-172 of this article or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on is level of involvement with the process as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-193. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the LIA of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued by the LIA unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the LIA has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 20-172(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 20-191(f) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the LIA are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)  Any land disturbing activities by a LIA shall be subject to the same requirements of this article and any other ordinances relating to land development as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the LIA. 
(d)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(e)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the LIA, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(f)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Secs. 20-194—20-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 20-210. - City authority to inspect. 
(a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the LIA shall regulate both primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The LIA must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate with 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-211. - City power to conduct investigations. 
The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out the duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-212. - Right of entry. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the LIA, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-213. - Review by districts or commission. 
The districts or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as LIA's pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-214. - Certification and decertification. 
The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as LIA's pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a LIA. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a LIA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Secs. 20-215—20-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES AND INCENTIVES 

Sec. 20-230. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the LIA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-231. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the LIA shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the LIA shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the LIA shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(b)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the LIA shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(c)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(d)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the LIA or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the LIA or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-232. - Bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 20-191(f). The LIA may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Sec. 20-233. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-05-660, § 1, 6-14-2010) 
Chapter 22 - FEES 

Sec. 22-1. - Available at city hall upon request. 
Schedules for fees charged by the city for building permits, sewer service, signage, development services, certificates of occupancy; plumbing permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, amusement and entertainment licenses; animal control licenses and pickup fees; filing fees and other applicable fees shall be reviewed for reasonableness annually during the city's budgetary process and adjusted to reflect actual costs of services provided by the city. Such schedules of fees and any updates and amendments thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and shall be maintained at city hall by the city clerk and made available to the public upon request. 
Chapter 23 - FILM AND MUSIC PROJECT PERMITS 

Sec. 23-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to govern and authorize individuals and film companies to conduct filming activities in the City of Oakwood without unreasonably impacting the peace and comfort of the residents of the community; to assure that such activities are consistent with considerations of the public health, safety and general welfare and to ensure the protection of property; and to provide a streamlined process for issuing film production permits. The requirements provided in this chapter shall be separate and in addition to those provisions of the City Business License Code and/or other codes adopted by reference, regarding business regulation and licensing. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate filming and recording activity within the City of Oakwood in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-2. - Definitions. 
Business license office shall mean the Oakwood city clerk and/or the city manager. 
Camera ready liaison shall mean the designated staff person of the Lake Lanier Convention & Visitors Bureau, Inc. who serves as the Camera Ready Liaison for the Georgia Film Office. 
Chief of police shall mean the serving City of Oakwood Police Chief or his designee. 
Fire marshall shall mean the serving Fire Marshall of Hall County or his designee. 
Engineering shall mean the designated staff person from the City of Oakwood who shall be charged with handling any and all engineering issues. 
Planning and zoning shall mean the designated staff person from the City of Oakwood Planning and Zoning department. 
News purposes shall mean filming, videotaping or otherwise recording news events for television, radio or Internet news casting by reporters, photographers, or audio or camera persons in the employ of a newspaper, news service or similar entity where the event is not preplanned and the film or tape is originally broadcast within 24 hours of the event, not including magazine or documentary programs. 
Filming activity shall mean the staging, shooting, filming, videotaping, photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of still photographs, motion pictures, television programs, music videos, commercials, and other commercial and non-theatrical productions. 
Studio shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises. 
Film permit shall mean written authorization from the City of Oakwood business license clerk to conduct the filming activity outlined in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-3. - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 23-4, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in filming activity as defined in section 23-2 any place within the City of Oakwood, other than an established studio as defined in section 23-2 or within an enclosed structure or building, without a film permit from the City of Oakwood. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-4. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Noncommercial filming or videotaping activities conducted solely for private or family use; 
(2)  Film activity conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil or criminal court proceeding; 
(3)  Film activity conducted for news purposes as defined in section 23-2; 
(4)  Film activity conducted for education, government, and public access and local origination for public television or public cable or public Internet channels within the State of Georgia; or 
(5)  Non-profit 50l(c)(3) tax exempt organizations and other governmental agencies if their film project is not for commercial use; 
(6)  Any film activity deemed by the City of Oakwood to be in the public interest. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of the city or any of its departments, the chief of police or the fire marshall to suspend film activity otherwise accepted herein when deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare or when such film activity poses an immediate hazard to persons and/or property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-5. - Permit application. 
The city clerk shall provide an application form and make it available for anyone who desires a film permit. A completed application must be provided to the city clerk at least two weeks prior to the date on which the film activity is proposed. Upon a showing of good cause, applications filed after the deadline may be considered by the business license office. The business license office shall determine in its sole discretion, not to be exercised in a discriminatory manner, whether there is time to ensure all requirements to protect the public health, safety and welfare can be timely met before the film activity is to commence. After filing and approval, permit applications can be amended only with the approval of the business license office and only after the business license office determines that requested modifications will not negatively impact the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-6. - Application review and permit conditions. 
(a)  Before granting a film permit, the business license office shall review the application and consult with the chief of police, fire marshall, planning and zoning and the camera ready liaison as appropriate and determine that the proposed film activity will not unreasonably interfere with the public health, safety and general welfare or unreasonably endanger any property. Appropriate city officials (and county) shall be consulted to review the application as deemed necessary by the business license office. In granting a film permit, any reasonable conditions may be imposed as necessary to protect public health, safety, general welfare and property. Factors which may be taken into consideration in granting and conditioning a permit include but are not limited to: noise, traffic congestion, traffic hazards, environmental problems, and interference with street maintenance work, unreasonable interference with normal business operations or residential peace and quiet and whether the proposed activity would violate federal, state or local law. 
(b)  Conditions which may be attached to the film permit may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Requirements regarding the presence of governmental employees, such as police officers or firemen, at the permittee's expense; 
(2)  Requirements regarding traffic control, such as the placement of traffic control devices and signs at the permittee's expense; 
(3)  Requirements regarding cleanup and restoration of property used in the film activity; 
(4)  Restrictions regarding the use of firearms and noise-creating or hazardous devices; 
(5)  Restrictions regarding stunts involving pyrotechnics, vehicle crashes and other hazardous materials and/or activity; 
(6)  Requirements relating to partial or full nudity in public places; 
(7)  Restrictions regarding the time of the film activity; and 
(8)  Requirements regarding notifications to nearby businesses and/or residences. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-7. - Fees. 
The fee for permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be an application fee and a per day permitting fee as set forth in chapter 22 of the Oakwood City Code or as may be adjusted from time to time considering the duration and scope of any particular project. The applicant shall pay such fee upon delivery of the application to the business license office. Any amounts representing the estimated cost of reimbursement of governmental personnel and equipment shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. Should the actual costs of governmental personnel and equipment exceed the estimated costs, the permit holder may be invoiced for the difference by the business license office. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-8. - Insurance. 
The applicant shall provide the business license office with evidence of insurance for general liability and covering any liability of the permittee, permittee's lessees, and any state or local governmental authorities within whose jurisdiction the film activity is to occur, including their /its officers, employees and agents arising out of the film activity. The insurance policy shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 or such higher amount as determined by the business license office to be appropriate to protect against foreseeable risks for bodily and personal injury liability and property damage arising from or in connection with the film activity. The applicant shall furnish the business license office with proof of such insurance coverage in a form and manner that is satisfactory in all respects to the business license office prior to the start of the film activity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-9. - Indemnification and liability. 
The permittee shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend all state and local governments and their officers, employees and agents from and against any and all losses, claims or judgments for damages to any person or property arising from the film activity or issuance of the film permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-10. - Permit revocation. 
The business license office may revoke the film permit if the permittee, or any agents, employees, volunteers or contractors of the permittee fail to comply with the permit conditions and requirements or if it is determined after issuance that the permit application is materially false. The business license office shall provide the permittee with grounds for revocation in writing within a reasonable time of determining the basis for the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-11. - Permit suspension. 
Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be subject to immediate suspension by the business license office if it is found necessary for the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare. Any employee of a local governmental entity within whose jurisdiction film activity is occurring and who has public safety responsibilities for that local government may suspend the film permit upon a determination by that employee that the film activity poses an immediate hazard to persons and/or property and the permit holder's representative in charge will not or cannot prevent the hazard after being instructed to do so by the employee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-12. - Appeals. 
The permit applicant or permittee may appeal a permit denial, revocation, suspension or refusal to waive a deadline set forth in this chapter. The appeal shall be filed in the city clerk at City Hall no later than three business days after the date notice of the decision is given. The appeal shall be heard by the city manager or his or her designee no later than three days after the appeal is filed. A decision shall be rendered no later than two business days after the appeal hearing. The decision of the city manager or his or her designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-13. - Unlawful conduct not sanctioned. 
The granting of a permit does not absolve the permittee or its agents from complying with all federal, state and local laws, other than for conduct expressly described in the application and not subject to a condition or requirement of the permit. (For example, the permit might allow stunts that include speeding on a roadway that would otherwise be prescribed by law.) 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Sec. 23-14. - Violation. 
(a)  Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the terms and conditions of a Film and Music Project Permit are a misdemeanor punishable under the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  It shall also be a misdemeanor to: 
(1)  Provide false or fraudulent information to the city during the permit application process; 
(2)  Provide any false or fraudulent information to the city after the permit has been issued including, but not limited to, the possession or existence of consent or permission from property owners when required; or 
(3)  Failure or refusal to cease any film activities when ordered to do so by the city manager due to violations of any provision of the Oakwood Code of Ordinances including this chapter, state law or federal law. 
(c)  If an applicant violates any provisions of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the city may provide the applicant with verbal or written notice of such violation. If the applicant fails to correct the violation, the city may immediately revoke the permit and all activity must cease. 
(d)  Any filming or related activity conducted contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be an unlawful action and a public nuisance. The city may authorize the commencement of an action at law or in equity in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction against the applicant to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter. All remedies prescribed herein will be cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not preclude the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, nor shall the city's delay or failure to exercise any remedy result in a waiver of that remedy. 
(Ord. No. 2017-CO-07-751, § 1(Exh. A), 8-14-2017) 
Chapter 24 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 24-19. - Adopted. 
The state minimum fire safety standards as set forth in chapter 2 of title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.) are hereby adopted and thereby are enforceable within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 1, 8-11-1997) 
Sec. 24-20. - Enforcement. 
Upon the effective date of the adoption of the state minimum fire safety standards as set forth in chapter 2 of title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.), the county fire service will enforce all codes set forth therein pursuant to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived for the city. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 2, 8-11-1997) 
Chapter 26 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as Zones A, A1—30, A—99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Building has the same meaning as structure. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before October 4, 1976. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 4, 1976. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or " FHBM " means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of the city issued by FEMA delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on the city's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans and/or watershed study projections and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after October 4, 1976 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 4, 1976. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited herein. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 2, § 201, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(1), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 1, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-2. - Findings. 
(a)  The city finds that floodplain management involves the designation of floodprone areas and the managing of their uses. It is also aimed at minimizing modifications to streams, reducing flood hazards, and protecting the beneficial uses of the floodplain such as water quality protection. As such, floodplain management can be seen as a subset of the larger consideration of surface water and stormwater management. The city further finds that floodplain regulations and development restrictions can greatly reduce future flooding impacts, preserve greenspace and habitat and protect their function in safely conveying floodwaters and protecting water quality. 
(b)  Specifically, the city finds the following: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and economical purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize damage to private property; 
c.  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
d.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(5)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. Section 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Oakwood, Georgia does ordain this ordinance and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 1, § 101(a), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 2, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-3. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development that may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 1, § 101(b), 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 26-4. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 1, § 102, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 26-5. - Administrator designated. 
The city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 1, § 103, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 26-6. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics - flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future-conditions Floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated March 21, 2000, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Hall County, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the city. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 1, § 104, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(2), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-7. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law and, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 1, § 105, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 26-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 1, § 107, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(3), § 3-9-2015) 
Secs. 26-9—26-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-35. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 3, § 301, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(4), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-36. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Be flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g,  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood proofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential flood proofed structure meets the criteria in section 26-98; 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in section 26-97 and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 3, § 302, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(4), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-37. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management / flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city manager a certified as-built elevation certificate or flood proofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA flood proofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the flood proofing measures. 
(2)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city manager) shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 3, § 303, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(4), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-38. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city manager as administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law including, but not limited to, Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city manager shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Articles III and IV; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structure has been flood proofed; 
(6)  When flood proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the city manager shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in city hall and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 3, § 304, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(4), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 3, 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 26-39—26-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 26-65. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Floodplain boundaries: 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
Floodway boundaries: The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city. If floodway data is not available from the city, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 4, §§ 401, 402, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(5), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-66. - General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under section 26-66(1) shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 26-67; 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 4, § 403, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(5), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 4, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-67. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 4, § 404, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(5), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-68. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 4, § 405, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(5), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-69. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The city may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 4, § 406, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(5), § 3-9-2015) 
Secs. 26-70—26-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 26-97. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 26-66 through 26-68 have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 5, § 501, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(6), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 5, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-98. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 26-97, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-66 through 26-68 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 26-66 through 26-68 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-97. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-97. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings . 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-66 through 26-68 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 26-66 through 26-68 may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city manager. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the city manager to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city manager. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 26-97(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-66 through 26-68 have been met. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 5, § 502, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(6), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 6, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-99. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 5, § 503, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(6), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 6, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-100. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the city manager shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with section 26-97. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 5, § 504, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(6), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-101. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-97; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the city manager using the FEMA Flood proofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 5, § 505, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(6), § 3-9-2015) 
Sec. 26-102. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 26-36; 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Oakwood to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 5, § 506, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(6), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 7, 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 26-103—26-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 26-133. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the city. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city council as established by the city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Hall County, as provided by law. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the city manager and the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
i.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The city manager shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city manager and city council shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city manager and city council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the city manager and the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 6, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(7), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 8, 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 26-134—26-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 26-165. - Violation declared public nuisance. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this chapter. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 7, intro., 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(8), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 9, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-166. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city manager or the city engineer determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city manager or the city engineer by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 7, § 701, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2015-CO-02-726, § I(7), § 3-9-2015; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 10, 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 26-167. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager or the city engineer shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or the city engineer may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city manager or the city engineer may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager or the city engineer may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager or the city engineer may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city manager or the city engineer may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the city manager or the city engineer shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager or the city engineer has taken one or more of the actions described in this section, the city manager shall refer the matter for hearing before the city council upon an additional ten days' notice of such hearing. At such hearing, the city council may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city manager or the city engineer may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court for the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 432, art. 7, § 702, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-756, § 11, 3-12-2018) 
Chapter 27 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1—27-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL PUBLIC HEALTH REGULATIONS 

Sec. 27-30. - State promulgated rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health (DPH), including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, and which are expressly incorporated herein, are hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(1)  On-Site Sewage Management System Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-3-1) 
(2)  Food Service Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-6-1) 
(3)  Tourist Accommodations Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-6-2) 
(4)  Public Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreation Water Parks Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-3-5) 
(5)  Rabies Control Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-2-7) 
(6)  Solid Waste Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-3-4) 
(7)  The Georgia Smoke Free Air Act Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-3-7) 
(8)  Drinking Water Supply Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-3-3) 
(9)  Portable Sanitation Contractors Rules and Regulations (Chapter 511-3-6) 
Copies of those DPH rules and regulations are on file in the office of the city clerk, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public-during regular city operating hours. · 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-31. - Adopted by reference—Local Board of Health Enactments. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1, et seq., in addition to the above-referenced rules and regulations of the Georgia DPH, the following rules and regulations have been enacted by the Hall County Board of Health and are hereby adopted by the City Council for the City of Oakwood in accordance with state law and are further hereby adopted and approved for enforcement as set forth herein: 
(1)  Rules and regulations concerning Operational Permits and Maintenance Requirements for Advanced Treatment Systems, enacted by resolution dated August 25, 2005. 
(2)  Rules and regulations concerning On-Site Water Well Supplies, enacted by resolution dated November 25, 2008. 
(3)  Rules and regulations concerning Body Art, enacted by resolution dated November 25, 2008. 
(4)  Rules and regulations concerning Rabies Control, enacted by resolution dated July 27, 2000. 
Copies of those rules and regulations enacted by the Hall County Board of Health and having been adopted by ordinance of the City Council for the City of Oakwood are on file in the office of the city clerk, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular city operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-32. - Conflict. 
Should any provision of the rules and regulations adopted in sections 30 and 31 above conflict with any other provision of the Official City Code of the City of Oakwood, Georgia, that provision which is most restrictive shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-33. - Rules and regulations of minimum lot sizes for on-site sewage management systems. 
In addition, the rules and regulations concerning minimum lot sizes for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems, having been enacted by the Hall County Board of Health are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance as though fully set out at length herein. The City of Oakwood may, however, require larger minimum lot sizes for utilization of on-site sewage management systems in zoning or land use districts providing for septic service and, in the event there is a conflict between the minimum lot size(s) established by the Hall County Board of Health and that established by the City of Oakwood, the larger lot size(s) established by the City of Oakwood shall control and take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-34. - Fee schedule. 
A fee schedule for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-referenced State Promulgated Rules and Regulations and Local Board of Health Enactments, including permit and inspection fees, has been established by the Hall County Board of Health, and is hereby approved and adopted by the City of Oakwood as part of the fees set forth in chapter 22 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-35. - Enforcement. 
In addition to any other provision of the adopted DPH rules and regulations, the enforcement and prosecution of this chapter shall be within the jurisdiction of the City of Oakwood and the Hall County Board of Health and their authorized designee(s) or agent(s), and all law enforcement personnel of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-36. - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any natural person or persons or any legal entity including, and not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, to violate any of the above-identified rules and regulations or fail or refuse to pay any fee established by the Hall County Board of Health and approved and adopted by the City of Oakwood, for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-37. - Violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision of this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended or shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the Municipal Court of the City of Oakwood, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 the Oakwood City Code for each violation in the discretion of the court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-38. - Abatement. 
In addition to the rights and remedies set forth herein, or as otherwise authorized by law, the City of Oakwood and the Hall County Board of Health retain and reserve the right to seek equitable relief, injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or proceeding to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Failure or refusal to pay any fee approved for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the above-identified rules and regulations, including all permit and inspection fees, may result in suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued by the Hall County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Sec. 27-39. - Compliance. 
This article and the enforcement and prosecution of this article by the City of Oakwood and the Hall County Board of Health and their authorized agent(s) or designee(s) does not in any way affect, estop, prescribe, regulate, limit or in any way control or prohibit the Georgia OHR and its agent(s) or designee(s) from initiating or undertaking any action or proceeding to enforce compliance with its rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-02-757, § 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2018) 
Secs. 27-40—27-69. - Reserved. 
Chapter 28 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Number per lot limitation. 
Only one trailer or mobile home shall be placed on any lot in the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 01, § 1, 11-7-1966) 
Sec. 28-2. - Rent or lease prohibited. 
Trailers or mobile homes are to be occupied by owners and not rented or leased. 
(Ord. No. 01, § 2, 11-7-1966) 
Secs. 28-3—28-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 28-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means any structure defined as a mobile home under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 1, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-24. - Codes adopted. 
For the purposes of this article, the following standards and codes are hereby adopted the same as if fully set out herein: 
(1)  American National Standards Institute Standard A119.1: Standard for Mobile Homes. 
(2)  Southern Standard Plumbing Code, Southern Building Code Congress, latest edition. 
(3)  Southern Standard Gas Code, Southern Standard Building Code Congress, latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 2, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-25. - Building permit required. 
All mobile homes hereafter located or relocated in the county shall obtain a building permit previous to the movement of the structure to its residential location. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 3, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-26. - Inspection required. 
The building official, upon notification from the building permit holder or his agent, shall make a final inspection after the mobile home is set up and all service connections made. The building official may require additional inspections if necessary to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 4, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-27. - Service connection—Plumbing. 
All water supply system connections and sewage collection system connections shall meet the minimum requirements of the Southern Standard Plumbing Code and ANSI A119.1 as follows: 
(1)  All materials for water supply lines shall meet or exceed the requirements of A119.1. 
(2)  All materials for waste drainage systems shall meet or exceed the requirements of the Southern Standard Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 7, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-28. - Same—Electrical. 
All electrical service connections shall meet the minimum requirements of the National Electrical Code as follows: 
(1)  All service entrance cable shall consist of three No. 2 aluminum types AVL, RHW, TW, USE or XHHW and one uninsulated No. 6 aluminum or equivalent. 
(2)  Service entrance cable for service greater than 100 amps shall be sized accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 8, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-29. - Same—Gas. 
All LP gas and natural gas service connections shall meet the minimum requirements of the Southern Standard Gas Code and ANSI A119.1. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 9, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-30. - Contractors license and bond. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor under this section, who shall make contracts for the location of mobile homes for which a permit is required, and every contractor subletting the same, or any part thereof, to pay a license tax of $10.00 and to register his name in a book provided for that purpose, with building official, giving full name, residence and place of business; and it shall be the further duty of every such person to give good and sufficient bond in the sum of $5,000.00, to be approved by the county attorney, conditioned to conform to the building code, the regulations of this section and other ordinances or laws of the city council in reference to mobiles homes. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 10, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-31. - Codes on file in clerk's office. 
The various codes referred to in this article are on file with the clerk of the city and available for the general public. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 11, 8-9-1976) 
Sec. 28-32. - Permit fee. 
A $35.00 permit fee shall be paid to the city before a permit for a mobile home is issued. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 13, 8-9-1976) 
Secs. 28-33—28-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means a detached single-family dwelling with all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Designed for long-term occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to an outside system. 
(2)  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailer or detachable wheels. 
(3)  Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete or in sections including major appliances and furniture and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities and the like. 
(4)  Not used as a permanent or temporary office, classroom, store or for-hire work space. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land under single ownership that is occupied or designated for occupancy by two or more mobile homes for nontransient use. 
Modular home means a detached single-family dwelling which is fabricated entirely or in part at some location other than its permanent site and which may be a complete unit or closed segments thereof. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 101, 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-54. - Service buildings. 
Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well-being of park residents. Such structures may include but are not limited to the following uses: 
(1)  Park management offices, repair shops and storage. 
(2)  Community sanitary facilities. 
(3)  Community laundry facilities. 
(4)  Community postal facilities. 
(5)  Indoor community recreation areas. 
(6)  Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the use of park residents. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 103, 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-55. - Water supply and sewage disposal. 
Every park must have a public, community or private water and sewer system which shall be approved by the county health department and the city manager. Water and sewer approval shall be obtained prior to submission of a site plan to the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 104, 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-56. - Permitted mobile homes. 
All site-built houses, modular homes and mobile homes being moved into or relocated within the city for the purpose of permanent or temporary occupancy shall require permitting in accordance with article II of this chapter. All modular homes or mobile homes more than one-year old being moved into the city shall not be permitted without the concurrent approval of the city planning and zoning commission and the city council upon a show of extreme hardship. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 105, 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-57. - Annual inspection fees. 
The building inspector shall inspect annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each mobile home, mobile home park or modular home regulated by this article for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is in compliance with all code requirements and the provisions set forth herein and whether any structure is in need of removal or repair. To meet the expense of such inspection, the permittee therefor shall pay to the sum of $10.00 per structure inspected inhabited by human and $10.00 per uninhabited structure. No inspection fee (other than the initial permit fee) shall be charged during the calendar year in which the mobile home, mobile home park or modular home is initially permitted/erected. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 106, 12-27-1995) 
Secs. 28-58—28-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 28-80. - Minimum park size. 
The minimum land area of any mobile home park shall be 15 acres with a minimum road frontage on a public street of 200 feet. Each space within the park shall have a minimum area of not less than 10,000 square feet and a minimum space width of 40 feet. All mobile home space lot lines and the type of sewage disposal proposed for each space shall be clearly delineated on a site plan prior to approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(a), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-81. - Setbacks. 
(a)  No mobile home within the park shall be located closer than 50 feet to adjoining property lines and the front setback for each mobile home shall be at least 50 feet from the front lot line. 
(b)  Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(b), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-82. - Foundations and tie-downs. 
Each mobile home shall be supported by piers and foundations and shall be anchored to the ground in accordance with all state and local building code requirements to secure the mobile home against uplifting, sliding, rotating and overturning. The underpinning shall consist of a minimum of two courses plus a cap of four-inch concrete/cinder blocks with concrete footings built in accordance with applicable building codes. Said underpinning shall be constructed with adequate ventilation but shall enclose substantially all of the area under the structure to within three inches of the bottom edge of the structure's outside wall with the gap being covered by appropriate trim. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(c), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-83. - Parking requirements. 
Off-street parking for the park shall be provided at a rate of two parking spaces per each mobile home lot. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(d), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-84. - Refuse collection. 
Each mobile home park shall provide refuse collection pads at locations convenient to each mobile home space but in no case more than 50 feet from the street serving each mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(e), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-85. - Space numbering. 
Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sign not less than one square foot in area which indicates the appropriate space number/address. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(f), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-86. - Driveway construction. 
(a)  All mobile home lots shall abut upon an interior driveway. All interior driveways shall have not less that a 50-foot right-of-way and have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(b)  All interior streets within the park shall be graded, based and paved in accordance with the applicable city and county codes. 
(c)  If a proposed street is to be greater in length than 300 feet, a plan profile for the road system shall be submitted along with the site plan. The city manager shall approve all road construction specifications and make a report to the planning commission regarding the finished road at the time the final plat is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(g), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-87. - Lighting requirements. 
The park street system shall be adequately maintained and lighted by the owner. The lighting units shall be so spaced and equipped to provide for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicle traffic at night. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(h), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-88. - Recreation/community use requirements. 
Parks designed to accommodate ten or more mobile homes shall provide one or more recreation areas. The size of the recreation area shall be based upon a minimum of 100 square feet for each mobile home space. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should be centrally located (topography permitting). Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(i), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-89. - Swimming pools. 
In the event that a swimming pool is constructed as a part of the park, this facility shall be enclosed by a chainlink, masonry or wood fence not less than four feet high. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(j), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-90. - Perimeter screening. 
All park grounds shall be maintained with grass, trees and/or shrubs to enhance the appearance of the park and to prevent soil erosion or the creation of dust during dry weather and to buffer the park from passing traffic. A landscaped screen consisting of dense evergreen trees and/or shrubs and having a minimum width of 35 feet adjacent to all public rights-of-way and 15 feet along all other property lines shall be required. A minimum six-foot-high, opaque fence or wall may be erected along property lines not abutting a public right-of-way in lieu of such landscaped screening. All perimeter screening must be properly maintained. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(k), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-91. - Transfer restrictions. 
No individual lot in any park may be sold or control of that lot transferred with the intent or effect of a sale unless that lot and park shall meet all requirements of the city subdivision regulations and the park owner shall hold a valid subdivision recording permit. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(l), 12-27-1995) 
Sec. 28-92. - Structure entrance requirements. 
(a)  All buildings/structures which are intended for habitation by humans shall have and maintain a screen door. Porches are required at all entrances to said structures with the following minimum sizes: 
(1)  Primary entrance: 40 square feet; 
(2)  All secondary entrances: 20 square feet. 
(b)  All porches shall have rails and steps constructed in accordance with the current building codes. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 102(m), 12-27-1995) 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; crimes generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Disorderly houses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep and maintain either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking or other misbehavior or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(Ord. No. 57, § 1, 11-13-1978) 
Sec. 30-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly: 
(1)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of a female or of a male under the age of 14 years, or by telephone to a female or to a male under the age of 14 years; 
(2)  Communicates to any female within the state by writing or printing any obscene or vulgar language or improper proposals; 
(3)  Engages in indecent or disorderly conduct in the presence of a female in any public place; 
(4)  Telephones another repeatedly, whether or not conversation ensues, for the purpose of annoying, harassing or molesting another or his family, or uses over the telephone language threatening bodily harm, or telephones and intentionally fails to hang up or disengage the connection, or knowingly permits any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this subsection; 
(5)  Uses violent and forceful behavior at any time in or near a public place, such that there is a clear and present danger that free movement of other persons will be arrested or restrained, or other persons will be incapacitated in the lawful exercise of business or amusement; 
(6)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(7)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking, or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(8)  Disturbs the peace of others by violent, indecent, offensive or boisterous conduct or language which said conduct or language was calculated to cause anguish or injury to another; 
(9)  Crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
(10)  Throws any stone or other missile upon or at any person, vehicle, building, tree, sign or other public or private property; 
(11)  Throws any stone or missile from any vehicle, either moving, stopped, or parked, upon or at any person, building, vehicle, tree, sign or other public or private property; 
(12)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(13)  Expectorates, urinates, or defecates on any public street, alley, sidewalk or floor of any public building or a building where the public gathers or has access; 
(14)  Makes a false alarm with reference to the request of firefighting apparatus or cries fire in any public place for the sole purpose of causing turmoil; 
(15)  Prowls or wanders upon the private property of another, peeks in the door or windows of any inhabited building or structure located thereon without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof; 
(16)  Interrupts the speaker of any lawful assembly or impairs the lawful rights of others to participate effectively in such assembly or meeting when such conduct is calculated to provoke or tend to cause turmoil or disturbance; 
(17)  Assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, devise or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in said city, or who shall aid and abet therein; 
(18)  Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(19)  Displays any deadly weapon in a public place in a manner which is calculated to alarm or frighten other persons present; or 
(20)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by the current ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 58, § 1, 1-4-1979) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 30-3. - Obstruction of law enforcement officers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully obstruct or hinder any law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties. 
(b)  Any person found to be guilty of violating the provision of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both at the discretion of the recorder's court. 
(Ord. No. 225, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-1994) 
Sec. 30-4. - Discharge of firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or wantonly fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm within the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons who shall fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm in defense of person or property; 
(2)  Law enforcement officers; and 
(3)  Persons who shall fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm at a firing range approved by the sheriff or police chief of the county or city in which the firing range is located and which is supervised by law enforcement officers or representatives of a local, state or national gun club. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 1, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 30-5. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this code section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  A person committing the offense of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-675, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 30-6. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Camp shall mean residing in our [or] using a location for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for more than one hour at a time; cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
(2)  Storing personal property shall mean leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for more than one hour. 
(b)  Streets and sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any street or sidewalk or public right of way. 
(c)  Other public property. Blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from buildings. 
(d)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section by simply sleeping, sitting or lying down in a prohibited location or for a prohibited period of time without having first received an oral or written warning to cease such unlawful conduct. 
(e)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performance, festivals, concerts, fireworks or other special events taking place in any park or on any street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office or other retail facility to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance or other special event; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provisions of meals; or 
(9)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 and as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-CO-09-731, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Secs. 30-7—30-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GANG ACTIVITY 

Sec. 30-29. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Criminal street gang means any organization, association or group of three or more persons associated in fact, whether formal or informal, which engages in a pattern of criminal gang activity as defined in this section. The existence of such organization, association or group of individuals associated in fact may be established by evidence of a common name or signs, symbols, tattoos, graffiti or attire or other distinguishing characteristics. 
Pattern of criminal gang activity means the commission, attempted commission, conspiracy to commit or solicitation, coercion or intimidation of another person to commit at least two of the following offenses, provided that at least one of these offenses occurred after July 1, 1998, and the last of such offenses occurred within 12 months excluding any periods of imprisonment or prior criminal gang activity: 
(1)  Any offense defined as racketeering activity by O.C.G.A. § 16-14-3; 
(2)  Any offense defined in article 7 of chapter 5 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 16-5-90 et seq.) relating to stalking; 
(3)  Any offense defined in the following: 
a.  O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1, as rape; 
b.  O.C.G.A. § 16-6-2, as aggravated sodomy; 
c.  O.C.G.A. § 16-6-3, as statutory rape. 
(4)  Any offense defined in article 3 of chapter 10 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 16-10-50 et seq.) relating to escape and other offenses related to confinement; 
(5)  Any offense defined in article 4 of chapter 11 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100 et seq.) relating to dangerous instrumentalities and practices; 
(6)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-5-15, 42-5-16, 42-5-17, 42-5-18 or 42-5-19 relating to the security of state or county correctional facilities; and 
(7)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 49-4A-11 relating to aiding or encouraging a child to escape from custody. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 3, 7-13-1998) 
Sec. 30-30. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person employed by or associated with a criminal street gang to conduct or participate in such criminal street gang through a pattern of criminal gang activity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to acquire or maintain, directly or indirectly, through a pattern of criminal gang activity or proceeds derived therefrom any interest in or control of any real or personal property of any nature including money. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who occupies a position of organizer, supervisory position or any other position of management with regard to a criminal street gang to engage in, directly or indirectly, or conspire to engage in a pattern of criminal gang activity. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, encourage, solicit or coerce another to participate in a criminal street gang. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate, directly or indirectly, with another any threat of injury or damage to the person or property of the other person or to any associate or relative of the other person with the intent to deter such person from assisting a member or associate of a criminal street gang to withdraw from such criminal street gang. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate, directly or indirectly, with another any threat of injury or damage to the person or property of the other person or to any associate or relative of the other person with the intent to punish or retaliate against such person for having withdrawn from a criminal street gang. 
(g)  Violation of section. 
(1)  Any person who violates subsection (c) of this section may, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, be punished by imprisonment for an additional 12 months which shall be served consecutively to any other sentence imposed on such person by law. 
(2)  Any person who violates subsection (d), (e) or (f) of this section shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, be punished by imprisonment for not less than 12 months. 
(h)  Each crime committed in violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 4, 7-13-1998) 
Sec. 30-31. - Public nuisance declared. 
(a)  Any real property which is erected, established, maintained, owned, leased or used by any criminal street gang for the purpose of conducting criminal gang activity shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by title 41 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.) relating to nuisances. 
(b)  An action to abate a nuisance pursuant to this article may be brought by the city attorney in any superior, state or municipal court. 
(c)  Any person who is injured by reason of criminal gang activity shall have a cause of action for three times the actual damages sustained and, where appropriate, punitive damages; provided, however, that no cause of action shall arise under this article as a result of an otherwise legitimate commercial transaction between parties to a contract or agreement for the sale of lawful goods or property or the sale of securities regulated by chapter 5 of title 10 of the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq.) or by the Federal Securities and Exchange Commission. Such person shall also recover attorney's fees in the trial and appellate court and costs of investigation and litigation reasonably incurred. All averments of a cause of action under this subsection shall be stated with particularity. No judgment shall be awarded unless the finder of fact determines that the action is consistent with the intent of the General Assembly as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-15-2. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 5, 7-13-1998) 
Sec. 30-32. - Conviction of offenses. 
A conviction of an offense as criminal gang activity shall stop the defendant in any subsequent civil action or proceeding as to matters proved in the criminal proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 6, 7-13-1998) 
Secs. 30-33—30-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 30-53—30-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 30-78. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests and residential, commercial, industrial or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. 435, § 201, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 30-79. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined by the city council that: 
(1)  Litter found throughout the city often finds its way into our streams, rivers and lakes (and especially Lake Lanier) and detracts from our quality of life. 
(2)  Pollutants carried into our streams, rivers, and lakes by litter, diminish the quality of our water and its aquatic resources. 
(3)  Litter control ordinances provide a prohibition against littering and provide an enforcement mechanism with penalties for dealing with those found littering. 
(4)  This division is modeled on the Georgia Litter Control Law (O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.) and adoption of this division is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 
(Ord. No. 435, § 101(A), 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 30-80. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. No. 435, § 101(B), 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 30-81. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 435, § 301, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 30-82. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 435, § 401, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 30-83. - Construction site litter control. 
Construction site operators shall control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste to prevent it from entering or causing adverse impacts to the City Separate Storm Sewer System or state waters. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-08-714, § 1, 8-22-2013) 
Sec. 30-84. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this division may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of this division, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this division. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this division is discovered to contain any articles, including but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this division. 
(c)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of the state or any political subdivision thereof or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of the state or any political subdivision thereof are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 435, § 501, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 2013-CO-08-714, § 2, 8-22-2013) 
Note— Formerly § 30-83. 
Sec. 30-85. - Applicability. 
This division shall apply to all public and private property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 435, § 601, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 2013-CO-08-714, § 2, 8-22-2013) 
Note— Formerly § 30-84. 
Sec. 30-86. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This division is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this division should be considered minimum requirements and, where any provision of this division imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 435, § 602, 7-11-2005; Ord. No. 2013-CO-08-714, § 2, 8-22-2013) 
Note— Formerly § 30-85. 
Secs. 30-87—30-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, §§ 1—3, adopted May 13, 2013, repealed Ch. 30, Art. III, Divs. 3—6, §§ 30-114—30-117, 30-148—30-155, 30-179—30-193, 30-225—30-229 in their entirety. Section 3, Exhibit A of said ordinance adopted a new Art. III, Divs. 3, 4, to read as herein set out. Formerly said divisions pertained to junk, weeds and trash, property maintenance, unsafe buildings and derived from Ord. No. 11, § 1, 12-10-1968; Ord. No. 2011-CO-09-678, § 9-12-2011, Ord. No. 455, §§ 2—9.1, 4-10-2006, Ord. No. 49, § 1, 4-10-1978. 

Sec. 30-179. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means a vehicle, including cars, trucks, trailers, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, manufactured homes or any other similar vehicle that meets one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Has been left unattended upon a highway, street or alley or other public property outside a designated parking space for a period of 48 hours; and/or 
(2)  Is within public view, without an appropriate car cover, and is inoperable, partially or wholly dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or of similar condition or any vehicle without a current license plate if required by law and is located outside of an enclosed building, garage, carport, wrecked motor vehicle compound or other place of business designated and lawfully used for the storage of such inoperable vehicles for a period exceeding 30 days. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of said property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of record in the county including executors, administrator, guardians, and trustees. 
Public officer means any person who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county or state relating to health, fire or building regulations or other activities concerning property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-180. - Legal status provisions. 
It is important for a community to appear clean, well-kept and generally clear of public nuisances, eyesores and unhealthy conditions. The appearance of a community weighs heavily in the decisions of prospective residents and businesses in locating to a particular area. A clean, safe and well-kept community can stabilize or increase property values, provide a healthy environment and make citizens proud of the area in which they live. Accordingly, a community needs a set of regulations to keep the area clean, remove unsightly conditions and prevent unhealthy and unsafe situations from occurring. It is therefore the purpose and intent of this division to encourage clean, healthy, and well-maintained properties free of nuisances, eyesores and unhealthy, unsafe or devaluating conditions. To this end, this division seeks to regulate and protect the health, safety, welfare, values and aesthetics of properties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-181. - Illustrative examples of nuisances. 
The following conditions, whether on occupied or unoccupied lands, public or private property, are hereby declared to be and constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated; although this section shall not be construed to be limiting with regard to its enumeration of public nuisances: 
(1)  Weeds or grass, within an improved landscape area, that are allowed to grow to a height greater than 12 inches on the average or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush that may provide safe harborage for rats, mice, snakes and/or other vermin. 
(2)  Vegetation that obstructs the safe passage or line-of-sight of motorists or pedestrians at an intersection or driveway connection with a public or private street or alley or along any street or sidewalk. 
(3)  Dead or dying trees or other vegetation that may cause a hazardous situation if they fall. 
(4)  Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, construction debris and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other such items which constitute unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
(5)  The keeping or maintenance of one or more abandoned vehicles in public view or in a manner inconsistent with this division. 
(6)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(7)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof or presents a fire hazard. 
(8)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors or stenches as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches including smoke and fires. 
(9)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity is conducted, performed or maintained in violation of local, state or federal law. 
(10)  Any accumulation of stagnant water. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-182. - Nuisance prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance as defined or more specifically described in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-183. - Unsanitary or unsafe conditions/notice to abate. 
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the jurisdiction of the city, any public official may file a written complaint with the city manager (or his designee) charging that weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions that constitute a nuisance have accumulated on private property, the code enforcement officer shall, if a preliminary investigation authorized by the city manager discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties of interest in such property a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-184. - Contents of notice. 
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this division shall contain the following: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances; 
(2)  The location of the nuisance, if the nuisance is stationary; 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance; 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance; and 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed, the city will file an action in municipal court of the city to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-185. - Hearing upon request. 
(a)  If the owner or a party in interest request a hearing, a notice that a hearing will be held before the city manager at a place within the city, fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and the hearing shall be conducted in an orderly fashion, but the rules of evidence will not be strictly followed. 
(b)  If, after such notice and hearing, the city manager determines that the property creates a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons in the vicinity, then the city manager shall state in writing such findings of fact that support of this determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order to abate the nuisance by altering or improving such property so as to render the property safe and without an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
(c)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with such order, then the city manager may cause to be posted on the boundary of such property a plaque with the following words: 
"This property is unsanitary and unsafe and is a public health hazard. Use of this property is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with the order authorized herein, then the city manager may abate the nuisance by causing such accumulation or other unsafe condition to be removed and otherwise made safe; provided, however, the duties of the city manager authorized by this subsection shall not be exercised until the mayor and council of the city shall have directed the city manager to proceed to abate the nuisance by removing the accumulation or otherwise making the property safe. 
(e)  The cost of removing the accumulation and making the property safe shall be a lien against the property upon which such costs were included. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs by the municipality and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the city manager in the office of the clerk of the city on a lien docket maintained by said clerk for such purposes. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the city's power to define and declare nuisances or to cause the removal or abatement of such nuisances by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(f)  The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien as authorized herein only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after the perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum, in three equal annual installments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed in this subsection (f)(1); 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the municipal corporation upon such sale, transfer or conveyance; and 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the three-year period or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (f)(2) of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by article 3 of chapter 4 of title 48, O.C.G.A. § 18-8-40, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-186. - Determination that property is unsafe or unsanitary. 
The city manager may determine that private property violates this division if the city manager finds that the property is unsanitary or unsafe and that the property thereby creates a public health hazard or a general nuisance to the persons residing in the vicinity; such conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: accumulations that increase the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities or if such conditions cause the property to be infested with rodents and to otherwise exhibit uncleanliness. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-187. - Administration and interpretation. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to administer and interpret this division. To this end, the city manager is authorized to prepare administrative procedures, guidelines, application forms, to tend to other administrative details not inconsistent with the provisions of this division and to implement the provisions of this division. The city manager may delegate administrative functions, powers and duties assigned by this division to other staff as may be appropriate without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-188. - Powers of city manager regarding unsafe or unsanitary property. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this division, including the following powers in addition to others possessed by such recorder: 
(1)  To investigate the private property in the municipality in order to determine whether such property is unsafe or unsanitary; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon the private property for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as the city manager deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this division; and 
(5)  To delegate any of the city manager's functions and powers under this division to such officers and agents as the city manager may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-189. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest or owners of unsanitary or unsafe private property. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by the city manager pursuant to this division shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the city manager or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of the state shall be sufficient evidence as to the service upon such person in possession, owners and party in interest, if such return of service or affidavit states that a copy of such complaint or order was served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the party's place of residence. 
(b)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the municipality, then service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such parties by the sheriff, or any local deputy of the county of the residence of such parties, or service may be made by any citizen; the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen shall be conclusive as to such service, if such service or affidavit states that such parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence of such parties. 
(c)  Nonresidents of the state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in The Times, a newspaper printed and published in the county and circulated in the city. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or order shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and, if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the municipality or is a nonresident, then such party shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such minor or insane person or persons laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative and if the minor or insane person lives within the municipality, then service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of such party's residence, which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such persons; in the case of other such persons who live outside the municipality or an[y] nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section or service may be perfected upon any person, firm or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)  A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed in the proper office for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-190. - Appeal of an administrative decision or interpretation. 
Any person who alleges that there has been an error by the city manager in administration or interpretation of this division shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within ten days of the entry of the final decision by the city manager. The matter shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council unless a meeting is called specifically to hear said appeal in which case the appellant shall be entitled to ten days' notice of said special called meeting. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-191. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce this division and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance therewith. The city manager may delegate enforcement functions, powers and duties assigned by this division to other staff as may be appropriate without the need to reflect such delegation by formal action. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-192. - Refusal of permits or permissions. 
The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits or permissions on any new project or application pursuant to this division or other ordinances of the city where the applicant, applicant's business or agent has failed or refused to comply with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-193. - Stop work order. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to issue written stop work and cease and desist orders for any activity that fails to comply with the provisions of this division. Such stop work or cease and desist orders may be lifted at such time as the city manager is satisfied that a good faith effort is being made to comply with applicable provisions of this division. Nothing shall prevent the city manager from reissuing stop work and cease and desist orders where warranted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-194. - Injunction. 
If any land is used or building, structure or other activity is established or maintained in violation of this division, the city manager is authorized to and may institute, in addition to other remedies, an injunction or undertake other appropriate action to cause the violation to cease or to be corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-195. - Taking by eminent domain; police power. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as preventing the owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the state or as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-196. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this division require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other ordinance, the requirements of this division shall govern. Whenever the provision of any state or federal statute requires more restrictive standards than are required by this division, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Secs. 30-197—30-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note at Division 3. 

Sec. 30-225. - Conditions constituting nuisances. 
Any building, structure, enclosure, place or premises is a nuisance when it is perilous to life or property by reason of its construction, or of the condition or quantity of its contents, or of the use of the building or its contents or the enclosure, or of the overcrowding at any time of persons therein, or of deficiencies in its fire alarm or fire prevention equipment, or of conditions in its construction likely to cause fire or the spreading of fire, or of conditions therein which would hamper or impede the bureau of fire services in combating a fire in or about the building; or where the condition of the walls, floors or roof is such that the building is likely to fall on account thereof, thereby endangering the safety of its occupants or of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-226. - Duty of city manager. 
The city manager is charged with the duty of enforcing this division. All employees of the city including the police department shall make a report to the city manager of any buildings or structures which are, may be or are suspected to be a nuisance, perilous to life or property by reason of their construction or for any other reason. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-227. - Procedure for abatement. 
Whenever the city manager has information that any building or structure may be in such condition that it is a nuisance, the city manager shall cause an examination thereof to be made. If, upon such examination, the city manager finds that any building or structure has any or all of the defects set out in this division, it shall be the duty of the city manager to cause the owner of such building or structure, or the person in possession, charge or control thereof, to be given written notice of the condition and to order that the condition constituting the nuisance be abated. The owner or person in possession, charge, or control shall be further notified in writing that the condition must be abated within ten calendar days from the date of notice unless the owner or person in possession, charge, or control requests a hearing before the city manager as to the city manager's determination as to the existence of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-228. - Hearing procedure. 
In the event an owner or person in possession, charge or control requests a hearing within ten days after the giving of notice as provided in section 30-227, the city manager shall call a public hearing within the city within seven days after the request for the hearing is made. The person requesting the hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing not less than two days prior thereto and shall be permitted to appear before the city manager personally or by counsel or other representative. Any determination of the city manager made pursuant to a hearing shall be reduced to writing and a copy of the determination shall be served upon the person requesting the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-229. - Abatement by city manager. 
If after ten days after the giving of notice specified in section 30-227 or, if a hearing is held pursuant to section 30-228, after ten days after the hearing the city manager is not reasonably satisfied that the condition constituting a nuisance has been abated or that substantial compliance has been made with respect to the abatement order, the city manager shall cause the nuisance to be abated and shall cause the owner of the property to be billed for the entire cost of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 3(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Secs. 30-230—30-251. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NOISE REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 4, renumbered Ch. 30, Art. III, div. 7 as a new division 5. See also the editor's note at division 3 for a detailed description of the reorganization of said article. 

Sec. 30-252. - Making loud, annoying, etc., noise unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause to be made or continue to make any unreasonably loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 2, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 4, 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-253. - Prohibited noises. 
The following are declared to be unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public area in the city except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for any producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with a volume louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Emptying of trash bins or dumpsters. The emptying of trash bins, dumpsters or other receptacles by truck, vehicle, machine, or mechanical device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily where such method involves the banging and clanking of such bins, dumpsters or receptacles upon metal, concrete or asphalt resulting in loud noises which annoy or disturbs the quiet comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Animals. The keeping of any animal including, but not limited to, dogs, cats and birds which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(7)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(8)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary or moving internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. Such are not in any event to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(9)  School, courts, places of worship, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of worship, court while in use or hospital which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital provided that conspicuous signs are displayed on those streets indicating a school, hospital or court is adjacent thereto. 
(10)  Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(11)  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(12)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes. The use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during hours and in places and with such volume as would constitute its use as a public nuisance provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
a.  Any government vehicle while engaged in necessary public business. 
b.  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(13)  Construction noise. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure in the vicinity of residential dwellings between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 3, 9-9-1996; Amd. No. 277, § 1, 5-8-2006; Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 4, 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-254. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any activity which would naturally cause a loud noise such as a parade, Fourth of July fireworks display, a gospel singing, construction of a building or similar type functions or activities which are properly permitted by the proper officials of the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 4, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 4, 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 30-255. - Misdemeanor offense. 
Any person failing to comply with the lawful provisions hereof or any act prohibited hereby or failing to do any act mandated hereby shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 5, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-708, § 4, 5-13-2013) 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITATION 

Sec. 30-256. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have definitions as outlined herein: 
Aggressive manner shall mean: 
(1)  Approaching speaking to a person or following a person before, during, or after soliciting if the conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, to fear damage to or loss of property, or to otherwise be intimidated into giving money or any other thing of value; 
(2)  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to such soliciting; 
(3)  Intentionally or recklessly making or causing physical contact with or touching another person, or his vehicle, without that person's consent in the course of soliciting; 
(4)  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
(5)  Using violent, obscene, abusive or threatening gestures toward a person solicited; 
(6)  Following a person being solicited with the intent of asking that person for money or other things of value; or 
(7)  Soliciting money from anyone who is waiting in line. 
Automated teller machine shall mean a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to perform transactions, including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries or mortgage and loan payments. 
Automated teller machine facility shall mean the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines and the adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
Check cashing business shall mean any person duly licensed to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration pursuant to Georgia law. 
Financial institution shall mean any banking corporation, credit union, or foreign exchange office as defined by Georgia law. 
Public place shall mean a place where a governmental entity has title, to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including, but not limited to, any alley, bridge, building, driveway, sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park or playground that are open to the general public. 
Soliciting shall mean asking for money or objects of value with the intention that the money or objects be transferred at that time, and at that place. Soliciting shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, bodily gestures, or signs with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other things of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services. 
(Ord. No. 2015-CO-09-731, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 30-257. - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall solicit in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(b)  No person shall solicit on private or residential property without permission from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such property. 
(c)  No person shall solicit on private or residential property if the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such property has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property. 
(d)  No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any entrance or exit of any financial institution or check cashing business or within 20 feet of any automated teller machine without the consent of the owner of the property or another person legally in possession of such a facility. When an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, the distance of 20 feet shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the facility. 
(e)  No person shall solicit an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located on any street for the purpose of performing or offering to perform a service in connection with such vehicle or otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services. This subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passenger of such vehicle. 
(f)  No person shall solicit from any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying or reserving a public parking space. 
(g)  No person shall solicit while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
(h)  No person shall solicit in any public transportation vehicle or at any bus or public transportation stop. 
(i)  No person shall solicit in any public parking lot or public parking structure. 
(j)  No person shall solicit in a group of two or more persons. 
(k)  No person shall solicit within ten feet of an entrance to a building. 
(Ord. No. 2015-CO-09-731, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 30-258. - Solicitation at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit after sunset or before sunrise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-CO-09-731, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 30-259. - False or misleading solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false or misleading representation in the course of soliciting. False or misleading representations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and is stranded when this statement is not true; 
(2)  Stating or suggesting falsely that the solicitor is either a present or former member of the armed services; 
(3)  Displaying any indication of physical disability when the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated; or 
(4)  Stating that the solicitor is homeless when he or she is not. 
(Ord. No. 2015-CO-09-731, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Sec. 30-260. - Penalty. 
Any person failing to comply with this section as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by six months in jail and/or a fine up to $1,000.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-CO-09-731, § 1, 10-12-2015) 
Chapter 32 - PUBLIC FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 1, adopted April 9, 2018, amended Chapter 32 of the Oakwood City Code entitled "parks and recreation" to rename said chapter 32 as "public facilities and infrastructure." 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope and definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The city is vitally concerned with the use and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare and economic development of the city. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia including, but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(6), has adopted this amendment to its Code of Ordinances for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope . The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public and private entities and businesses utilizing and occupying any public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-2. - Sale of goods, articles or services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell goods, articles or services of any nature on any street, park or other property of the city without first obtaining written permission from the city manager, or his designee, which permission will not be granted unless the request and proposed use of the property will be in full accordance and compliance with all written policies, procedures, guidelines and fees applicable to the property for which the use is being sought, which policies, procedures, guidelines and fees have been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 32-3—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means intoxicating beverage, malt beverage, wine or any other beverage containing any alcohol whatsoever. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Litter means any garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash and all other waste material whether natural or artificial. 
Recreation facilities means all recreation areas in parks, including land, buildings, lakes, swimming pools and all other property and buildings owned, leased or managed by the city, the designated agents or departments of the city and including all recreation areas and parks in the city owned by the United States Government. 
Vehicle means any motor-driven equipment, automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or sled, skateboard or skates (traditional and inline). 
Weapon means pistol, firearm, hatchet, axe, shotgun, air gun, slingshot or other similar device. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 3, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-20. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer of the city. Where there has been a violation of any provision of this article, the law enforcement officer, in his discretion, may issue a warning ticket to the person violating these provisions rather than arresting the offender. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 4, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-21. - Compliance with rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulation relating to the use of recreation facilities where such rules and regulations have been approved and adopted. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or attempt to use any of the property or equipment within a recreation facility except during the hours and in accordance with the rules and regulations governing the same. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 5, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-22. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts while in a city park: 
(1)  Litter . It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, fountains, ponds, lakes, swimming pools, streams or other bodies of water in any recreational facility, except within public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of a recreation facility. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(2)  Weapons . It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into any recreational facility, or have in such person's possession, any weapon; or to shoot, use, carry or employ any weapon or similar device in a recreation facility. 
(3)  Explosives and fireworks . It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession, or set off, any fireworks. 
(4)  Throwing objects . It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any stone or missile at any person or at any public or private building or equipment in a recreation facility. 
(5)  Annoying noise . It shall be unlawful for any person to whistle, hiss or holler at another person in a boisterous, unbecoming or erring manner or make any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of other persons in a recreation facility. 
(6)  Profanity; disorderly conduct . It shall be unlawful for any person to use profanity or profane language, engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace in a recreation facility. 
(7)  Damaging vegetation . It shall be unlawful to cut, remove or destroy any tree, sapling, seedling, bush or shrub, whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze, box, girdle, trim or otherwise deface or injure any tree or shrub or break or remove any branch, foliage, flower of any tree or shrub or pick, gather, uproot, remove or destroy any flower, plant or grass in a recreation facility. 
(8)  Damaging structures . It shall be unlawful for any person to mark, deface, disfigure, damage, displace or remove any building, tables, benches, grills, waterlines, signs, markers, equipment or other property whatsoever in a recreation facility. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any sod, sand, earth, humus, peat, rocks, boulders or gravel. 
(9)  Fire . It shall be unlawful for any person to build a fire in a recreation facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No person shall allow the flames of a fire to exceed five feet in height from the ground. 
(10)  Alcoholic beverages and controlled dangerous substances . It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
a.  Use or drink alcoholic beverages in any recreation facility. 
b.  Bring any controlled dangerous substance, use the same at any time or be under the influence of any controlled dangerous substance at any recreation facility. 
(11)  Vehicle use . It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in a recreation facility except on roadways or paths constructed, designated and maintained for vehicular traffic. It shall also be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in areas designated as "restricted." Recreation facility employees whose duties require them to drive maintenance vehicles and equipment shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this subsection. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle recklessly across or upon any part of any public park of the city. 
(12)  Bicycles . It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle in a recreational area and facility except for the purpose of accessing and parking bicycles in areas approved for the parking of bicycles. 
(13)  Parking . It shall be unlawful: 
a.  To park a vehicle in a recreational facility except in those areas designated by appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas. 
b.  For any person to park in a recreation area if the owner of the vehicle is not utilizing the recreation facility. 
(14)  Commercial activity restricted . It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial activity in a recreation facility without proper permitting through the city. 
(15)  Loitering . It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within parking areas of the city recreation facilities. 
(16)  Picnics . It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold a picnic in a recreation facility except in areas set aside or specifically designated as picnic areas. A permit must be secured from the city clerk for any picnic with more than 20 participants. 
(17)  Interference with use . It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity within a recreation facility that could cause injury to other persons, cause a disturbance or which shall unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of the recreation facility by other persons. 
(18)  Camping . It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in any recreation facility unless in a designated camping area. 
(19)  Animals . It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, have under his control or bring into any recreational area or facility any animal except as otherwise permitted by law. 
(20)  Swimming . It shall be unlawful for any person: 
a.  Not to leave a swimming area when so directed by a lifeguard on duty or not to cease any activity which would be hazardous to others when so directed by a lifeguard or other official. 
b.  To engage in any activity within a swimming area that could cause injury to any person in or near the swimming facility. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 7, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-23. - Ejection from facility for causing disturbances. 
Any person causing a disturbance or engaging in any activity which shall unreasonably interfere with the use of enjoyment of the recreation facility by citizens or any person violating any ordinance of the city or law of the state shall leave the recreation facility upon notification by any authorized recreation employee or law enforcement officer and shall not return to such recreation area for a period of at least 24 hours or as directed by the city and/or its agents. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 8, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-24. - Hours of use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized parks and recreational facility personnel or any authorized agent thereof, to enter, remain within, drive a vehicle in or attempt to park or park a vehicle on any of the streets or parking areas or at any location within the city recreation facilities from 10:00 p.m. to 7:30 a.m. daily. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy the recreation facility during said hours unless for approved scheduled events or special permission has been granted in advance by the city manager with prior notification to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 9, 8-11-1997; Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-25—32-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PICKETING AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS 

Sec. 32-30. - To be peaceful and unattended by noise, etc. 
All assemblies and picketing shall be orderly, taking into consideration the rights of any residents in the immediate area of the demonstration or picketing to the peaceable enjoyment of their residences. To the extent that any residence is located within 300 feet of the location of any demonstration/picketing, the demonstrators or picketers shall not use any sound amplification system, except for one hand-held bullhorn; provided, however, that no hand-held bullhorn may be used in any such demonstration or picketing between sundown and sunrise. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-31. - Use of sidewalks and streets. 
When picketing or demonstrating on public sidewalks maintained by the city, only the outside five feet of the sidewalks next to the curb shall be used by the pickets or demonstrators. No picketing or demonstrating shall be conducted on the remaining portion of the sidewalks or on that portion of the streets used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-32. - Method of marching; limitation on number of pickets or demonstrators before given place of business or facility. 
Marching by picketers or demonstrators shall be spaced at a distance of five feet, front to back, and five feet, side to side and shall not otherwise block access. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-33. - Use of placards and signs. 
Pickets and demonstrators shall carry only cardboard or paper placards or signs and the words used thereon shall not be such that they would immediately incite violence. No metal or wood may be attached to the placards or signs and the placards or signs shall not be more than 36 inches in length and not more than 36 inches in width. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-34. - Picketing and demonstrating prohibited in certain places. 
There shall be no picketing or demonstrating in front of any building in which the following are located, affecting the normal operations thereof: 
(1)  A hospital, nursing home or rest home within 200 feet of the boundary line; 
(2)  A school, within 100 feet; 
(3)  A residence, no longer than 45 minutes; 
(4)  A state or federal highway or road unless there has been compliance with all rules, regulations and requirements imposed by the appropriate state or federal governing authority for the use of a state or federal highway or road as a private route. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-35. - Participation by persons under sixteen prohibited. 
No person under the age of 16 shall be permitted to absent themselves from school attendance in order to march, picket or demonstrate within the corporate limits of the city during any time that such person is required by law to be in attendance at school, unless such person has obtained written permission from the appropriate educational authority to be absent from school to attend and to participate in such march, picket or demonstration. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-36. - Notice of proposed picketing or demonstrating. 
The chief of police is to be given at least 18 hours' written notice of any person or persons planning to picket or demonstrate. This written notice shall include the names of the organization or organizations planning to picket and also shall include the names of the places of business or public facilities which will be picketed and the hours the picketing or demonstrating will be conducted. Spontaneous demonstrations are excepted. Spontaneous demonstrations presuppose a same day response by connected individuals to an active event. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-37. - Duty to disperse as directed by police. 
Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-38. - Use of vehicles for picketing or demonstrating. 
No vehicles shall be used in any picket or demonstrating lines and all pickets or demonstrators shall be afoot. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-39. - Time of picketing and public demonstrations. 
Picketing and demonstrations shall be conducted only between sunrise and sunset. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-40. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished according to the provisions of section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-41—32-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES 
Division 1. - Generally 

Sec. 32-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade is any parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind involving ten or more persons or five or more vehicles. 
Parade permit is a permit as required by this article. 
Person or applicant is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Professionally organized parade means a parade which has been organized and produced by any person or organization that has received compensation or remuneration for its services in organizing and producing such parade, other than reimbursement of its actual expenses. 
Vehicles shall include any device which moves on wheels or tracts whether under its own power or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-47. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions, provided the police department is notified of each procession's time and route; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational or school-sponsored activities; provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-48. - Parade permit review committee established. 
There is hereby established a parade permit review committee (hereinafter referred to as the permit review committee) composed of the chief of police, the public works director and the city clerk, or their designated representative. The chief of police, or his authorized representative, shall be the chairperson of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-49. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference . No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades . No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route . The police department shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or parts thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The police department may post signs to that effect and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-50. - Regulations for conduct of parades. 
(a)  For the purpose of controlling traffic and pedestrian congestion and of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare, the following regulations shall pertain to all parades conducted within the city: 
(1)  All parades shall be conducted along the route specified in the parade permit; 
(2)  Parades shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
(3)  All parade participants shall assemble for the parade at the time and location designated in the parade permit and shall disperse from public property immediately after the conclusion of the parade; 
(4)  No parade participant shall carry arms or other weapons (or facsimiles thereof) without a valid permit to so carry nor shall any parade participant carry bricks, bats, sticks, rocks, bottles or other items which may be used as weapons; 
(5)  No parade participant shall drink alcoholic beverages or be under the influence of any intoxicating beverages or drugs; 
(6)  Materials used in the construction of floats in the parade shall be of fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to such requirements concerning fire safety as may be determined by the permit committee. 
(7)  Once commenced, the parade shall not stop along the parade route but shall continue to move at a fixed rate of speed and any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade, except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, shall constitute a violation of the permit; 
(8)  It shall be the responsibility of the person, group or organization obtaining the parade permit to police the parade route for discarded literature, publications or other written materials distributed along the parade route by participants of the parade and literature, publications, leaflets or other written material shall be distributed in such a manner as not to unduly delay or hinder the progress of the parade; 
(9)  Speeches shall be allowed only at a location designated in the parade permit; 
(10)  Speeches, rallies or other activity to be conducted during any time that the parade is on the public roads, streets or highways located within the corporate limits of the city shall be limited to a total time of 30 minutes, after which the parade participants shall continue or disperse as designated in the parade permit; 
(11)  In no event shall speeches, rallies, etc. be conducted in the public streets or along the sidewalks of the city; 
(12)  The permittee shall advise all participants in the parade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of the parade and shall sign an acknowledgment that the permittee and the parade participants have read, understand and will comply with the regulations specified in this article and the conditions of the permit. 
(b)  Any other reasonable regulation or restriction deemed necessary by the chief of police for the protection and safety of the parade participants, viewing public or for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, may be imposed by the chief of police. However, such additional regulations or restrictions shall be specified in writing to the applicant with all reasons therefor clearly enumerated. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-51. - Professionally organized parades. 
In the event the parade is a professionally organized parade, the applicant or the organizer shall pay a fee for such permit as set forth in chapter 22 of this Code. In addition thereto, the applicant or organizer shall post a bond of $1,000.00 per hundred participants or any portion thereof reasonably estimated to participate, the excess of which shall be conditioned upon the reimbursement of the city for the cost of additional police reasonably used during said parade and for clean up during and immediately following the parade. The applicant and organizers shall be liable for such costs of additional police and clean up as may be actually incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-52. - Deviation from prescribed streets, ways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade, procession or demonstration along, upon or over any street or public way other than those set out in the permit issued as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-53. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. Each separate violation and each day of any continued violation, shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 32-54—32-60. - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Permit 

Sec. 32-61. - Required. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city. Nothing in this section shall be read or understood as prohibiting or restricting any necessary initial planning activities to apply for or to obtain any permit required under this article. No more than one permit under this article shall be issued to the same person more than once every 90 days. No parade permit shall be issued to any person for a period of 12 months following any parade for which a permit has been issued to such person and which has been conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-62. - Application generally. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by his office. 
(1)  Filing period . An application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than ten days or more than 120 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents . The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number (day and night) of the person seeking to conduct the parade and the applicant, if different; 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
c.  The name, business address, residence address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader, chairman or marshal and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
d.  If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on its, his or her behalf; 
e.  Whether or not any person will distribute or cause to be distributed any item, either perishable or otherwise, to any bystander or onlooker; 
f.  A statement from the person making the application that such person anticipates no unusual problems concerning either police protection or traffic congestion to be experienced as a consequence of the parade or, if such statement cannot be made, the reasons therefor; 
g.  The purpose of the parade; 
h.  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
i.  The hours when the parade will start and terminate; 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas and the time the units will leave the dispersal area; 
k.  Whether parade marshals will be provided; 
l.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. The proposed parade route shall be set forth in detail in the application for the parade permit; 
m.  The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade; 
n.  The number and type of vehicles, animals, marching units, bands and floats to be utilized in the parade including a description of any sound amplification equipment to be used; 
o.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
p.  The location by streets of any assembly and dispersal areas for the parade; 
q.  The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade; and 
r.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(2)  Late applications . The chief of police, where just cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(3)  Fee . No fee shall be charged for such permit except as otherwise herein provided for professionally organized parades. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-63. - Procedure for processing permit application and standard for issuance. 
All applications for permits under this article shall be filed with the police department to be forwarded to the members of the permit review committee for investigation of the applicant and other facts, circumstances and information relating to such application and the permit review committee shall, within five business days after the filing of an application, grant or refuse to issue a permit unless additional information is required. If any member of the permit review committee objects to the issuance of the permit, the chairperson shall promptly convene a meeting of the committee. If the committee does not unanimously approve the permit, the permit shall be denied. The standards for issuance of a permit are as follows: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movements of firefighting equipment enroute to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely: 
a.  To cause injury to persons or property; 
b.  To cause disruption of the provision of fire protection services or emergency medical services to the surrounding area; or 
c.  To cause there to be a substantial risk that the parade would incite or produce lawless action or spectator violence which cannot be satisfactorily prevented by means of reasonable crowd control techniques. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute; 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private profit; 
(9)  The parade will not unreasonably burden the streets and sidewalks or the city so as to substantially interfere with the normal use thereof by the public; 
(10)  The parade will not interfere with another parade for which a permit has been approved; 
(11)  The information contained in the application is not found to be false in any material detail; 
(12)  The purpose of the parade is not illegal or in any way prohibited by law; or 
(13)  That no alcoholic beverages will be consumed during the parade. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-64. - State permit. 
Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant for such permit shall obtain any state permit required by law or by the regulations of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-65. - Notice of granting or refusal of permit. 
Notice of the granting or refusal of any permit by the permit review committee shall be given to the applicant in writing promptly. Such notice shall be deemed delivered five days after deposit, postage prepaid, in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-66. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal in writing the denial of a parade permit to the appeals committee as set forth in article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-67. - Failure to file an appeal. 
Failure to file an appeal in accordance with article VI hereof shall constitute a waiver of the right to such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-68. - Alternative permit. 
The permit review committee may grant the permit conditioned on the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that requested by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two days after notice of the action, file a written notice of acceptance with the permit review committee. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-69. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the application for a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  The city clerk; 
(3)  The Hall County Fire Chief; 
(4)  The city public works director; 
(5)  The Hall County Sheriff; 
(6)  The public safety director of the county; and 
(7)  The permit review committee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-70. - Issuance and contents of permit. 
The permit review committee shall grant a written permit for a parade as provided in this article which shall state the following information: 
(1)  Assembly time; 
(2)  Starting time; 
(3)  Minimum speed; 
(4)  Maximum speed; 
(5)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(6)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(7)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and 
(8)  Any other information as the city manager shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-71. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade leader, chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-72. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designated representative shall have the authority to summarily suspend or revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth under section 32-63 or the regulations as herein set forth under this section. 
(b)  Any permit for a parade issued pursuant to this article may be summarily revoked on the day of the parade by the chief of police or his designated representative when by reason of inclement weather, disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the chief of police or his designated representative determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. If a permit is so revoked, the permittee shall be allowed to reapply for a new parade permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 32-73—32-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
Division 1. - Generally 

Sec. 32-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permit means a permit as required by this article. 
Person or applicant is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Sound-amplifying system means any system of electrical hookup or connection, loudspeaker system or equipment, sound-amplifying system, and any apparatus, equipment, device, instrument or machine designed for or intended to be used for the purpose of amplifying the sound or increasing the volume of the human voice, musical tone, vibration or sound wave. 
Special event means the temporary use, with a valid permit, of public property, including streets, sidewalks, beaches, parks, and community centers for the purposes of conducting certain short-term events such as art shows, music concerts, fundraising events, sidewalk sales, amusements, attractions, circuses, carnivals, rodeos and sporting events including, but not limited to, walkathons, marathon runs, "10K's," exhibitions or related activities. Special events shall be events other than those included in sections 32-30, et seq. and 32-46, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-92. - Interference with special event prohibited. 
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any special event in violation of any of the terms, conditions or regulations of the permit issued therefor, or knowingly join or participate in any special event without the consent and over the objection of the permittee or in any manner interfere with the orderly conduct of such event. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-93. - Special events permit review committee established. 
There is hereby established a special events permit review committee (hereinafter referred to as the permit review commit) composed of the chief of police, the city clerk, and the public works director, or their designated representative. The police chief or his authorized representative, shall be the chairperson of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-94. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article or condition of the permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code; and each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 32-95—32.99. - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Permit 

Sec. 32-100. - Required. 
No person shall organize, produce, direct, conduct, manage, institute or carry on any special event without a permit first had and obtained from the chief of police. A permit is required if the applicant desires to reserve and preempt public use of a portion of public property for a temporary period. No person shall promote, advertise, encourage or solicit attendance or otherwise participate in any way in a special event for which no permit has been issued or for which such permit has been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-101. - Application generally; specific locations for music concerts; dance permits. 
(a)  An application for a permit for a special event shall be filed with the chief of police not less than ten or more than 120 days before the date proposed for holding a special event. Such application shall be signed by the applicant or their authorized agent. 
(b)  Music concert permits shall only be issued upon approval according to the procedures set forth by the permit review committee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-102. - Contents of application. 
Application for a permit to hold a special event shall be made on forms provided by the police department and approved by the permit review committee. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and, if the same is a corporation, the names of its principal officers or, if the same is a partnership, association, organization or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association, organization or company with the address and telephone number of each; 
(2)  If the applicant is a charitable or religious association, the application shall be signed by two officers of the association and shall include the following: 
a.  A list of the names of all persons authorized to solicit contributions on behalf of such association; 
b.  Total amount of funds sought to be raised; 
c.  The percentage of funds to be used for expenses and the percentage of funds to be used for charitable or religious purposes; 
d.  A financial statement showing the fiscal period 90 days prior to the filing of the application; and 
e.  If a promoter or non-charitable association or entertainment group or person is to be used to raise funds for the charitable association, the true and fictitious names, home and business addresses of the promoter, non-charitable association, entertainment group or person. 
(3)  A detailed description of the special event proposed to be held, the number of persons participating in the event, number of spectators and vehicles expected, the purpose of the event, the date, hours and location where the event is proposed to be held and the participant entry fee, if any, to be charged. 
(4)  A detailed description of the equipment to be used, if any, including the number and types of vehicles, the number of sound-amplifying systems, whether mounted, portable or stationary, the time and area of operation of the sound-amplifying systems, the number and type of special units such as musical groups, animal zoos or shows and the like; 
(5)  An agreement that the city shall be compensated for any damage to public property and that the site shall be cleaned and restored to the condition in which it was found prior to the holding of the special event; 
(6)  A detailed list of items to be sold and/or given away; 
(7)  The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury; and 
(8)  Such other information as the permit review committee may require to adequately evaluate the application. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-103. - Procedure for processing special event permit applications. 
All applications for permits to hold special events shall be filed with the police department to be forwarded to the members of the permit review committee for investigation of the persons involved with the activity proposed to be conducted and other facts, circumstances and information relating to such application; and the permit review committee shall, within seven days after the filing of an application, grant or refuse to issue a permit unless additional information is required. If any member of the committee objects to the issuance of the permit, the chairperson shall promptly convene a meeting of the committee. If the committee does not unanimously approve the permit, the permit shall be denied. Grounds for denial of a permit are set forth at section 32-111 hereinafter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-104. - State permit. 
Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant for such permit shall obtain any state permit required by law or by the regulations of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-105. - Notice of granting or refusal of permit. 
Notice of the granting or refusal of any permit by the permit review committee shall be given to the applicant in writing promptly. Such notice shall be deemed delivered five days after deposit, postage prepaid, in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-106. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal in writing the denial of a parade permit to the appeals committee as set forth in article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-107. - Failure to file an appeal. 
Failure to file an appeal in accordance with article VI hereof shall constitute a waiver of the right to such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-108. - Alternative permit. 
The permit review committee may grant the permit conditioned on the conduct of the special event on a date, at a time, or at a different location from that requested by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two days after notice of the action, file a written notice of acceptance with the police department. An alternate special event permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a special event permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-109. - Surety and insurance. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the chief of police may require: 
(1)  In lieu of an agreement to compensate the city for loss or damage to public property, the deposit of a surety bond, letter of credit or cash in an amount sufficient to guarantee the cleaning up of the site and the removal of any debris left as a result of the holding of a special event; if it is determined that the special event will warrant the presence of police officers, paramedics, special officers for patrol or parking duty or lifeguards, the permit review committee shall also require the deposit of a surety bond or cash in any amount sufficient to pay the additional costs of providing such officers or lifeguards; and 
(2)  That the applicant provide public liability insurance and property damage insurance, including products liability coverage written by an insurance company acceptable to the permit review committee in minimum limits as set by the permit review committee naming the city as an insured; or 
(3)  Execution of a hold harmless agreement, indemnifying the city for any personal injury or property damage arising from such special event. 
(b)  The permit review committee shall consider the recommendation of the city risk manager as to the likelihood of harm to participants and spectators as well as the financial hardship to the applicant when deciding if insurance is required. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-110. - Conditions for granting permit. 
(a)  As a condition to granting a permit, the permit review committee may impose reasonable terms and regulations concerning the time and place of such event, the area and manner of conducting such event; the maximum number of persons participating therein; the regulation of traffic, if required, including the number and type of vehicles, the number and type of signs and barricades to be provided by applicant, if any, together with a plan of the disposition attached to the application; permissible decibel levels; and such other requirements as it may find reasonable and necessary for the protection of persons and property. 
(b)  The permit review committee may require the applicant to compensate the city for incidental costs such as utility charges, increased fire, and/or police protection and/or additional lifeguard services. The permittee, as a condition to granting the permit, agrees to bear such costs. 
(c)  As an additional condition to granting such permit, the applicant shall be required to ensure that participants and spectators of the special event abide by the rules and regulations of this Code and all other applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(d)  The applicant may request a waiver of any condition set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-111. - Grounds for denial of permit. 
(a)  The permit review committee shall not issue any permit if it finds any of the following: 
(1)  The application is not on the form provided or does not contain the required information; 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit; 
(3)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such special event does not comply with or fails to meet all of the health, zoning, fire and safety requirements or standards of all of the ordinances of the city, the county or the state applicable thereto; 
(4)  The activity or location of the activity is such as to not interfere with or unreasonably obstruct the free flow of vehicular traffic or other means of travel on any public street, or with pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks; 
(5)  Proof of insurance, as may be required by this article as a prerequisite to the holding of a special event, has not been filed with the city; 
(6)  The conduct of the special event will be contrary to law; 
(7)  The conduct of the special event will unreasonably interfere with the preservation of the public peace, health, safety or welfare of the public; 
(8)  The applicant has had a similar special event permit denied for good cause within one year prior to the application and can show no material change in circumstances since such denial; 
(9)  The applicant refuses to agree to, abide by or comply with all conditions and regulations attendant upon such permit; and 
(10)  Such event will interfere or conflict with another event for which a permit has already been issued or will interfere or conflict with another event for which no permit is required by this Code. 
(b)  The permit review committee shall notify the applicant in writing specifically stating all reasons for denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-112. - Contents of permit. 
A special event permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the person or organization to whom issued; 
(2)  The address and telephone number of the person or organization named on the permit; 
(3)  The type of activity for which the permit has been issued; 
(4)  The date, hour and location for the event; 
(5)  Expiration date; and 
(6)  Any conditions imposed on the holding of such special event. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-113. - Late applications. 
The permit review committee, where cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten days before the date the special event is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-114. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the application for a special event permit, the police department shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  Special events permit review committee; 
(3)  The city clerk; 
(4)  The fire chief; 
(5)  The public works director; 
(6)  The sheriff of the county; and 
(7)  The county public safety director. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-115. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit for an event issued hereunder shall be summarily suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designee at any time: 
(1)  When he or she has reasonable cause to believe that any of the grounds exist for which the original application for permit would have been denied; or 
(2)  When he or she has reason to believe that the health, safety and welfare of persons or property would be endangered because of inclement weather, real or threatened disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency. 
(b)  Notice of such suspension or revocation shall be made in writing to applicant or permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-116. - Exception for public entities. 
No permit shall be required under this article for any event sponsored or cosponsored by the city or any department thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-117. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this article or condition of the permit shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code; and each person shall be guilty of a separate offence for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 32-118—32.130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL 

Sec. 32-131. - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
An appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of a permit requested pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be taken by the applicant, person or permittee to the appeals committee established in section 32-132 hereof within three days after service of notice of notice of such action by the applicable permit review committee. Such appeal shall be in writing, setting forth fully the grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall be filed with the city clerk who shall forward copies to the appeals committee and the involved permit review committee. The permit review committee shall submit to the appeals committee a report of the case appealed prior to the hearing on said appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-132. - Appeals committee establishment; action on appeal. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the filing of an appeal with the city clerk, the appeals committee, consisting of the city manager and city attorney, shall hear appeals on all or part of an application for a permit, or any permit previously granted, either upon request of the applicant or a permit review committee (established in articles IV or V hereof). Such appeal shall be a condition precedent to judicial review. 
(b) Written notice of the time and place the appeals committee will consider the appeal shall be mailed by the city clerk to the applicant, person or permittee who filed the appeal and the applicable permit review committee at least five days before the date set for hearing unless the applicant, person or permittee shall waive notice in writing. Within five days after the hearing, the appeals committee shall issue its decision. 
(c) In any appeal, the appeals committee shall consider the application, the report submitted by the applicable permit review committee and other pertinent information presented, and may grant or deny the permit subject to the conditions, terms and regulations set forth in this chapter. The decision of the permit appeals committee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 32-133. - Review of permit review committee. 
(a)  The appeals committee may, on its own motion made within 20 days after the decision of a permit review committee, review the issuance, denial, suspension or revocation of any permit or review any condition, term or regulation attached thereto. 
(b)  If, after review, the appeals committee determines that the matter should be considered on appeal before such body, it shall order the city clerk to notify the applicant, person, permittee, applicable permit review committee and any other affected parties of the time and place of such consideration, as hereinabove provided. After such consideration, the appeals committee may grant or deny the permit subject to the conditions, terms and regulations set forth in this chapter. Such decision of the permit appeals committee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-762, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 32-134—32-169. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS 

Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means the person seeking a license. 
Chief means the chief of police of the city or his designee. 
Goods means any sort of personal property, wares or merchandise that can be sold including, but not limited to, brushes, vacuums, magazines, newspapers, luggage, housewares, electronics, computers, furniture, food, agricultural products, flowers, tools, clothing, decorative accessories, rugs, paintings, sculpture, dishes and so forth. 
License means a permit to peddle. 
Official photo identification means a driver's license or identification card issued by the state, another state, the United States military or a United States passport. 
Peddler means any person who engages in peddling. 
Peddling or to peddle means traveling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and exhibiting, offering to sell or selling goods or services, to households, businesses or passers-by. The term "peddling" or "to peddle" also means traveling from place to place or door to door taking orders for the sale of goods or services for delivery at another time or place. The solicitation of orders combined with a separate transaction to make delivery to the purchaser as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed peddling. Visits by sales representatives pursuant to previously arranged appointments with a specific business or person or as a part of an on-going business relationship shall not be deemed peddling. 
Services means the provision of any sort of professional or trade service to another including, for example, general maintenance, construction, painting, lawn service, house cleaning, mending, sharpening, motor repair, appliance repair and so forth. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 102, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 34-20. - Purpose. 
Peddling by unlicensed peddlers exposes the citizens of the city to fraud and harms legitimate businesses. The city council deems it to be in the best interests of the citizens of the city that a peddler ordinance be enacted in accordance with law. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating peddling, itinerant traders, traveling salesmen and other door-to-door salesmen generally known as peddlers. Such persons typically market magazines, appliances, housewares and other goods and services by going door to door in neighborhoods and business districts. The citizens of the city are sometimes subject to unregulated peddling by questionable organizations or individuals with illegitimate products or no intent to deliver. It is the purpose of this article to regulate peddling in the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare. To achieve this end, this article requires peddlers seek licenses, have background checks and peddle under certain limitations. However, it is not the intent of this article to require legitimate sales representatives, visiting businesses or persons they have already made appointments with or already have a legitimate business relationship with, to get additional licensing. Neither is it the intent of this article to infringe free speech rights or require licensing for persons going door to door for political campaigns, religious proselytizing or other free speech reasons. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 101, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 34-21. - Restrictions. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling in the city without first obtaining a license. Licenses shall be for a period of ten days and may be renewed. Each employee of a business or corporation engaging in peddling shall have a separate license. 
(b)  State law requirement. In addition to this article, peddlers as defined by state law must obtain a license from the probate court of the county under the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. The requirements of that statute are separate from this article and obtaining only that license shall not satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 103, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 34-22. - License requirements. 
(a)  License application. All requests for a license must be provided to the chief. The chief shall issue a decision within five business days of the application being filed. 
(b)  Individual licenses required. Each individual person seeking to peddle must obtain a license. If the applicant is working for another individual or corporation or other business entity, that information must be disclosed on the application and the license, if granted. 
(c)  Required information. All applications for licenses must include, at a minimum, the following information, and shall be signed by the applicant: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant including a local address where the applicant will be staying while peddling. If the applicant is working for an entity other than himself, such as a corporation or another individual, he shall provide the name of the employer, provide the headquarters address and address of the Oakwood office or the address of the closest branch office if there is no Oakwood office; 
(2)  Applicant's height, weight, age, sex, race and social security number for background check purposes; 
(3)  Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of the applicant; 
(4)  Proposed peddling activity including identification of the type of business and the goods or services to be sold; 
(5)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle together with the license plate number and state of origin; 
(6)  The desired duration of the license (maximum ten days); 
(7)  The application shall contain a statement that the submission of the application shall be considered to be consent that a background check may be run by the chief at his discretion on the applicant and a statement that all information contained therein is true and correct; and 
(8)  Any additional information the chief may find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether the proposed event will endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  Fingerprints. The fingerprints of the applicant shall be taken by the police department for identification and background check purposes. 
(e)  License and identification carried. The signed license is to be kept on-site in the possession of a peddler at all times that peddling is underway. Licenses shall be displayed at the request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. Official photo identification shall also be kept on the person of a peddler at all times he is peddling and shall be presented upon request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. It shall be a violation of this article to fail or refuse to display a license or official photo identification when requested. 
(f)  Duration; renewal. A peddler license shall be valid for the period specified thereon up to a maximum of ten days. A peddler license may be renewed once annually upon submission of an application accompanied by the appropriate fee. Upon application for renewal, the chief shall check to ensure no complaints or criminal charges have been made against the peddler and shall apply the same criteria as applies to the grant of a license to renew the license. 
(g)  Fees. An initial application shall be accompanied by an application fee as provided in the fee schedule maintained by the clerk. The chief shall have the authority to waive or reduce the fees on a case-by-case basis for charitable organizations, schools and churches. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 104, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 34-23. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Investigation. The chief shall review the application for completeness and compliance with the terms of this article. The chief shall determine whether there are any records of complaints against the applicant in the records of the police department or the GCIC/NCIC crime database system. The chief may, at his discretion, conduct a background check of the applicant. The chief may, at his discretion, make any other inquiries he deems necessary for the investigation of the applicant. 
(b)  Decision. The chief may grant or deny a license. The chief shall issue a license as provided in this article from a consideration of the application and from such information as may otherwise be obtained unless he finds that any or all of the following apply: 
(1)  The applicant or the employer of the applicant has any criminal complaints pending against them or has a criminal record involving crimes of theft, fraud or other moral turpitude; 
(2)  The background check has revealed the applicant is not of good character or the proposed good or service is not legitimate or legal; 
(3)  The grant of the license is contrary to the public's health, safety or general welfare; or 
(4)  The application was not complete or the application or license requested is not fully in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
The chief shall indicate on the application review form all reasons for rejection of the application. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 105, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 34-24. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of a license shall have the right to appeal the denial or restriction to the municipal court of the city. A written appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  Procedure. The chief shall appear and present his case and evidence as to why the application was denied. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present its case and evidence in support of the application. The hearing shall be conducted as a magistrate court proceeding. 
(c)  Standard of review. The municipal court judge, keeping in mind the purpose of this article, the substantive provisions and giving deference to the judgment of the chief, shall make a determination as to whether the denial or restriction was lawful and in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare or whether the license should be issued or modified. If the latter, the court shall enter an order providing guidance as to the location, time, persons and other criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 106, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 34-25. - Peddling regulations; prohibited locations and times. 
(a)  Prohibited times. 
(1)  With the exception of stationary roadside stands for the exclusive sale of agricultural products, no peddling shall be allowed during the following times: 
a.  Before 9:30 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday; 
b.  Between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. Monday through Friday; 
c.  Before 10:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on Saturday or Sunday; and 
d.  At any time after sunset or before sunrise. 
(2)  Stationary roadside stands for the exclusive sale of agricultural products as described in subsection (e) of this section shall be allowed to operate anytime from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(b)  Prohibited locations. No peddling shall be allowed at the following locations: 
(1)  On any street or highway right-of-way; 
(2)  On any bridges and sidewalks; 
(3)  On any public property or governmentally owned property; and 
(4)  On any private property without the written permission of the property owner. 
(c)  Solicitation. Solicitation shall not be allowed under a peddler's license. A separate solicitation license is required. 
(d)  Peddlers under 18 years of age. Applications for peddlers under the age of 18 years must be signed by an adult and the adult must provide their address and relationship to the applicant. 
(e)  Time exemptions. Stationary roadside stands for the exclusive sale of agricultural products, and the persons operating such stands, shall be required to obtain a license hereunder. However, such stands are exempt from the maximum ten-day limitation of section 34-22(f) and shall be allowed a license that shall be valid for a period specified thereon, up to a maximum of 30 days, with one renewal period of up to 30 additional days annually upon the payment of the renewal fee as prescribed herein. 
(f)  Health inspection certificates. Any application for a peddler license to engage in the sale of food or beverages shall require proof of approval and issuance of an applicable certificate of health inspection (or health permit), in addition to the license required by this article. The permittee shall comply with all the county health department regulations. Notice of noncompliance shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 107, 5-9-2005; Amd. No. 445, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 34-26. - Violations; enforcement. 
(a)  Any violation of this article shall immediately revoke the license. The chief shall also have the discretion to revoke the license upon charge of violation being made or upon awareness of illegal or unauthorized activity if revocation is required in the best interests of public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Any person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article may not be issued a license for a two-year period from the date of the violation. Upon second offense, the person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article shall be banned from further peddling in the city. 
(c)  The city attorney shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief and other relief in superior court of the county if necessary to effectuate the intent of this article. The city shall be entitled to seek civil fines in the amounts specified above and shall be entitled to its attorney's fees for any successful action. 
(Ord. No. 445, § 108, 5-9-2005) 
Chapter 36 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate signs, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51. 

Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned sign. A sign shall be considered abandoned when the sign owner is no longer in operation or does not have a current business license in effect. 
Administrator. The administrator of this article shall be the city manager or his designee. 
Aggregate sign area means the area of all signs on a parcel. 
Animated sign means a sign or part of a sign that uses movement or change of natural light, artificial light, color effects, or physical position by any means whatsoever to depict action or create a special effect or scene or give the impression of movement. The term "animated sign" does not include signs which indicate time, temperature or date or signs which rotate less than five times per hour. 
Area of a sign or sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members. 
Awning/canopy sign means a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Banner means a temporary flag, bunting, pennant, streamer or other flexible sign characteristically hung on a building or a pole or otherwise suspended down or along the face of a building or across any public street of the city. The banner may or may not include copy or other graphic symbols but is intended to display a message of temporary significance or garner the attention of the passing public. The term "banner" does not include flags of the United States of America or any of its several states' flags which are specifically excluded hereby from regulation by this article so long as said flags are of standard size and height. 
Billboard sign means a stanchion sign with a sign area between 100 square feet and 150 square feet, the maximum square footage for signage within the city. 
Changeable copy sign. 
(1)  Automatic changeable copy sign (ACCS) means a sign on which the copy changes automatically or by remote control. The term "ACCS" includes mechanically operated devices which change the copy through rotation of any type of panel and also signs which are illuminated partially or entirely by a matrix of electric lamps that are electronically changeable. An ACCS must contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
(2)  Manual changeable copy sign means a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards with changeable letters. 
(3)  Smartboards means a sign, display or device that changes the message or copy on the sign by means of a liquid crystal display. Smartboards may not incorporate animation or scrolling in the copy or change of copy. Notwithstanding other transition regulations, each message displayed on a smartboard when changed must be accomplished within an interval no greater than one second. Smartboard signs must contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
Changing sign/electronic message board means a sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign and that can also change the visible display of words, letters, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods when such changes are actuated by a control mechanism rather than manually, whether or not the message appears to move across the sign face. A sign that changes no more frequently than once every 24 hours shall not be considered a changing sign. A changing sign shall include electronic message boards and changeable copy signs. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Flashing sign means a sign of which the illumination is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use or which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. Changeable copy signs permitted in accordance with section 36-34 shall be excepted from this definition. 
Freestanding sign means a sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support such as monument or stanchion signs. 
Illuminated sign means a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Interstate commercial sign means a stanchion sign with a sign area of no greater than 125 square feet within the interstate office/commercial sector, which advertises on-premises activities, goods or services and is visible from the interstate corridor. 
Interstate office/commercial sector means that sector of the city consisting of those parcels located within 660 feet of the outer edge of the nearest paved lane of travel of Lanier Parkway (I-985). 
Major arteries means the major arteries in the city specifically meaning the following: 
(1)  Atlanta Highway (Georgia Highway 13); 
(2)  Frontage Road; 
(3)  Lanier Parkway (I-985); 
(4)  McEver Road; 
(5)  Mundy Mill Road; 
(6)  Old Oakwood Road; and 
(7)  Thurman Tanner Parkway. 
Major street, between two streets adjacent to the parcel, means the street with the highest daily traffic count. 
Monument sign means a freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this article. 
Parcel means a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Roof sign means a sign attached to, painted on or supported by the roof of a building that extends above the immediately adjacent eave line of the building. 
Sign means a device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 
Stanchion sign means a freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure, which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
Wall means all of the vertical face of a building including any parapet but excluding the roof. 
Wall sign means a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Window sign means a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(b)  As used in this article, unless the context indicates otherwise: 
(1)  The term "lot" includes the terms "piece," "plot" and "parcel." 
(2)  The term "structure" includes the terms "building" and "sign." 
(3)  The terms "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 102, 2-14-2005; Amd. No. 426, § 1, 12-10-2007; Ord. of 3-9-2003(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 36-20. - Findings. 
(a)  The city's population and the surrounding areas of the county have grown substantially in the past decade. The result is that the major thoroughfares of the city have experienced a drastic and dramatic increase in the volume of traffic along with significant increases in automobile collisions. The regulations in this article are designed to promote the public health and safety by controlling number, placement, size and height of signs to prevent excessive and undue distraction to motorists and pedestrians and to prevent traffic hazards. 
(b)  The city is an attractive and pleasant community with a small town atmosphere where various and diverse businesses have located. The city recognizes the need of these businesses to advertise products and services. The city also finds that it is in the best interests of all property owners, residents and businesses to avoid an environment that encourages visual blight and seek to encourage an attractive suburban environment. As a result, the city must balance the needs of business against the city's obligation to restrict clutter, maintain an aesthetically pleasing environment, protect property values and enhance public safety. 
(c)  The city further finds that uniform regulation of signage providing directional, commercial and noncommercial information to the motoring public, to promote public safety, is essential. Regulation of the location, size, placement and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, to take advantage of the beauty of the community's natural environment and to protect property values therein. Such regulation is also necessary to facilitate and aid in the identification and location of businesses in the city in the event of police, fire or other emergencies and to avoid confusion and delay in response to such emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 101(A), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-21. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  Accordingly, it is the intention of the city to establish regulations governing the display of signs that will: 
(1)  Promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the city by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs. 
(3)  Restrict signs and lights that increase clutter or which increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing vision. 
(4)  Promote signs that are compatible with their surroundings. 
(b)  It is also the purpose of this article to ensure proper maintenance, for safety and structural soundness, as well as the appearance and attractiveness of signs. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 101(B), 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-22. - Permits. 
(a)  Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a sign permit. 
(b)  Existing signs that conform to the provisions of this article that would be required to obtain a permit under the regulations of this article must register with the city to establish that conformity. Failure to register shall not render the sign illegal; however, failure to register the sign shall shift the burden of proof of conformity with the sign regulations in effect at the time of the erection and initial permitting of the sign to the sign owner/property owner. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 36-23. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 103, 2-14-2005; Amd No. 426, § 1, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 36-23. - Application information. 
The sign owner or the owner's agent shall file applications for sign permits required by this article with the city clerk. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. 
(2)  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel with documentation (and calculations) of applicable wall and floor square footage necessary for the aggregate area computation as well as pro rata signage calculations (for multitenant buildings, floor build-out plans). 
(3)  The total square footage of all wall signage. 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(5)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
(6)  Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(7)  Structural details or other information necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of these regulations and all applicable codes including, but not limited to: 
a.  The type of sign to be erected. 
b.  The area of the sign. 
c.  The height of the sign. 
d.  The shape of the sign. 
e.  An explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected. 
f.  The distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. 
g.  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed. 
h.  The construction cost. 
(8)  One scaled site plan with elevation drawings and showing drives, structures and any other limiting site features including notation of zoning, property dimensions, vicinity map, site address and existing rights-of-way. 
(9)  One scaled drawing of plans, specifications (including color of material samples described and keyed to the proposed sign) and method of construction and attachment to the building or ground for the sign. 
(10)  A copy of all required building permits. 
(11)  Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this article and all other ordinances of the city and applicable construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 104, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-24. - Time for consideration of application. 
The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and a sign permit fee. The clerk shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the 30-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 105, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-25. - Display of inspection permit. 
Every sign for which a permit is required under this article shall be plainly marked with a permit decal issued for said sign by the administrator affixed on the framework of the sign in such a manner that the information contained therein shall be readily accessible and durable. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 106, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-26. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, incomplete applications and applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the clerk shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked except for due cause as hereinafter defined and the applicant is granted a public hearing before city manager or his designee as the hearing officer designated by the city. The applicant will be given ten days' written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing along with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application or the revocation of a permit. The term "due cause" means the violation of the provisions of this article, state or federal law or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal. The applicant whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the designated hearing officer to the city council provided that they file written notice of an appeal stating the reasons for the appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the initial decision on the appeal. Otherwise, the initial decision of the designated hearing office is final. Such appeal shall be considered by the city council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal provided that notice of appeal is received a minimum of two full business days before the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 107, 2-14-2005; Amd. No. 426, §§ 2, 3, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 36-27. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If, later, an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 108, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-28. - Fees. 
The permit fee for signs shall be as provided in the fee schedule maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 109, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-29. - Annual inspection fees. 
The building inspector shall inspect annually, or at such other times as are necessary, each sign or other advertising structure, regulated by permit issued pursuant to this article, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure and whether it is in need of removal or repair. More than one annual inspection shall be conducted only when the sign has failed the previous inspection and followup inspections are necessary to ascertain whether the sign is secure or when the sign has been damaged to such an extent as to require repair/removal. To meet the expense of such inspection, the permittee therefore shall pay to the zoning administrator a sum as provided in the fee schedule maintained by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 110, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-30. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Roof signs. 
(2)  Animated signs, changing signs, electronic message board signs and changeable copy signs except as permitted by section 36-34. 
(3)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs. 
(4)  Window signs that exceed 30 percent of the window area. 
(5)  Signs that contain words, pictures or statements that are obscene as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(6)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hides from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign. 
(7)  Signs that emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing. 
(8)  Signs that interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(9)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curb, utility pole or other structure except as set forth herein. 
(10)  Signs which advertise any activity, service or product prohibited by the laws or regulations of the United States or the state or by the ordinances or resolutions of the city. 
(11)  Signs attached to or painted on a vehicle parked adjacent to and visible from a street for the sole purpose of advertising onto said street. 
(12)  Air- and gas-filled devices. 
(13)  Flashing, blinking or varying intensity signs except as permitted by section 36-34. 
(14)  Portable or trailer display signs. 
(15)  All off-site premises signs unless specifically authorized by this article. 
(16)  Spotlighted or floodlighted signs, with the exception of monument signs. 
(17)  Foreign language sign regulations. 
a.  A foreign language sign is any sign whose English letters and words occupy less than 75 percent of the total area of the sign occupied by letter and words or language characters. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit signs in foreign languages or signs using foreign symbols or letters so long as the English equivalent is placed on the sign in letters of at least the same size. 
b.  A foreign language sign is any sign containing other than English letters and words that has not submitted a notarized translation to the city planning department by a qualified translator (as determined by the city planning department upon submission, review and approval of qualifications). The qualified translator must be someone other than the owner of the business. A translator approved to perform translation services before any court in the state shall be a qualified translator and need only submit proof of such court approval. 
(18)  Banner signs. 
a.  Banner signs except as registered in subsection (a)(18)b of this section. 
b.  Banner signs are permitted under the following conditions: 
1.  The business location has permitted permanent signage which is in compliance with this code section. 
2.  Banner signs are registered (no fee) with the city by completion of the required online registration forms at the city's web site (www.cityofoakwood.net) or with the city clerk at city hall. Written confirmation shall be given of registration. 
3.  Banner signs shall not be displayed more than 90 days in any one period of time. 
4.  Banner signs shall not exceed more than three banners and the total banner signage shall not exceed 50 percent of the maximum permitted signage for the business location (up to a maximum of 100 square feet total). 
5.  No banners are allowed in the common parking areas of shopping centers and multitenant commercial premises. 
6.  Banners which are not registered within ten days of notice from the city or which are not in compliance with all the provisions of the within code section shall be removed within ten days of notice of noncompliance. Thereafter, the city shall remove said banners and hold for ten days during which time the banner owner may redeem said banner by payment of a fee of $25.00 plus the acutal cost of removal. At the end of ten days, said banners shall be destroyed. 
7.  Banners must be attached to a principal building. 
(b)  The ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted in order to facilitate and aid in the identification and location of businesses and other entities in the city upon police, fire and other emergencies and to avoid confusion and delay in response to such emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 111, 2-14-2005; Amd. No. 426, §§ 2, 3, 6, 12-10-2007; Ord. of 3-9-2009(2), § 3; Ord. No. 2011-05-C0-671, § 1, 6-13-2011) 
Sec. 36-31. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts. 
Parcels located in residential zoning districts shall not have an aggregate sign area greater than eight square feet. Signs having a height of greater than five feet above the grade level of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located are not permitted. No sign shall have a sign area of greater than 2.5 feet. However, one single-faced sign, one double-faced sign or two single-faced signs, no larger than 24 square feet each and bearing identical copy may be permitted to identify the name of a single-family development at the major entrance. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 112, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-32. - Restrictions in multifamily/mobile home park/office sector (MMO). 
Parcels located in the MMO sector which consists of zoning districts R-4 and MHP shall not have an aggregate sign area greater than 24 square feet or a sign height exceeding five feet above the ground level of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 113, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-33. - Height requirements. 
The following height requirements shall be adhered to: 
(1)  No sign shall exceed 24 feet in height at the highest point on the sign. 
(2)  All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 114, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-34. - Size and location requirements for commercial zones (C-1 and C-2). 
(a)  Freestanding signs. No freestanding sign may be located within 30 feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. In no case shall the freestanding sign impair sight distance and/or traffic safety). 
(b)  Signs attached to property of person other than owner. No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner and as permitted under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Billboard signs. 
(1)  Billboard (general advertising) signs shall not exceed 150 square feet of sign area. Billboard sign areas shall not exceed 14 feet in height or 48 feet in length nor extend more than 60 feet above the level of the centerline of the adjacent Interstate 985 travel lane. Prior to issuance of a permit, a certified profile showing the height of the sign above the adjacent travel lane of Interstate 985 shall be submitted to the city. 
(2)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in the interstate office/commercial sector zoning area. 
(3)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways. 
(4)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard sign. 
(5)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet of residential zoned parcels. 
(6)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 500 foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery. 
(d)  Maximum aggregate sign area. Parcels may contain more than one sign provided that: 
(1)  Parcels shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area for the entire parcel in an amount equal to 200 square foot or ten percent of the total wall square footage of the major street-facing wall, whichever is greater, except those parcels which front on two or more major arteries shall have a maximum aggregate sign square footage equal to ten percent of the total wall square footage of two walls facing major arteries with the greatest square footage. 
(2)  These limits shall include the area of all wall signs, billboard signs and freestanding signs located on the parcel. 
(e)  Stanchion signs. 
(1)  Each parcel shall be allowed one stanchion sign per street frontage. 
(2)  Stanchion signs for single occupant buildings shall total a maximum of 100 square feet in sign area. 
(3)  Stanchion signs for multitenant parcels shall not exceed a sign area of 150 square feet with each tenant allowed a pro-rata share of the total sign square footage based upon a percentage calculated by dividing the tenant rental floor square footage by the total rental floor square footage of the multitenant building. 
(4)  Stanchion signs shall only be located on property in commercial zoning areas. 
(f)  Wall and awning signs. 
(1)  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. 
(2)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
(3)  Wall and awning signs shall not exceed a sign area of 150 square feet or eight percent of the wall face, whichever is more, on the major street-facing wall. 
(4)  The maximum wall or awning sign height shall be ten feet. 
(5)  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(6)  Each multitenant building tenant shall be allowed wall or awning signage based on the major street-facing wall with a total sign area not to exceed the individual tenant's pro rata share of the wall/awning sign area component of the maximum aggregate sign area. 
(g)  Monument signs. 
(1)  Monument signs are encouraged in lieu of permitted stanchion signs but shall total a maximum of 150 square feet of total area and shall not exceed ten feet in height, which shall include signage and structure. 
(2)  Multibuilding commercial developments shall be allowed one monument sign not exceeding 150 square feet for identification purposes at the major entrance to said development with each occupant being allowed name signage area not to exceed six square feet. Each individual building shall be allowed one additional monument sign not to exceed 35 square feet. No other stanchion signs shall be allowed in such developments except on outparcels that front major arteries. 
(3)  Multibuilding industrial/office/professional developments shall be allowed one monument sign not exceeding 150 square feet for identification purposes at the major entrance to said development with each occupant being allowed name signage area not to exceed six square feet. Each individual building shall be allowed one additional monument sign not to exceed 35 square feet. 
(4)  Single-building industrial/office/professional developments shall be allowed one monument sign not to exceed 35 square feet. 
(5)  Only one face of a double-faced sign with parallel, opposing faces bearing identical copy shall be used in computing the sign area. 
(h)  Changing signs, electronic message board signs and changeable copy signs. 
(1)  Changing signs, electronic message board signs and changeable copy signs shall be permitted solely in city zoning classifications C-1 and C-2 upon strict compliance with all of the following regulations as well as all other state and federal laws and city ordinances applicable hereto. 
(2)  No sign permitted under section 36-34(h) shall be erected within 100 feet of an adjoining residential district. No such sign face shall be visible from the interior of any property used for residential purposes. 
(3)  No visible portion of such a sign face shall be located within 100 feet of any street having a posted speed limit less than 35 miles per hour. 
(4)  Electronic message boards shall not exceed 12 square feet, shall use red or amber light only and may be incorporated into a monument sign. Any messages of said board shall consist of text which may change but shall not flash or scroll across the screen. Each message displayed shall remain fixed for at least ten seconds. When a message is changed, it must be accomplished within an interval no greater than one second. 
(5)  No changing sign, electronic message board sign or changeable copy sign shall be located adjacent to an interstate highway or be visible from any portion of said highway unless the sign is otherwise permitted by state law and complies with the following: 
a.  Any sign which is directly or indirectly illuminated, including changing signs, electronic message boards and changeable copy signs shall be reviewed by the city manager or his designee prior to the issuance of a permit for a determination of full compliance with this subsection (h)(5). 
b.  No such sign shall be erected and there shall be no lighting of such signs in such a manner and location so as to obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic signal, notice or control device or with lights on any emergency vehicle or so as to create hazards or distractions to drivers because of direct or reflected natural or artificial light, flashing, intermittent or flickering lighting or real or apparent movement. No flashing or animated sign shall extend over any public right-of-way. 
c.  No changing sign, electronic message board or changeable copy sign shall extend over any public right-of-way. 
d.  If any sign is found to constitute a traffic hazard, the owner of the sign may be required to reduce the intensity of the condition or effect which caused the hazard to a level acceptable to the city. The city may through the issuance of a stop work order cause an immediate cessation of such conditions or effects where an imminent danger to the traveling public is found. 
e.  Each message displayed on any changing sign display shall remain static for at least ten seconds following the completion of its transition from the previous message. As used in this subsection, the term "static" means a display that is fixed in one position with no portion of the display changing in color or light intensity. 
f.  When a message is changed mechanically, the transition between a complete static display of the previous message and a complete static display of the next message shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. The transition period shall be measured as that period between any change in any part of the display of the previous message and the time that the display of the next message is fully static. 
g.  When a message is changed electronically, the transition between a complete static display of the previous message and a complete static display of the next message shall be accomplished in two seconds or less. The transition period shall be measured as that period between the time that the previous message is static and fully illuminated and the time that the display of the next message is static and fully illuminated. 
h.  No changing sign may include animated, flashing, full-motion, video or other intermittent elements. The transition period between two fully illuminated static message displays in an electronically changed sign shall not be considered an intermittent element so long as the purpose of the changing light intensity is to fade or dissolve into the next message. 
i.  No changing sign may have any type of changing effect on the border of the sign that is not fully integrated with a static message display and which does not transition to the next static message display in the same manner as the rest of the display. 
j.  No display or other effect from any electronically changed sign shall cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. Such display or effect shall be considered an acute traffic hazard and shall be subject to the regulations contained in this section. 
k.  All signs shall appropriately adjust display brightness as ambient light level changes so that brightness of the display does not cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. The failure of an electronically changed sign to appropriately adjust display brightness as ambient light levels change shall be considered an acute traffic hazard and shall be subject to the regulations contained in this section. 
l.  No malfunction of a changing sign shall cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. Any such condition resulting from a malfunction shall be considered an acute traffic hazard and shall be subject to the regulations contained in this section. 
m.  No general advertising sign employing changing sign technology which is permitted by state law to be located on or adjacent to the interstate highway system or a general advertising sign with a changing message sign face that is visible from an interstate highway shall be located within 5,000 feet of another general advertising sign employing changing sign technology that is permitted adjacent to an interstate highway and on the same side of said interstate highway or any other general advertising sign with a changing message sign face that is visible to traffic traveling in the same direction on said interstate highway. The distances shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest edges of the signs. 
n.  No general advertising sign employing changing sign technology which is adjacent to an arterial or connector street or with a message face that is visible from an arterial or connector street shall be located within 2,500 feet of another general advertising sign employing changing sign technology that is visible to traffic traveling in the same direction on said arterial or connector street, as measured in a straight line from the nearest edges of the signs. 
o.  A freestanding business identification sign which is not permitted to be a changing sign and employing any changing sign technology shall contain only static messages and shall not be allowed to change more than once every 24 hours. Any change of copy shall require a permit. 
p.  Shopping center signs may employ changing sign technology in those zones where changing signs are allowed. The portion of the sign face which is capable of employing changing sign technology shall be limited to 50 percent or less of the total area of the sign face. 
q.  Permit applications for electronically changed signs must also include a certification from the owner or operator of the sign stating that the sign shall at all times be operated in accordance with this part and that the owner or operator shall provide proof of such conformance upon request of the city. Whether the sign is programmed from the site or from a remote location, the computer interface or other method that programs or controls the changing of the sign copy shall be available for inspection upon the request of the city so that the city can determine the messages being displayed. If the information from the computer interface or other control method is not immediately available, the sign shall cease operation until such access can be provided. 
r.  Any general advertising sign which applies to employ changing sign technology shall be required to include as a part of its application a statement which shall indicate that the applicant is willing to allow law enforcement agencies to utilize its display capabilities to disseminate emergency messages on a temporary basis. 
s.  Due to the limitation on distances between certain electronic changing signs, an approved application to employ changing sign technology must be acted upon within the time frames stated on the sign permit. After expiration of the permit, a new application for the location shall be required and the expired permit shall be not considered to bar location of other changing signs due to distance requirements under this part. The city may issue one extension of 60 days for good cause as shown in writing by the permit holder prior to the expiration of the original permit. 
t.  A review fee as provided in the fee schedule maintained by the clerk shall be due and payable at the time of the submission of the application to use changing sign technology. Said fee shall be in additional to all other fees for the specific type of signage. 
(i)  Interstate commercial signs. 
(1)  Interstate commercial signs (excluding off premises signs/billboards) shall not exceed 125 square nor extend more than 60 feet above the centerline of the adjacent Interstate 985 travel lane. Prior to issuance of a permit, a certified profile showing the height of the sign above the adjacent travel lane of Interstate 985 shall be submitted to the city. 
(2)  Interstate commercial signs shall only be located on parcels in the interstate office/commercial sector zoning area visible from Interstate 985. 
(3)  No more than one interstate commercial sign shall be located on any parcel. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 115, 2-14-2005; Amd. No. 426, §§ 4, 5, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 36-35. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs are signs which met all legal requirements when erected and were permitted. Nonconforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; 
(2)  The sign has been damaged to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign; 
(3)  The sign is removed or moved for any reason including, but not limited to, right-of-way acquisition, remodeling or reconstruction. 
(b)  No structural repairs or change in shape, size or design shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this article. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 116, 2-14-2005; Amd. No. 426, § 4, 6-12-2006) 
Sec. 36-36. - Illegal signs. 
If the administrator shall find that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, he shall give written notice to the permittee thereof. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten days after such notice, such sign or advertising structure may be removed or altered to comply by the administrator at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The administrator shall refuse to issue a permit to any permittee or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed. The fee for the owner or permittee to reclaim the sign will be as provided in the fee schedule maintained by the clerk. With regard to signs for which a permit is required, any sign shall be considered an illegal sign if the information furnished to obtain the permit upon the application was false or incorrect. The administrator may cause any sign or other advertising structure that is in immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 117, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-37. - Variances. 
Where a literal application of the terms of this article, due to special circumstances, would result in an unusual hardship in an individual case, a variance may be granted where all the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Exceptional conditions pertaining to the property where the sign is to be located as a result of its size, shape, or topography, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area. 
(2)  The applicant would be deprived of rights that are commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(3)  Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges that are denied to others similarly situated. 
(4)  The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant. 
(5)  The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(6)  Granting of the variance would not violate more than one standard of this article. 
(7)  Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 118, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-38. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his duties shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. Such signs include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Public notices; 
(2)  Safety signs; 
(3)  Danger signs; 
(4)  Traffic and street signs; 
(5)  Directional signs; 
(6)  City signs; 
(7)  Memorial plaques; and 
(8)  Historical markers. 
(b)  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 36-22 and shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in section 36-34(g): 
(1)  Non-illuminated signs, having a sign area of less than 2.5 feet, provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. Such signs in commercial and industrial zoned parcels shall be limited to four times a year for a period of ten days at a time. Each period of display shall be separated by at least 30 days. 
(2)  Window signs installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed 30 percent of the available window space. 
(3)  Directional or information or public service signs not exceeding 2.5 square feet in sign area erected for the convenience of the public and only used to identify: 
a.  Entrances; 
b.  Exits; 
c.  Drive-throughs; 
d.  Bay door entrances; 
e.  Parking areas; 
f.  No parking areas; 
g.  Restrooms; 
h.  Public telephones; 
i.  Walkways; 
j.  Cart paths and similar such features; 
k.  No trespassing, no fishing and no hunting signs; and 
l.  Other such property regulation signs. 
(4)  Signs that appear on vending machines or similar devices so long as the sign refers to the product contained within or on the device. 
(5)  Professional names plates not exceeding 2.5 square feet in sign area. 
(6)  Residential nameplates not exceeding 2.5 square feet in sign area and bearing only property numbers, post office box numbers, and names of occupants of premises or owners of the property. 
(7)  Construction signs not exceeding five feet in height and 32 square feet in aggregate sign area with a limit of one sign per site. The sign may only be erected after a building permit has been issued for the site. The sign may only be used to identify the name of the project, architects, engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction but not including any advertisement of any project. In single-family residential zones (R-1 and R-2 zoning districts) the maximum size is six square feet and must be removed no later than seven days after issuance of an occupancy permit by the city (and in no case more than two years). 
(c)  Future use signs are permitted in all districts and shall be used to announce a future use of a now vacant parcel of land. These signs can be no more than five feet in height, no more than 32 square feet in sign area and shall be limited to one sign for each parcel of land. Future use signs may remain erected for a maximum of two years subject to review by the administrator and must be replaced immediately by a construction sign once a building permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 119, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-39. - Illumination. 
Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 120, 2-14-2005) 
Sec. 36-40. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give the permittee ten days to rectify the condition or remove the dilapidated sign before issuing a citation. 
(b)  The city may issue a citation for violation of this article by any sign erected, altered, converted or used in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $150.00 for each offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 121, 2-14-2005) 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1, adopted May 13, 2013, repealed Ch. 38, §§ 38-19—38-26, 38-55—38-67 in its entirety. Section 1(Exh. A) of said ordinance adopted a new Ch. 38 to read as herein set out. Formerly said chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 226, §§ 2—14, 9-12-1994; Ord. No. 402, §§ 201—501, 11-10-2003. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-19. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person charged with a violation of any section or provision of this article shall be given a written notice and instructions from the city manager as to the required remedy for such violation and shall be given 30 days to comply with the provisions of this article. Failure to comply with the requirements of such written notice and instructions of the city manager shall result in the termination of services by the city and shall, upon conviction in the municipal court be punished as provided heretofore. 
(b)  Reinstatement of city trash and garbage collection shall only be provided after the person has fully complied with all the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-20. - City responsible for sanitation services generally. 
(a)  All residential garbage, trash and refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed by the city except as expressly provided in this article. Commercial garbage, trash and refuse collection, conveyance, and disposal in the city shall be performed by private service providers. 
(b)  The city will collect refuse in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the city council and kept on file in the city manager. 
(c)  The following items, products or materials will not be collected and it shall be a violation of this article for any person to place such items, products or materials in any refuse can or container for collection: rubber tires, acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids and dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(d)  The city council may grant a contract to persons to collect, convey and sell residential recyclables and solid waste with the following requirements: 
(1)  Such person shall pay an annual permit fee as fixed from time to time by the city council to operate within the city. 
(2)  The city shall bill and collect a fee from residential customers. 
(3)  The fee shall cover the operating cost of such persons as specified in the contract and the cost of management. 
(4)  The operation cost as specified in the contract shall be paid to such persons on a monthly basis upon receipt of an invoice and record of recyclables collected. 
(5)  Such person shall provide the city manager or his designee with evidence of insurance coverage as to vehicle liability and public liability in an amount as established from time to time by the city council prior to securing a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-21. - Residential collection days designated. 
Residential garbage, trash, and refuse shall be collected from the various premises in the city by the proper departments of the city as follows: 
(1)  Collections from residential premises for garbage, trash and refuse will normally be made once a week in accordance with the schedule established by the City Council. 
(2)  In the event of inclement weather, collection will be on the next business day when weather permits. 
(3)  Residents with a temporary or permanent disability may apply for an exemption of the curbside requirement on forms to be provided by the city clerk. 
(4)  Special collections for trees or tree limbs shall be on the last Friday of each month. Limbs are to be no more than six inches in diameter and not less than three feet in length. Limbs in excess of the required size will not be collected. Limbs should be placed curbside in such a manner as to not obstruct passage. This placement shall be no more than two days prior to pickup. All limbs not collected shall be removed by the resident within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-22. - Household item collections. 
The following household items may be collected and deposed of by the city upon payment of a special pickup fee established by the City Council: 
(1)  Barbeque grills; 
(2)  Appliances; 
(3)  Electronics; 
(4)  Furniture; and 
(5)  Other like items. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-23. - Separation of refuse for pickup. 
(a)  Each classification of refuse must be kept separate and will be picked up separately. Recycling is mandatory and should be placed in a separate container from general refuse, garbage and trash. 
(b)  The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building materials, dirt, broken concrete, bricks, rock or debris resulting from repairs, remodeling or construction. Such materials must be disposed of by the contractor or owner of the property. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors or building contractors except on a special fee basis by agreement with the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-24. - Preparation and storage of residential garbage and refuse for collection. 
(a)  With the exception of multifamily dwellings, residential garbage and refuse shall be placed in securely tied plastic bags and stored in roll-cart containers owned and provided by the city. Any excess refuse shall be placed in securely tied plastic trash bags and placed on top of the containers. The containers shall be placed curbside no later than 8:00 a.m. on pickup day and shall be removed from the right of way no later than 8:00 a.m. the next day. 
(b)  Garbage and refuse placed in containers not provided by the city will not be collected and the customer will be notified of noncompliance with this article. 
(c)  Garbage and refuse services for multifamily dwellings shall be provided in accordance with a site-specific storage and collection plan approved by the city manager. The city will not collect garbage and refuse from multifamily dwellings that fail to comply with the city approved storage and collection plan. 
(d)  Residents are required to maintain roll cart containers in a sanitary condition, tightly covered at all times except for filling. The container shall be further maintained so as to prevent the overflow or scattering of trash, garbage or refuse. 
(e)  Grass trimmings, small shrubbery trimmings, pine needles, etc., are not accepted and should be composted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-25. - Provision of approved city-owned garbage and refuse containers. 
The city shall provide, or arrange the provision of, city-owned containers of sufficient size for households to deposit their garbage, trash and refuse. However, the following costs shall apply: 
(1)  Single-family residences. Property owners shall be required to execute an acknowledgement receipt of said approved city-owned container. The first container shall be provided at no cost. Additional cans shall be provided upon receipt of deposit. If said container(s) are lost, stolen, damaged or destroyed, the property owner shall be responsible for a replacement fee as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(2)  Townhouses, two-family residences (duplexes), multifamily dwellings, rental single-family residences. Managers/owners shall be required to execute an acknowledgement receipt of said approved city-owned container. The first container shall be provided at no cost. Additional cans shall be provided upon receipt of deposit. If said container(s) are lost, stolen, damaged or destroyed, the managers/owners shall be responsible for a replacement fee as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-26. - Depositing in street or public place. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, throw, deposit, scatter or otherwise cause to be placed or left upon any vacant or unoccupied lot or lots along any street or sidewalk or other public place or private property within the city without the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, any paper, wastes, rubbish, trimmings, limbs or garbage of any kind. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person utilizing any vehicle, moving or parked, to cause any paper, wastes, cartons, rubbish, feathers, gravel, earth, trimmings, limbs or garbage of any kind to be littered, thrown, deposited or scattered upon any street, sidewalk or public place or any private property, occupied or unoccupied. Such precautions as are necessary to contain transported materials including covering of open trucks, shall be utilized to prevent such littering and scattering. 
(c)  The city shall not be responsible for the disposal of dead animals. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-27. - Unauthorized use of solid waste containers and prohibiting scavenging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or otherwise leave trash in solid waste containers that are leased, owned or paid for private use except by permission of the owner. This prohibition includes dumpsters on government property. Only dumpsters marked "For Public Use" shall be used and it shall be unlawful to import household trash to these dumpsters. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove solid waste from solid waste containers or dumpsters. Trash in these containers is the property of the entity providing the service. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall on conviction thereof be punished as set forth in section 38-19. 
Secs. 38-28—38-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 38-55. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the city manager or his authorized representative. 
Aluminum cans means containers fabricated primarily of aluminum, usually beverage cans (soda, beer, etc.), including tin foil, pie pans, TV dinner trays, emptied of all contents both liquid and solid, and rinsed. 
Approved recycling container means the receptacle provided by the city or its authorized representative for placement of certain recyclable materials. 
Cardboard means wood pulp based material which is usually smooth on both sides with or without corrugated center (wavy middle layer), commonly used for boxes such as for storage, shoes, cereals, crackers, etc. Specifically excluded are wax coated cardboards. 
Corrugated cardboard means wood pulp based material which is usually smooth on both sides with a corrugated center (wavy middle layer), commonly used for boxes, that has been dismantled and flattened, and including clean, brown paper grocery bags. The term "corrugated cardboard" specifically excludes waxed-coating cardboard and single-layer boxes such as for shoes, cereals, crackers, etc. 
Glass means transparent or translucent jars, bottles and containers which are used for packaging and bottling food and beverages only, but only those that are green, blue, brown or clear in color, emptied of all contents, both liquid and solid and rinsed, and not including lids. Specifically excluded are plate and window glass, light bulbs, ceramic or heated, treated glass (i.e. Pyrex). Glass may contain printed paper labels and still be acceptable for recycling. Glass must be placed in separate containers and not comingled with other recyclables. 
Magazines means glossy ground wood containing paper, including magazines, catalogs and periodicals having stapled or glued bindings. 
Metal cans means food and beverage containers fabricated primarily of tin or steel, emptied of all contents both liquid and solid and rinsed, and not including lids. Cans may contain printed paper labels and still be acceptable for recycling. Metal paint cans are included if empty and paint residue is dried. Aerosol spray cans are also included if empty and without plastic caps. 
Newspaper means newsprint, including printed inserts that come with newsprint, but not including magazines and catalogs printed on "glossy" or "slick" paper. 
Newsprint means common, inexpensive machine finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp and used for newspapers. 
Nonrecyclable refuse means any solid waste not listed as recyclable materials as defined in this section. 
Plastic means beverage containers (soda, milk, etc.), including high density polyethylene (HDPE No. 2), both natural (cloudy white, such as bleach and laundry detergent bottles), and polyethylene terephthalate (PETE No. 1), such as green and clear one-liter and two-liter soda bottles, all materials being rinsed, without caps or lids, and flattened. Specifically excluded any plastics that contain hazardous materials (such as motor oil, transmission fluid and pesticides), rigid plastics (such as buckets, toys and plastic furniture) and styrofoam. 
Recyclable materials means aluminum cans, cardboard, glass, newspaper, magazines, metal cans and plastic, all as more specifically defined in this section. 
Source separation means the segregation of recyclable materials from solid waste at the point of generation for separate collection, sale or other disposition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013; Ord. No. 2018-CO-05-769, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 38-56. - Violations and penalties. 
Any failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be deemed a violation. The administrator is authorized to provide a written warning notice to first time offenders, at his discretion, depending upon the extent of the violation. Any person violating this article shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $50.00 for first offenses and $200.00 for subsequent violations, as determined by the court of proper jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-57. - Purpose. 
(a)  The ordinance from which this article is derived is enacted for the purpose of implementing state, county and city policies for encouraging waste stream reduction through recycling, as more fully described in the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, the Georgia Solid Waste Management Plan, and the Hall County-Municipal Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan. 
(b)  This article is intended to facilitate the disposal of solid waste generated within the city in the most environmentally acceptable manner possible and to facilitate and encourage the recovery of all recyclable materials which can be marketed or used for secondary purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-58. - Administrative authority. 
The administrator is hereby empowered by the governing body to administer and enforce the provisions of this article and to promulgate, publish, revise and amend administrative rules, regulations and orders necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-59. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all households within all single-family residences, townhouses, two-family residences (duplexes) and all multiple family dwellings within the city limits, whom on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, are receiving solid waste collection services, or whom hereafter receive solid waste collection services provided or arranged by the city. This article shall not apply to institutions and commercial or industrial establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-60. - Exemptions. 
Any household unable to comply with this article for good cause shown, for example, handicapped residents, may apply to the administrator for an exemption from this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-61. - Residential recyclable materials collection days designated. 
Collections from residential premises for recyclable materials will normally be made once a week in accordance with the schedule established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-62. - Source separation of recyclable materials required. 
All households to which this article applies shall be required to separate all recyclable materials, as defined by this article, from nonrecyclable refuse, and place said recyclable materials in an approved recycling container provided by the city, and to place the approved container near the curb, or streetside for collection by the city or as arranged by the city. Recyclable materials shall not be commingled with nonrecyclable refuse. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-63. - Provisions for multiple-family residential complexes. 
(a)  The owner, manager, or superintendent of every multiple-family residential complex receiving refuse collection by the city or as arranged by the city, shall provide and maintain, in a neat and sanitary condition, recycling collection areas to receive the recyclable materials generated by households of the complex. This provision merely requires the source separation of recyclable materials from nonrecyclable refuse, although further separation of recyclable materials by type of material is encouraged. 
(b)  In cases where a condominium, cooperative or similar association exists, the association shall be responsible for the provision and maintenance of the recycling collection areas. 
(c)  All households of multiple-family residential complexes shall provide source separation of recyclable materials and nonrecyclable refuse and shall deposit all recyclables in the appropriate containers. 
(d)  Multiple-family residential complexes shall have 60 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived to comply with this section. Failure to provide for the recycling collection area within the specified period of time shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-64. - Soiled or unclean recyclable materials. 
In limited instances, recyclable materials may become soiled, unclean, or used for a purpose (i.e., newspaper as a bird cage liner) that renders them unable to be cleaned and therefore unsuitable for recycling. In such limited cases, soiled recyclable materials shall not be included in the approved recycling container and shall be considered nonrecyclable refuse. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-65. - Other recyclable materials. 
There are several materials that do not meet the definition of recyclable materials as provided in this article, but which are indeed recyclable materials collectable by the resource recovery division of the county department of public works at various compactor sites in the county. Such materials include used motor oil, cooking grease, electronics and clothing. Households are encouraged, but not required, to source separate and deposit for recycling any recyclable materials not collected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013; Ord. No. 2018-CO-05-769, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 38-66. - Provision of approved recycling containers by city. 
The city shall provide, or arrange the provision of, containers of sufficient size for households to deposit their recyclable materials. The city shall not be required to provide approved containers for households within multiple-family residential complexes which are required by section 38-63 to provide recycling collection areas. Approved city-owned recycling containers shall be provided at no cost to households or multiple-family residential complex owners. However, the following costs shall apply: 
(1)  Single-family residences. Property owners shall be required to execute an acknowledgement receipt of said approved city-owned recycling container. The first container shall be provided at no cost. Additional cans shall be provided upon receipt of deposit. If said container(s) are lost, stolen, damaged or destroyed, the property owner shall be responsible for a replacement fee as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(2)  Townhouses, two-family residences (duplexes), multifamily dwellings, rental single-family residences. Managers/owners shall be required to execute an acknowledgement receipt of said approved city-owned container. The first container shall be provided at no cost. Additional cans shall be provided upon receipt of deposit. If said container(s) are lost, stolen, damaged or destroyed, the managers/owners shall be responsible for a replacement fee as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-67. - Notification of program by city. 
The administrator shall be responsible for providing written notification and explanation, by individual letter, brochure or through the city's newsletter or website to all households concerning the mandatory residential recycling program. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 38-68. - Amendment. 
This article may be amended by the city council subject to any applicable procedures required by the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-CO-04-709, § 1(Exh. A), 5-13-2013) 
Chapter 40 - STORMWATER 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1—40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POST DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easemen t means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries that regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Non-point source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff and leaching. Non-point source pollution is a byproduct of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain) and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Post-development means the time period or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Predevelopment means the time period or the conditions that exist on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional non-point source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. The term "stormwater better site design" includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 202, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-20. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in this section shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. 
a.  If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
b.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated, upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary, to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in this subsection (2), the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(3)  Applicability. 
a.  This article shall be applicable to all land development including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications and grading applications unless exempt pursuant to subsection (3)b of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
2.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
3.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city manager to be a hotspot land use; or 
4.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (3)a.1 and 2 of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
b.  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
1.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
3.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
4.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 701, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-21. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council does hereby determine that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased non-point source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or credits. The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas that provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
(5)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and non-point source pollution. 
(b)  Therefore, the city has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion and non-point source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 101(a), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-22. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and non-point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, non-point source pollution and increases in stream temperature and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Coordinate site design plans that include greenspace with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(7)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(8)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans and for the inspection of approved active projects and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 101(b), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-23. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 201, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-24. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements and, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 801, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-25. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city manager and or his designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 803, 11-14-2005) 
Secs. 40-26—40-42. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-43. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 40-44; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 40-45; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 40-46, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 40-47, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 40-48. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 301(a), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-44. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the landowner or developer meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. 
(b)  The consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan that should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans which illustrate at a minimum: 
a.  Existing and proposed topography; 
b.  Perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); 
d.  Boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands and other native vegetative areas on the site as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(c)  Local watershed plans, the county greenspace projection plan (if applicable) and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 301(b), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-45. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article including the performance criteria set forth in section 40-46. 
(b)  The stormwater management plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this division and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state verifying that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklists found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. 
(d)  The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes and velocities which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes and velocities which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 40-46; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 40-46 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system which shall include: 
a.  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
b.  A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
c.  Cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
d.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
e.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 40-46; 
f.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and 
g.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis that includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with chapter 20, article V, or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. A detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in section 40-46, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 40-46. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and nonlocal permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 301(c), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-46. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(c)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(d)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in division 5 of this article. 
(e)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 301(d), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-47. - Application procedure. 
The application procedure for land development permits is as follows: 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 40-43 (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event this subsection and subsection (3) of this section shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 40-97. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 301(e), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-48. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 301(f), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-49. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(b)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city, that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 301(g), 11-14-2005) 
Secs. 40-50—40-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

Sec. 40-69. - Applicability. 
The performance criteria in this division shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans unless otherwise provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401, intro. ¶, 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-70. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401(a), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-71. - Stream channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401(b), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-72. - Overbank flooding protection. 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 40-71 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401(c), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-73. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401(d), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-74. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency and rate of stormwater runoff or increased non-point source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(b)  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401(e), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-75. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 40-70. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements that identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401(f), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-76. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities which may include, but are not limited to, culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401(g), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-77. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 401(h), 11-14-2005) 
Secs. 40-78—40-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 40-96. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 501(a), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-97. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 501(b), 11-14-2005) 
Secs. 40-98—40-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 40-100. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, may correct the violation as provided in section 40-103. 
(b)  Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 
(c)  Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 601(a), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-101. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 601(b), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-102. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 601(c), 11-14-2005) 
Sec. 40-103. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work that shall be a lien on the property and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 601(d), 11-14-2005) 
Chapter 42 - MUNICIPAL RIGHTS-OF-WAY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-CO-03-761, § 1, adopted April 9, 2018, amended Chapter 42 of the Oakwood City Code entitled "Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places" to be renamed as Chapter 42 "Municipal Rights-of-Way." 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY INSTALLATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate utility installations, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92. 

DIVISION 1. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY 

Sec. 42-19. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope and definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The city is vitally concerned with the use, construction within and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare and economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia including, but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(6), has adopted this amendment to its code of ordinances for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(c)  Definitions. 
Codified ordinances mean the Official Code of Ordinances of the City of Oakwood, Georgia; 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way; 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way; 
Director means the city manager or his planning director designee; 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property; 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city; 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representative(s) is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately response to, facilities relate emergencies or situations; 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code; 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities; 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city; 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the City within the corporate limits of the City, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months or that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities; 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices and street lighting systems and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-9-2009; Ord. No. 2016-CO-03-735, § 1, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-20. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this chapter amendment including by lease, sublease or assignment to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this chapter, shall file a registration statement with the city within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter amendment. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the Registration Statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner. 
(2)  The name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the City at all times. 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration. Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter amendment, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance, taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator and/or any other remedy provided by city Code or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-9-2009) 
Sec. 42-21. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the city planning department in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director upon application made on forms prescribed by the city planning department. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility. 
(2)  The nature, extent and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation. 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work. 
(4)  The name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished. 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits or agreements. 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the director and maintained as set forth in section 1-12 of the Code as well as being available at the offices of the director and open for public inspection. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter. 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant. 
3.  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state or federal government. 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter. 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
1.  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
2.  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-9-2009) 
Sec. 42-22. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this Code and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Oakwood municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)  Blasting or excavating. As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given at least a 48 hour notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-9-2009; Ord. No. 2016-CO-03-735, § 2, 4-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-23. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-9-2009) 
Sec. 42-24. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, violates any law or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the city planning department. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-9-2009) 
Sec. 42-25. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
(a)  Additional permits required. The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 42-11(e). 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-9-2009) 
Sec. 42-26. - Penalties. 
(a)  Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-9-2009) 
Secs. 42-27—42-34. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 644, § 2, adopted Nov. 9, 2009, renumbered Div. 1, §§ 42-19—42-24 to read as a new Div. 2, §§ 42-35—42-40. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 42-35. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Utility includes all persons or entities supplying electric, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural gas, cable television, telephone, communication and similar or associated services, whether public or private. 
Utility transmission facilities includes, but is not limited to, poles, towers, supports, structures, wires, conduits, cables, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, substations, transformer stations and all similar attachments and appurtenances associated with the supply and distribution of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 1, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 42-36. - Enforcement. 
The zoning administrator shall enforce this division. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 7, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 42-37. - Submittal and approval of plans required. 
No utility shall install, locate or relocate utility transmission facilities within the rights-of-ways or easements of the city until such time as plans indicating the location and nature of work to be done in said right-of-way or easement has been submitted to the city zoning administrator for approval. The zoning administrator shall act on such plan approval requests without undue delay. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 3, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 42-38. - Conformance with utility master plans. 
Any installation, location or relocation of utility transmission facilities within the rights-of-ways or easements of the city shall conform to any adopted utility master plans of the city, unless the zoning administrator approves an alternative that preserves the intent of said master plan. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 4, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 42-39. - Grounds for disapproval of utility plans; conditions and standards for approving utility work. 
(a)  The zoning administrator may disapprove plans for utility transmission facilities where, in his opinion, the location of said facilities would be ill-advised with respect to an anticipated public improvement such as a road widening or other utility location project, or in such cases where the proposed location or relocation would subsequently result in or cause needless, purposeless and wasteful expenditures of public funds resulting from a lack of coordination between various public projects. 
(b)  As a condition of approval of any utility plans, the zoning administrator may require that said utility conform to certain conditions that will ensure utility transmission facilities are placed and installed according to the appropriate installation principles, including, but not limited to: the compaction of soil and earth in trenches or disturbed areas; the planting, sodding or hydroseeding of exposed areas to their original state or reasonable equivalent; the planting of vegetation to screen above-ground utility transmission facilities, the proper grading of slopes; and other actions designed to mitigate adverse environmental financial or aesthetic impacts resulting from the utility work or placement of utility transmission facilities. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 5, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 42-40. - Normal maintenance exempted. 
This division shall not be construed as requiring plan approval for the normal or routine maintenance of utility transmission facilities or the installation or replacement of the attachments or appurtenances of existing utility transmission facilities, where such maintenance, installation or replacement would not constitute a relocation of said facilities, as determined by the zoning administrator conservatively in favor of the utility. 
(Ord. No. 222, § 6, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 42-41—42-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TELEPHONE UTILITY INSTALLATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 644, § 2, adopted Nov. 9, 2009, renumbered Div. 2, §§ 42-52—42-56 to read as a new Div. 3, §§ 42-68—42-72. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 42-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Equipment means the poles, wires, electrical conductors, conduits, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are located in the rights-of-way. 
Rights-of-way or streets means the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered and any location thereof, there-over or thereunder; and any portion thereof. 
Services means any telephone service, interconnection service, access service and any other telecommunications services provided by a telephone company in connection with the telecommunications system except for "cable service" as that term is defined at 47 USC 522(6). 
Telecommunications system means the system over which services are provided inclusive of all equipment. 
Telephone company means any person that is engaged in the provision of telephone exchange service or exchange access over a telecommunications system or the provision of any other telecommunications over a telecommunications system. The term "telephone company" does not include a person insofar as such person is engaged in the provision of a commercial mobile service including wireless telecommunications services and does not utilize the streets to provide such services. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 2.01, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 42-69. - Findings, intent and purpose. 
(a)  The public rights-of-way are a valuable and scarce community resource. In order to provide for the health, safety and well-being of its inhabitants, to ensure the structural integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way and to protect the investment of its residents, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. 
(b)  Traditionally, along with the facilities of electric, gas and other utilities, telecommunications equipment facilities including wires (whether fiber optic, coaxial cables or otherwise) have been laid in the public rights-of-way. Local exchange carriers often have one set of lines, long distance providers another, cable companies others and fiber optic providers still others. 
(c)  Availability of and demand for a variety of telecommunications services and delivery technologies has dramatically increased the demand for use of the rights-of-way. In addition, new technologies and increased competition foster more intensive use of public rights-of-way which, in turn, requires more intensive management of the rights-of-way to ensure orderly use, maintenance of public safety, reliable delivery of essential services and equitable treatment of all users. Increasing demand for use of public rights-of-way is causing, and continues to cause, local governments to expand management services and responsibilities including more frequent inspections, repairs, re-paving, mapping technologies and systems and increased personnel. Consequently, the responsibility to manage public rights-of-way requires the ability to place appropriate conditions on their use. 
(d)  In response to the foregoing, the city hereby adopts the ordinance from which this division is derived which imposes reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of telephone companies' equipment currently located within its rights-of-way or which shall be placed therein at some future time. The division is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 1.01, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 42-70. - General provisions. 
(a)  City's right of oversight. The work of constructing, erecting and maintaining facilities of a telephone company shall be done under the regulation of the city and shall be subject to the police power of the city and the city's ordinances. The city has the right to oversee, regulate and inspect the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment in accordance with the provisions of this division and applicable law. The city reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders or other directives governing a telephone company or its equipment as it shall find necessary or appropriate in the exercise of its police power or the management of the city streets and such other orders as the city shall find necessary or appropriate pursuant to and in furtherance of the purposes of this division. The use of the streets by a telephone company shall not interfere with the use of the streets by others except to the extent permitted by this division. The telephone company shall leave all streets and other property in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the telephone company's installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance or removal of the equipment from the streets and without materially affecting, altering or disturbing in any way any electric or other cables or wires or any pipes, structures or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of such streets and to require the telephone company to make any additional repairs in order to bring such streets to the condition required by this division. 
(b)  Regulation of use of streets preserved. Nothing in this division restricts the authority of the city to regulate the use and occupancy of the streets by any person or entity providing service. Persons or entities subject to paying a fee pursuant to chapter 14, article II, division 2 shall not be exempt from municipal regulations relating to the time, manner and method of installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of the equipment located within the city's streets. Pursuant to applicable provisions of the city charter and other general law, the city expressly reserves its right to require a franchise from any telephone company providing service whose equipment occupies the city's streets. 
(c)  Permits and approvals. Pursuant to city ordinances or other applicable regulations, a telephone company shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals necessary before constructing, installing, operating, upgrading, repairing, maintaining or removing equipment. Prior to the city's issuing a construction, building or other permit, a telephone company may be required to: 
(1)  Submit an application in writing specifically describing the nature, extent and location of the portion of the rights-of-way to be used by the telephone company; and 
(2)  Furnish an indemnity bond acceptable to the city or other security acceptable to the city for any damage to any part of the street, the city or to any member of the public caused by the work of the telephone company performed under authority of such permit. 
The obligations of the telephone company under this division and any liability of the telephone company shall not be limited by the city's acceptance of the bond or the security. Any fees that the city charges to a telephone company to issue construction, building or other permits or approvals shall not be offset against the compensation that a telephone company is required to pay to the city pursuant to chapter 14, article II, division 2 nor against any other fees or taxes the telephone company may pay the city. 
(d)  Repair and replacement of streets. A telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace and properly relay and repair the surface, base and landscape treatment of any public sidewalk or street that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance or repair of its facilities promptly and in no event later than ten days after completion of the work in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the work. Upon failure of a telephone company to perform any such repair or replacement, after ten days' notice from the city, the city or its agent or contractor may repair such portion of the streets as may have been disturbed by a telephone company, its contractors or agents and, upon receipt of a bill from the city, a telephone company will promptly reimburse the city for its costs so incurred. Such repair or replacement shall restore the streets to the condition required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Abandoned equipment. All equipment including both aerial and underground equipment that is abandoned within the public rights-of-way shall be removed by the telephone company unless an alternative plan is approved by the city. Any abandoned equipment allowed to remain in the public rights-of-way shall continue to be the responsibility of the telephone company. Such telephone company shall be liable for all costs and damages arising from the presence of the abandoned equipment in the public rights-of-way. 
(f)  New grades or lines; relocations. If the grades or lines of any street are changed at any time during the term, then the telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the notice of the city, protect or promptly alter or relocate equipment so as to conform with such new grades or lines. Upon notice from the city, a telephone company shall remove and relocate equipment where the city deems such removal and relocation necessary as a result of the construction or maintenance of any part of the street or due to the extension of a public road. If a telephone company refuses or neglects to so protect, alter or relocate equipment, in accordance with this subsection, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate such equipment and a telephone company shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. The city and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall not have any liability to the telephone company for any damage as a result of or in connection with the breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. 
(g)  Quality. All work involved in the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the city or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any equipment is harmful to the health or safety of any person, then a telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions. 
(h)  No obstruction. In connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment, a telephone company shall not obstruct the streets, subways, railways, rivers or other traffic to, from or within the corporate limits of the city without the prior consent of the city. Equipment of a telephone company in the streets shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the use of the streets and adjoining property. 
(i)  No interference. A telephone company shall not interfere with the technical operation of any other telecommunications system or any other utility operating within the rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city. 
(j)  Underground utilities. A telephone company shall comply with any current or future city ordinances, rules or orders requiring the placement of equipment underground. 
(k)  Moving equipment. A telephone company shall, upon prior written notice by the city or any person holding a permit to move any structure and, within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move equipment to permit the moving of said structure. A telephone company may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the city for any such movement of its equipment. 
(l)  Emergency relocation of equipment. The city may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency as determined by the city in its sole discretion, cut or move equipment, in which event the city shall not incur any liability to a telephone company, any affiliated person or any other person. When possible, a telephone company shall be consulted prior to any such cutting or movement of equipment and shall be given the opportunity to perform such work itself. All costs to repair or replace such equipment shall be borne by a telephone company. If the city determines that the failure of a telephone company to properly restore or repair the streets constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. A telephone company shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city in regard to the repair or restoration. 
(m)  Street closings. If all or any part of the streets are eliminated, discontinued or de-mapped, the telephone company shall cease operation of the telecommunications system with respect to such streets upon the effective date of a final action of the city in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 3.01, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 42-71. - Oversight and regulation. 
(a)  Reports. At the request of the city, a telephone company shall promptly submit to the city such information as the city may reasonably request regarding a telephone company and any affiliated person to verify compliance with any term or condition of this division. The city may require a telephone company to provide, among other things, written construction plans in advance of beginning construction and to provide as-built drawings after construction completion. 
(b)  Treatment of proprietary information. Access by the city to any of the documents, records or other information covered by this division shall not be denied on grounds that such documents, records or information contain proprietary information. A telephone company may label any documents, records or other information as proprietary if it considers them such and the city shall protect the documents, records or other information from disclosure to the extent permitted under applicable law. In the event that any other person requests such information under the Georgia Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.) and the city reasonably believes that such requested documents, records or information may be within the exclusion guidelines of the Georgia Open Records Act, the city shall not release proprietary documents, records or other information without written notice to a telephone company. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 4.01, 6-27-2000) 
Sec. 42-72. - Indemnity, liability and insurance. 
(a)  Insurance specifications. A telephone company shall, at its own expense, maintain a liability insurance policy in a form acceptable to the city together with evidence acceptable to the city demonstrating that the premiums for said policy have been paid. Such policy shall be issued by companies duly licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city. Such companies must carry a rating by Best of not less than "A." Such policy shall insure: 
(1)  A telephone company; and 
(2)  The city and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees (through appropriate endorsements if necessary) against each and every form of liability of a telephone company referred to in this division in the minimum combined amount of $1,000,000.00 or such other amount as may be agreed to by the city, for bodily injury and property damage. 
The foregoing minimum limitation shall not prohibit a telephone company from obtaining a liability insurance policy or policies in excess of such limitations provided that the city, its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees shall be named as additional insured to the full extent of any limitation contained in any such policy or policies obtained by a telephone company. Notwithstanding the above, in lieu of the insurance coverage required by this subsection (a), a telephone company may provide such proof of financial resources as may be deemed acceptable by the city that a telephone company may have available to pay claims. 
(b)  Liability not limited. The legal liability of a telephone company to the city and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the liability insurance policies required by this division including, without limitation, a telephone company's indemnification obligations set forth in this division, shall not be limited by the insurance policies required by subsection (a) of this section nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payment by a telephone company. 
(c)  Liability of telephone company. A telephone company shall be responsible for any liability including, without limitation, any liability of the city and any person including, without limitation, any officer, employee, agent, attorney, consultant and independent contractor of the city arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment. A telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, repair or restore any damaged property to its prior condition and shall pay appropriate compensation in the event of any injury to or death of any person occasioned by any act or failure to act of a telephone company, any affiliated person or any officer, employee, agent or subcontractor thereof in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment. The city, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall not be responsible for any liability of a telephone company, any affiliated person or any other person arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment or provision of services through the equipment. 
(d)  Liability limitation of city. Nothing in this division abrogates the right of the city to perform any public works or public improvements. Neither the city nor its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants or independent contractors shall be responsible to the telephone company or any affiliated person for any liability as a result of or in connection with the protection, breaking through, movement, removal, alteration or relocation of any equipment by or on behalf of a telephone company or the city in connection with any emergency, public work, public improvement, alteration of any municipal structure, any change in the grade or line of any street or the elimination, discontinuation and closing of any street as provided in this division. 
(e)  Indemnification of city. A telephone company and each affiliated person shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors from and against all liabilities whether special, incidental consequential or punitive and all other damages, costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment or the provision of services through the equipment. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 4.02, 6-27-2000) 
Chapter 44 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Statement of findings and policy. 
(a)  The city council finds that it should maintain broad jurisdiction over the regulation of subdivisions. Whenever property is divided, the public interest is affected to a degree. Property lines and lot configurations have a significant effect on street alignments, property use, zoning boundaries, and the allocation of costs for public improvements. When property is subdivided without description by metes and bounds and without public review and approval, problems can occur. Traffic congestion, blighted areas, slums, increased cost of public improvements, and other defects are attributable in large measure to imperfect land subdivision. Correction of these defects is costly, and its accomplishment slow, and repetition of mistakes must be avoided. Without regulations, tracts may be sold without provisions for water, sewage disposal, or even access; tracts may be sold which, due to their size, dimension or character cannot be developed; tracts may be subdivided in such a manner that compliance with ordinances regulating development is not possible; land may be sold without an accurate description of the tract and/or without recording easements or other rights in the property being conveyed; tracts may be sold leaving an unplatted portion of property. The city council therefore finds that regulation of land subdivision and development is necessary to help prevent these problems. 
(b)  The city council finds that the resulting designs and patterns of subdivisions become the pattern of the community, which in turn influence the character of the entire city. Once land has been cut up into streets, blocks, and lots, and publicly recorded, the die is cast and the pattern is difficult to change. For generations the people who occupy such land will be influenced by the character of its design. The subdivision and development of land affects the welfare of the entire community in so many important respects that it can not be entrusted to haphazard subdivision methods. The city has interests in ensuring development proceeds in an orderly and rational manner, in accordance with city plans and policies, and authority to control land development must therefore be exercised. 
(c)  Accordingly, the city council finds that, in order to close off loopholes normally associated with subdivision regulations, review of virtually all land subdivisions must be required. The interests of the city, the owner and the occupant of a house will be best served if all subdivisions have been properly designed, soundly conceived, and properly developed. Some exemptions to the platting requirement are provided, but only those which are clearly beyond the public interest to regulate. Exemptions are to be used legitimately and not for the purpose of avoiding subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 101, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-2. - Purpose and intent. 
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the municipality; 
(2)  To guide the future growth and development of the municipality, in accordance with the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers, and to prevent the overcrowding of land and undue congestion of population; 
(4)  To protect the character and social and economic stability of all parts of the municipality and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the municipality; 
(5)  To protect and conserve the value of land and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; 
(6)  To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities, and to ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision; 
(7)  To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the municipality, with particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines; 
(8)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions, resubdivisions, and land development, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; 
(9)  To ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land; 
(10)  To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the municipality, to ensure appropriate development with regard to natural features, to prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds, to ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities, to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources to preserve the integrity and stability of the community and the value of land; 
(11)  To ensure that all building lots have adequate access and circulation, especially for firefighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles; 
(12)  To ensure the provision of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; 
(13)  To ensure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform submittal requirements, approval procedures and improvement standards for the subdivider; 
(14)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems which develop when streets and lots are laid out without proper consideration given to various public purposes; 
(15)  To protect lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 102, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-3. - Authority and delegation. 
(a)  The city council hereby authorizes the city planning commission to review and recommend for approval or disapproval, plats for subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the municipality, as more specifically provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The city council hereby delegates to the city zoning administrator the authority and power to administratively review, approve and disapprove certain plats for the subdivision of land and all land development plans within the corporate limits of the municipality, as more specifically provided in this chapter, provided such plats do not involve dedication of land for any purpose to the municipality ("minor" subdivisions), nor involve variance to the development standards provided in this chapter. The zoning administrator is further authorized to sign and record plats approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 104, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-4. - Plat approval and recording required. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider, by deed, map or other instrument, to sell, transfer, agree to sell, offer at public auction, negotiate to sell or subdivide any land until a final plat approved by the city council, or exemption plat approved by the zoning administrator, as the case may be, and recorded in the office of the superior court clerk of the county in accordance with this chapter. No subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded in the superior court of the county, unless such plat has been approved for recording by the zoning administrator. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from this chapter or from the penalties established herein. The city, through its attorney or other designated official may enjoin such transfer of, sale, or agreement by appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 106, 4-11-1994) 
State Law reference— Procedures for approval of plats of subdivisions dear a part of the state highway system, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq. 
Sec. 44-5. - Development approval required. 
No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any land in the corporate limits of the city, and no development permits, land disturbing activity permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy, or other instrument of approval shall be issued by the zoning administrator, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, or prior to approval and recording of a final or exemption subdivision plat, as the case may be, as provided in this chapter, nor prior to the approval of land development plans which demonstrate compliance with this chapter and other applicable land development regulations in effect in the city. This provision shall not be construed as requiring a new plat for existing lots of record, as defined in this chapter. Nor shall this provision be construed as prohibiting the zoning administrator from granting development approval upon the establishment of an interest bearing escrow account (with interest accruing to the benefit of the city for use on the specified development project) for cash payments made to the city in lieu of construction of required public improvements and facilities at the time of the development approval hereunder under conditions where such public improvements and facilities should be deferred until such time as such improvements would be a part of a more complete and usable facility (such as incremental sidewalk construction). 
(Ord. No. 221, § 107, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 2011-CO-09-677, § 1, 10-10-2011) 
State Law reference— Proposed or existing subdivisions that access the state highway system must obtain state department of transportation approval prior to undertaking additions or changes to plats that might affect road safety, O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-150—32-6-153. 
Sec. 44-6. - Recording of unapproved plats prohibited. 
No plat of subdivision of land within the municipality, whether submitted for plat approval or submitted as an attachment to or exhibit of a deed or other instrument of transfer, shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county without the approval thereon of the city zoning administrator and without such approval having been entered in writing on the plat by the zoning administrator. Notwithstanding the exemptions provided in the O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, all plats shall require the approval of the zoning administrator before recording, even if no new streets or roads are created, or if no new utility improvements are required, or no new sanitary sewer or approval of a septic tank is required. The city council is authorized to take any action within its power to ensure compliance by the clerk of the superior court of the county, with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 108, 4-11-1994) 
State Law reference— Standards for maps and plats recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67. 
Sec. 44-7. - Compliance with specifications required. 
No land dedicated as a public street or for other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for other purpose unless such improvements are constructed in accordance with the specifications fixed by this chapter and formally approved and accepted as public improvements by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 109, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-8. - Compliance with city zoning ordinance. 
No person shall subdivide or develop land, and the zoning administrator shall not approve any subdivision or development of land, unless the lots created pursuant to a subdivision meet or exceed all applicable requirements of chapter 54, zoning, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 110, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-9. - Exemptions from plat approval. 
The following types of land transfer are specifically exempted from plat approval requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  The sale of cemetery plots; 
(2)  The sale of lots consistent with a previously approved and recorded plat or deed; 
(3)  The creation of a leasehold for a space within a multiple-occupant building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial or institutional uses (i.e., shopping center); 
(4)  The creation of a leasehold for agricultural use of a property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for any purpose not directly related to agricultural use of the land, or crops or livestock raised thereon; and 
(5)  Mortgage lots and other parcel transfers by lawsuits for partition, inheritance, the probate of an estate, merger of title, or by a court of law; 
provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements of this chapter, and such exemptions shall not require the city council to issue permits should the resulting lots or parcels not meet applicable zoning and/or subdivision regulations. Furthermore, said exemptions do not exclude the land transfers in this section from recording requirements in cases where a plat is the method of land conveyance. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 112, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-10. - Exemptions from approval by city council. 
The following types of subdivisions are exempt from the requirement of review by the planning commission and approval by the city council, but such subdivisions shall require approval by the zoning administrator to ensure minimum lot sizes and dimensions as may be required by chapter 54, zoning are met, and to ensure the subdivision is properly recorded: 
(1)  The division of a tract or parcel for purposes of creating a dedication plat; 
(2)  The combination, recombination or aggregation of properties for land assembly purposes; and 
(3)  Minor subdivisions as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 113, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-11. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary access to a building or abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Auction means a public sale of property to the highest bidder. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals or property of any kind, including tents, awnings, or vehicles used for purposes of a building. The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the building, including any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements shall be observed for those areas adjacent to street rights-of-way. 
Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the city council and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs, ditches or pavement/improvement ends of such street, or such midway line extended. 
City attorney means the attorney of the City of Oakwood. 
City engineer means the person appointed by the city council to review engineering aspects of plans. 
Comprehensive plan means those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the city council for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around. 
Cul-de-sac, temporary, means a nonpermanent vehicular turnaround located at the termination of a street. 
Culvert means a drain or conduit that carries water under a driveway, roadway, railroad, pedestrian walk or public way. 
Curb means a concrete boundary marking the edge of a paved area. 
Curb cut means a provision for vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting street. 
Deceleration lane means an added roadway lane that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Development means any manmade change of improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Drainage means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means. 
Easement means a nonpossessory interest in land; a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons, of a portion of land for a specified purpose or purposes. 
Escrow account means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits either cash, a note, a bond or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for a specific face value specified by the city to cover the costs of required improvements. 
Grade means the slope of a street, or other public way, specified in percentage terms. 
Gridiron pattern means a street and block system resulting in formal, regular, rectangular blocks and resulting in four-way intersections. 
Letter of credit means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures a letter of credit from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the city. The letter pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both, intended to be devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, and having principal frontage on a public street. In determining the area and dimension of a lot, no part of the right-of-way may be included. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street rights-of-way. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, depth, means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot which has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public street is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
Lot frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Lot mortgage means a lot created out of a tract to enable the contract purchaser of the tract to finance construction of a single-family residence or other building thereon. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required building line. 
Performance bond means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the city to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the city. The performance bond may be cashed in by the city in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
Plat dedication means a plat which indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
Plat, final, means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. 
Plat, preliminary, means a drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its general design. 
Reservation means a method of holding land for future public use by designating public areas on a subdivision plat. 
Resubdivision means the further division of a lot or lots within a subdivision previously approved and recorded. 
Right-of-way means that area, distinguished from an easement, specified for the present or future use of roads, streets and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Shade tree means a tree in a public place, street, special easement or right-of-way adjoining a street. 
Sidewalk means a hard surfaced area provided for pedestrian use, usually located alongside a road within the right-of-way. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, arterial, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, arterial streets are those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
Street, collector, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, collector streets are those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within commercial and industrial areas. 
Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles. 
Subdivision means the division, proposed division, redivision or proposed redivision of any land into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or interests, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of offer, sale, lease, gift, charitable donation, or development. The term "subdivision" includes the division or development of residential and nonresidential land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, intestacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument. Subdivision also refers to the land to be so divided, as the context may indicate. Certain types of subdivision are exempted from the procedural requirements of this chapter but otherwise require compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Subdivision improvement guarantee means a legal device used by local governments to assure that required capital improvements are, in fact, completed in a satisfactory manner by subdivision developers. 
Subdivision, minor, means the division of a buildable lot of record into five or fewer lots, where the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Proposed lots comply with all zoning requirements; 
(2)  Each proposed lot fronts on an existing public street and complies with the county health department requirements; 
(3)  All slope and utility easements as determined necessary by the zoning administrator are provided to the city; 
(4)  Each lot created is not resubdivided pursuant to the provisions for minor subdivisions; and the entire contiguous property owned by the subdivider is included. 
Minor subdivisions are those that, because of their small size, can be administratively approved in expedited fashion by the zoning administrator. 
Subdivision, one-lot, means a term typically referring to the division of one lot from a larger tract or parcel. Since the division of any tract results in two lots (the lot created, plus the lot remnant) this chapter recognizes one lot subdivisions as being a subdivision as defined in this section. 
Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of this chapter as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Zoning administrator means the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(b)  Except as specifically defined in this section, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definition. 
(Ord. No. 221, art. II, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 44-12—44-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBDIVISION PLAT AND LAND APPROVAL 

Sec. 44-41. - Preapplication conference. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be made, or when land is proposed to be developed, the subdivider or land developer is encouraged (but not required) to consult early and informally with the zoning administrator. The subdivider or land developer may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity, and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision or parcel of land. This preapplication conference is intended to permit an early evaluation of the subdivider's or land developer's intentions and coordination with the comprehensive plan of the city, and to inform and provide the subdivider or land developer with the necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review, and no formal application shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 301, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-42. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
This section shall apply only to applicants for subdivision plat approval not exempted as a minor subdivision. Following the preapplication review of a subdivision involving the grading of land and/or the installation of roads, streets, utilities and/or other improvements, the subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator, the following: 
(1)  An application form furnished by the administrative officer; 
(2)  Five copies of the preliminary plat, with appropriate information required by this chapter, provided, however, that the zoning administrator may require more or less copies depending upon the nature and extent of review; 
(3)  An application fee, as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 302, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-43. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
(a)  The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a suitable scale (one inch equals 100 feet, unless another scale is approved) on a sheet size not exceeding 24 inches by 36 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet at this size and scale, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(b)  The preliminary plat shall include the following information; provided, however, that the zoning administrator may waive individual information requirements established in this section where, in his opinion, said information is not essential to the review process: 
(1)  Ground elevations at contour intervals of not less than five feet, based on sea level datum and a tie to one or more benchmarks (if available within 1,000 feet); 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of owner of record and of subdivider; 
(3)  Proposed name of subdivision, its acreage, and location by land lot and district; 
(4)  North arrow, graphic scale and date; 
(5)  Vicinity map showing location of subdivision; 
(6)  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances, as certified by a state registered land surveyor on the plat or by reference to a certified boundary survey, including all adjacent land owned by the subdivider; 
(7)  Names of owners of record of adjoining land; 
(8)  Existing streets, utilities and easements on or adjacent to the tract; 
(9)  Other physical features of the land such as streams and direction of flow, lakes, floodplains, bodies of water, and existing buildings; 
(10)  Proposed layout including streets, alleys, street names, right-of-way widths, lot lines with approximate dimensions and acreage, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings; 
(11)  All lots shall be numbered sequentially, regardless of number of phases or sections; 
(12)  Provisions for water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage; 
(13)  Location and results of percolation tests or soils information for lots which will not be served by a public or community sanitary sewage system, as required by the county health department; 
(14)  Existing and proposed covenants and restrictions; 
(15)  Name, address and phone number of person to contact. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 303, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-44. - Transmittal of preliminary plat to review agencies. 
At his discretion, the zoning administrator may transmit for review and comment a copy of the plat to applicable internal and external review agencies, such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  The city engineer; 
(2)  The city attorney; 
(3)  The city police chief; 
(4)  The city building inspector; 
(5)  The county health department; and 
(6)  The state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 304, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-45. - Action on the preliminary plat. 
Within 30 working days of receipt of the completed application for preliminary plat, the planning commission shall recommend approval of the plat as submitted and notify the applicant in writing thereof, or recommend disapproval of the plat along with reasons for said disapproval made in writing to the applicant. Upon review by the planning commission, the plat shall be submitted for action by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting or special called meeting. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat; rather, it shall be approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat to be used as a guide for the preparation of the final plat. Preliminary plat approval shall continue in effect for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 305, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-46. - Waiver of preliminary plat approval. 
Where a proposed subdivision does not involve the grading of land prior to sale or the installation of streets and/or utilities, or which does not require storm drainage facilities or other such improvements, the zoning administrator may waive the requirement of a preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 306, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-47. - Submittal of plans for utilities and streets. 
(a)  This section applies to all applicants for preliminary subdivision plat and land development approval. Prior to the issuance of a development permit as required by section 54-109, three copies of plans and specifications for the improvements shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. Said plans shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Utility plans providing information regarding the location, size, length and type of all water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage improvements showing their minor structures, appendages and connections with existing systems, and the approximate location of service lines from the lots to the proposed utility lines. 
(2)  Street plans providing information as follows: street profiles and cross section as required by the zoning administrator type of subbase, type of paving base, type curb and gutter; type street paving, and type improvements within the street right-of-way outside of the paved area. 
(3)  A grading plan and soil sedimentation and erosion control plan. 
(b)  In addition to utility, street, grading and erosion control plans, the zoning administrator and/or city engineer may require a hydrological study or other engineering studies as may be necessary, depending upon the scope and extent of the development project. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 307, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-48. - Review and approval of development plans. 
This section shall apply to all applicants with approved preliminary plats and all applicants for land development approval, unless specifically exempted as provided in this chapter or chapter 54, zoning. Upon receipt of the completed development plans by the zoning administrator, he shall initiate review and may forward a copy of said plans to the city engineer for review and comment. The zoning administrator shall have 15 working days to review and approve or disapprove the plans. If approved, the zoning administrator shall provide his signature on said approved plans indicating said approval, retain two copies of said plans for his records, and return one copy to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 308, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-49. - Issuance of development permit. 
Upon receipt and approval of development plans, the zoning administrator shall issue a development permit in accordance with established procedures maintained by and available from the city clerk. Issuance of a development permit shall constitute authorization to begin land disturbing activities and the construction of improvements. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 309, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-50. - Application for final plat approval. 
This section shall not apply to land developers not requiring final subdivision plat approval. Upon completion of required improvements, the subdivider may then submit an application for final plat approval, which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An application form furnished by the zoning administrator; 
(2)  Ten copies of the final plat, with appropriate information required by this chapter and one time-stable, reproducible film copy or original of the plat; 
(3)  An application fee, as established by the city council from time to time; 
(4)  A letter from the applicant's engineer that all required improvements have been constructed and meet the specifications of the city; 
(5)  A letter from the applicable electricity service company may be required indicating that service points for individual lots and streetlights, if provided, have been installed; 
(6)  A performance bond for those required improvements not yet completed (e.g., pavement topping), if such delay in completion of required improvements is permitted by the zoning administrator. Said performance bond shall be: 
a.  Conditioned upon the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer of all work required within a specified time; 
b.  Payable to, and for the indemnification of, the city; 
c.  In an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required improvements not yet completed, plus an additional ten percent of said costs, as approved by the zoning administrator; 
d.  With surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; and 
e.  Approved as to form and content by the city attorney; 
(7)  A maintenance bond, cash deposit, escrow account or other guarantee/instrument of financial security as approved by the city attorney to ensure maintenance of required improvements in the subdivision for a period of one year, payable to the city and in the amount of ten percent more than the city's estimate of actual construction cost. If, upon being notified of failure of required improvements, the subdivider does not correct the deficiency or commence work within ten days of notice, it shall be deemed to be a failure on the bond, and the city shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by public work or by private contract, and the bond or instrument of financial security shall be liable for the full amount of the cost of said repairs, as determined by the city; 
(8)  As-built drawings acceptable to the city engineer of: 
a.  All streets showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines; 
b.  Centerline profile of all streets with final grades; and 
c.  Horizontal and vertical alignment including profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines; 
provided, however, the zoning administrator may waive this final plat submittal requirement for a set period of time if improvements and/or as-built drawings are not complete, subject to subsequent denial of building permits should said drawings not be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 310, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-51. - Final plat specifications. 
(a)  The final plat shall be drawn in permanent ink at a suitable scale (one inch equals 100 feet, unless another scale is approved) on a sheet size of 17 inches by 22 inches or otherwise approved by the zoning administrator. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet at this size and scale, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(b)  The final plat shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision and street names. 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of owners of record. 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of subdivider. 
(4)  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north, or grid north, and indication whether bearings shown are calculated from angles turned or taken from compass readings. 
(5)  Location of tract (land district and land lot), location sketch and acreage. 
(6)  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street intersections or bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments. 
(7)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth-foot and bearings to the nearest second, determined by an accurate field survey. 
(8)  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
(9)  Municipal, county and land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or immediately adjoin the subdivision. 
(10)  Exact locations, right-of-way and pavement widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the subdivision. 
(11)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth-foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
(12)  The acreage or square footage of the area of each lot, and the total number of lots in the subdivision. 
(13)  Front yard/building setback lines with dimensions. 
(14)  Lots numbered in numerical order, regardless of the number of phases or sections. 
(15)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
(16)  Location, dimensions and purposes of easements and areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
(17)  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document of private covenants, if any. 
(18)  Areas within the intermediate regional flood (IRF) (i.e., 100-year flood) shall be determined by a professional engineer and shall be shown on the plat, including location and elevation of the intermediate regional flood. 
(19)  Names of record of owners of adjoining unplatted land, and the name of subdivisions and blocks and lot numbers for adjoining platted land. 
(20)  The following certifications (forms for which are maintained and available from the city clerk): 
a.  Final surveyor's certificate. 
b.  Owner's certificate of ownership and dedication to public use streets, alleys, easements and other public areas, signed by the owner. 
c.  Certification by the county health department that the plat and proposed water and sewage facilities are acceptable. 
d.  The zoning administrator's signature indicating approval of the final plat. 
e.  Certificate of recording. 
(21)  A statement that final plat approval does not constitute acceptance of public streets, easements and areas. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 311, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-52. - Action on the final plat. 
Upon receipt of the completed final plat application materials, the zoning administrator may transmit for review and comment a copy of the plat to applicable review agencies. The city planning commission shall have 45 days to recommend approval or disapproval of the plat. Upon recommendation by the planning commission, the plat shall be submitted for action by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting or special called meeting. If approved by the city council, the signature of the zoning administrator shall be placed on the reproducible film copy or original of the plat and his signature shall constitute the city's final approval. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 312, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-53. - Combinations and replats. 
Where separate lots of land are proposed to be combined or replatted, but where the resulting number of lots is not increased, they shall be submitted to the zoning administrator as a final plat for review, approval and recording. Said plat shall contain all information and certificates as specified in section 44-51; provided, however, the zoning administrator may waive certain of these specific information requirements if determined not to be essential. Such combinations and/or replats shall indicate in writing on the plat in a conspicuous place, numbered and dated consecutively, of all revisions to the plat. Said plat shall require a fee as a final plat. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 313, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-54. - Recording of final plats. 
Upon approval and without undue delay, the zoning administrator shall have the final plat recorded in the records of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and a time-stable, reproducible film copy or original filed in the office of the zoning administrator. Said copy of the original shall not require an engineer or surveyor's stamp to protect the liability of the professionals involved. Recording fees shall be included in the fee charged for final plats and therefore paid by the city. The clerk of the superior court shall indicate on the filed copy, as well as the time-stable, reproducible film copy or original, the book and page number in the county records where the final plat is recorded. Recordation of a final plat constitutes approval to begin the sale or transfer of subdivision lots. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 314, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-55. - Assignment of street addresses. 
Upon recording of a final plat, the zoning administrator shall assign each lot a street address and shall note each address in permanent ink on the time-stable, reproducible film copy or original. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 315, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-56. - Distribution of recorded final plat. 
(a)  The final plat is a source of essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility officials, among others. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for ensuring that each agency listed in this section receives a copy of the final recorded plat with assigned addresses: 
(1)  The county tax commissioner. 
(2)  The county tax assessor. 
(3)  The county health department. 
(4)  The city police department. 
(5)  The city building inspector. 
(6)  The city engineer. 
(7)  The United States Postal Service (local postmaster). 
(b)  At the discretion of the zoning administrator, additional agencies or persons may be added to the list in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 316, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-57. - Acceptance of public streets and improvements. 
At any date after one year has passed since the date of final plat approval, the subdivider or land developer may petition the city council, in writing, to accept public streets and other improvements, in whole or in part, within the subdivision. Said improvements shall not be accepted for maintenance until approved by the city council. Any instrument of financial guarantee shall be returned to the subdivider upon acceptance of public streets and improvements by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 317, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 44-58—44-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL DESIGN AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 44-88. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to the flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or that is, for topographical or other reasons, unsuitable for residential use, shall not be platted for residential use nor any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or proper construction, unless hazards can be and are corrected. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 401, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-89. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the zoning administrator. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in the city or county. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 402, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-90. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 403, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-91. - Conformance to adopted major thoroughfare and other plans. 
(a)  All streets and other features of the major thoroughfare plan of the city, if adopted by the city council, shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major thoroughfare plan. In subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federally numbered highway, the approval of the state department of transportation may be required by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  When features of other plans adopted by the city (such as schools or other public building sites, parks or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall either be dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a six-month period from the date of preliminary plat submittal by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 404, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-92. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 405, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-93. - Street names. 
Street names shall be approved by the zoning administrator. Streets that are in alignment with existing named streets shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets in the city or county. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 406, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-94. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-94, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-94 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-95. - Development along arterial street or limited access highway. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street or a limited access highway, the zoning administrator may require a street approximately parallel to and on one or both sides of such right-of-way and shall require a ten-foot-wide easement, no-access or land reservation to ensure no access. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 408, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-96. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be provided at the rear of lots used for multifamily, commercial or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in one- or two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the zoning administrator of the need for alleys. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 409, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-97. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, or public grounds shall not be permitted unless their control is placed in the hands of the city council, under conditions approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 410, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-98. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements having a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided, where required for utility lines, storm drains, and underground mains and cables. 
(b)  When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement of adequate width (minimum 20 feet) approved by the zoning administrator. Parallel streets may be required by the zoning administrator in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 411, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-99. - Culs-de-sac. 
(a)  Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, culs-de-sac or dead-end streets shall not be greater in length than 1,000 feet unless approved by the zoning administrator and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around. 
(b)  Where a subdivision contains a dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac, the zoning administrator may require the subdivider to provide a temporary vehicular turn-around within the right-of-way, when the zoning administrator considers such to be necessary for effective traffic circulation. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 412, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-100. - Street right-of-way widths. 
The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall extend a minimum of 13 feet from the back-of-curb, and the total width shall be evenly divisible by ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 2, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 2, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-100, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-100 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-101. - Street pavement widths. 
Minimum street pavement widths shall be as follows measured from back of curb to back of curb: 
(1)  Arterial streets, as shown in the major thoroughfare plan. 
(2)  Collector streets, as shown in the major thoroughfare plan. 
(3)  Minor streets and dead-end streets, 24 feet. 
(4)  Minor streets, commercial and industrial subdivisions, 28 feet. 
(5)  Alleys, 14 feet. 
(6)  Culs-de-sac, commercial and industrial subdivisions, 50 feet radius. 
(7)  Culs-de-sac, local residential streets, 40 feet radius. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 3, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 3, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-101, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-101 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-102. - Vertical alignment. 
Maximum and minimum street grades shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial streets, not in excess of seven percent. 
(2)  Collector streets, not in excess of ten percent. 
(3)  Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, not in excess of 15 percent. (Ten percent for nonresidential streets). 
(4)  No street grade shall be less than one percent. 
Minimum design speeds shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial streets- 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  Collector streets- 45 miles per hour. 
(3)  Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys- 25 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 4, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 4, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-102, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-102 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-103. - Horizontal curvature. 
The minimum radii of centerline curvature shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial streets, 800 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets, 200 feet. 
(3)  Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, 100 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 5, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 5, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-103, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-103 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-104. - Tangents. 
Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent having a length not less than the following: 
(1)  Arterial streets, 200 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets, 100 feet. 
(3)  Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 417, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-105. - Sight distance requirements. 
Alignment shall be such that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Major streets shall have a sight distance of at least 500 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(2)  Collector streets shall have a sight distance of at least 300 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(3)  Minor streets shall have a sight distance of at least 200 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 6, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 6, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-105, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-105 pertained to vertical alignment. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-106. - Street intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersections shall be at an angle of less than 65 degrees, unless required by unusual circumstances. Maximum intersection grade shall not exceed three percent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 7, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 7, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-106, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-106 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-107. - Curbline radius. 
The curbline radius at street intersections shall be at least 30 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a longer radius may be required. For commercial and industrial subdivision streets, a minimum 40-foot curbline radius shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 420, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-108. - Block lengths and widths. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  In general, residential blocks shall be not greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 600 feet in length. 
(2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major arterial streets, or limited-access highways, or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 421, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-109. - Lot sizes. 
(a)  Lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of chapter 54, zoning. 
(b)  Residential lots shall have a depth of not less than 100 feet and not greater than three times the width of the lot at the building line, unless unusual circumstances make these limitations not practicable. 
(c)  Where individual septic tanks are used, the county health department shall approve minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards of the state department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 422, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-110. - Lot lines. 
All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 423, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-111. - Building lines. 
A building line meeting the front yard setback requirements of chapter 54, zoning, as a minimum, shall be established on all lots. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 424, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-112. - Lot frontage. 
Each lot shall abut a minimum of 30 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 425, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-113. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 426, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-114. - Panhandle or flag lots. 
Panhandle lots or flag lots are discouraged, but if designed with the required width and area they may be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than 30 feet wide, and the panhandle access shall be not more than 200 feet long. Not more than two such panhandle lots shall abut each other. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 427, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 44-115—44-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 44-142. - Street right-of-way clearance. 
All trees, brush, stumps, rocks, or other debris shall be cleared from the street right-of-way as required, except in cases where shade trees are required to be preserved by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 501, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-143. - Grading of streets. 
All streets shall be graded to lines, grades and cross sections approved on the plans. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 502, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-144. - Street paving and base. 
(a)  Base course construction; general specifications. 
(1)  Arterial and collector streets: The base course shall consist of graded aggregate of a minimum compacted thickness of eight inches placed on a stabilized sub-base in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grade, and typical cross-section as shown on the drawings approved by the city. 
(2)  Minor and dead-end streets: The base course shall consist of graded aggregate of a minimum compacted thickness of six inches placed on a stabilized sub-base in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grade, and typical cross-section as shown on the drawings approved by the city. 
(3)  Turn lanes and deceleration lanes: The base course shall consist of graded aggregate of a minimum compacted thickness of eight inches placed on a stabilized sub-base in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grade, and typical cross-section as shown on the drawings approved by the city. 
(4)  Base course construction; materials: All materials shall be secured from Georgia Department of Transportation approved sources. 
(5)  Base course construction; preparation of sub-grade: All boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy material and any other objectionable material shall be removed and replaced with approved material. The sub-grade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform to the lines, grades and typical cross-sections as shown on the drawings approved by the city. 
(6)  Base course construction; placing and rolling aggregate: All base course material shall be deposited and spread by means of spreader boxes, or approved mechanical equipment, or from moving vehicles equipped to distribute the material in a uniform layer. Each layer shall be not more than two inches in thickness after compaction and shall be constructed as follows: 
a.  Immediately following the spreading of the coarse aggregate, all material placed shall be compacted to the full width by rolling with a smooth wheel power roller weighing seven to ten tons, or an equivalent sheep-foot packer. Rolling shall progress gradually from the sides to the center, parallel with the centerline of the street and lapping uniformly each preceding track by one-half the width of such track, and shall continue until all the surface has been rolled and has been thoroughly keyed, and the interstices of the stone reduced to a minimum, and until it ceases to creep or wave ahead of the roller. 
b.  Any irregularities or depressions that develop under such rolling shall be corrected by loosening the material at these places and adding or removing material until the surface is smooth and uniform. 
c.  After the coarse aggregate has been thoroughly keyed and set by the rolling described above, screenings in an amount that will completely fill the interstices shall be applied gradually over the surface and rolling shall be continued while the screenings are being spread, so that the jarring effect of the roller will cause the screenings to settle into the voids of the coarse aggregate. 
d.  The screenings shall not be dumped in piles on the coarse aggregate but shall be spread in thin layers, either by spreading motion with hand shovels, by mechanical spreading or directly from trucks. 
e.  In no case shall the screening be applied so fast or thickly as to cake or bridge on the surface in such manner as to prevent the filling of all voids or prevent the direct bearing of the roller on the coarse aggregate. 
f.  Hand brooms shall be used to sweep the screenings into unfilled voids and to distribute the stone where needed. The spreading, sweeping and rolling shall continue until no more screenings can be forced into the void. 
g.  Shaping and rolling shall be performed alternately as required to maintain a uniform compacted base until a surface or treatment has been applied to the base. 
h.  Along curbs, headers and walls and at all places not accessible to the roller, the base course material shall be tamped thoroughly with mechanical tampers or approved hand tampers. 
i.  Base course construction; seasonal limits on construction. No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the sub-grade is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable weather conditions. 
(b)  Bituminous plant mix paving. 
(1)  Arterial and collector streets: Bituminous plant mix paving shall consist of a minimum of two-inch asphaltic concrete "E" mix placed on top of a minimum of four-inch asphaltic concrete binder "B" mix. 
(2)  Minor and dead end streets: Bituminous plant mix paving shall consist of a minimum of one-inch asphaltic concrete "F" mix placed on top of a minimum of two-inch asphaltic concrete binder "B" mix. 
(3)  Turn lanes and deceleration lanes: Bituminous plant mix paving shall consist of a minimum of one-inch asphaltic concrete "F" mix placed on top of a minimum of four-inch asphaltic concrete binder "B" mix. 
(4)  Bituminous plant mix materials: All materials shall be secured from Georgia Department of Transportation approved sources and conform to the latest equivalent GDOT standards. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 8, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 8, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-144, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-144 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-145. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  Curb and gutter shall be installed along both sides of all paving. All curb and gutter shall conform to city specifications. Curb and gutter construction shall be of 3000 psi concrete 24 inches wide as further detailed in the City of Oakwood design standards. 
(b)  Curb and gutter requirements; construction standards: The curb and gutter shall be so constructed as to present a smooth, even line both vertically and horizontally, in accordance with the Georgia D.O.T. standards. There shall be one-half inch expansion joints placed every 50 feet and pre-shaped contraction joints every ten feet along the curb and gutter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 9, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 9, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-145, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-145 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-146. - Street signs. 
(a)  Street name signs shall be furnished and installed at all street intersections on the rights-of-way by the developer. Signs shall be retro-reflective, high intensity grade on nine-foot blades with blue background with six-inch white legends, upper and lower case, mounted on ten-foot galvanized U-channel posts. Exact locations and proofs of street name signs shall be approved by the zoning administrator prior to production and installation. 
(b)  Traffic signs shall comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and be installed on ten-foot galvanized U-channel posts by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 10, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 10, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-146, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-146 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-147. - Street right-of-way improvements. 
All street rights-of-way outside of the paved portions shall be graded to conform with approved cross section and shall be grassed as directed by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 506, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-148. - Shade trees. 
Shade trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall be placed or retained so as not to obstruct sight distances at street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 507, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-149. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person and/or his agent to hereafter install, construct, or lay, or cause to be installed, constructed or laid, any sidewalk or sidewalks within the street lines of the city without first obtaining a permit authorizing the same from the city. 
(b)  Any sidewalk hereafter constructed within the street lines of the city by any person shall be constructed in strict compliance with specifications and plans and upon grades and lines to be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 508, 4-11-1994; Amd. No. 221, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 44-150. - Sidewalks required. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be provided within all single-family subdivisions. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be provided along the street from which a multifamily development has access and along all other adjoining streets. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall be provided along all streets adjoining a nonresidential development. 
(Amd. No. 221, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 44-151. - Location requirements. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be required adjacent to both sides of internal subdivision streets in both residential and nonresidential developments. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be required adjacent to the perimeter of "eyebrow" turnarounds as well as cul-de-sac turnarounds. 
(Amd. No. 221, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 44-152. - Design standards. 
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the following design standards unless a modification is granted by the city manager or his designee: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be located two feet from the back of existing curb. Where no curbing exists or proposed roads improvements are anticipated, sidewalks shall be placed in a location acceptable to the state department of transportation. 
(2)  All sidewalks shall match and provide a smooth at-grade transition to any existing sidewalks with no steps. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and shall be a minimum of five feet in width and four inches thick. Concrete shall be class B (as defined by the state department of transportation) and have a strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on a four-inch foundation of compacted crushed gravel or crushed stone. 
(5)  Curb ramps shall be provided at all curb termini and shall be a minimum of four feet in width exclusive of flared sides. 
(6)  Expansion joints shall be provided at all property lines (extended) and driveway crossings. Control joints shall be provided every ten feet. 
(7)  Sidewalks shall slope one-quarter-inch per foot towards the street. 
(8)  Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed. 
(9)  All sidewalks shall be constructed to conform to requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(Amd. No. 221, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 44-153. - Installation deadlines. 
Sidewalks shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval in accordance with this chapter unless a performance bond is posted. The cost of sidewalk installation may be set aside in escrow where proposed road improvements may impact the location of the sidewalk as follows: 
(1)  Sidewalks required on residential building lots within a subdivision shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each individual dwelling. 
(2)  Within a residential subdivision, sidewalks required along common areas or designated recreation areas shall be installed prior to final plat approval. 
(3)  Sidewalks required for all other development shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as appropriate. 
(Amd. No. 221, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 44-154. - Storm drainage system. (See also the requirements of chapters 20 and 40 of this Code.) 
Storm drains, along with catchbasins and manholes, shall be installed in compliance with the plans and specifications, and as follows: 
(1)  Every subdivision shall be served by storm drainage facilities, including drains, sewers, catchbasins, culverts and other facilities as required by standards and specifications of the city. 
(2)  All drainage facilities shall be so designed to serve the entire drainage area in which these facilities are located. All street drains serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. A formula may be developed by the city to provide for a sharing of the cost of other drainage facilities needed to serve the subdivision when certain of the required drainage facilities are necessary to serve other subdivisions in the same drainage basin. 
(3)  All surface water drainage shall be transported to existing storm sewers or to drainage facilities approved by the city. 
(4)  Whenever drainage ditches are used, such ditches shall retain natural design characteristics and be so designed that they do not present a hazard to life and safety or create erosion problems. 
(5)  All drainage features shall be in accordance with standards and specifications of the city, and no extension shall be made from the street drainage through the abutting property without approval of the city. 
(6)  When the construction of a proposed public road makes it necessary to cross a storm drain, the developer shall provide and install the required size and length of an acceptable grade of pipe. The length of the pipe required shall be measured from a point 60 feet to the rear of the established building line on the upstream side of the road to a point 60 feet beyond the building line on the downstream side of the road and in no case shall the extension be less than 30 feet from the rear of any proposed dwelling; provided, however, the drain runs through building lots proposed to be platted. 
a.  In cases where the developer or owner chooses not to develop the land through which the drain runs, then the trench may be left open, however, in such cases the plat must be so marked and an easement shown thereon, indicating that no building or driveway shall be built over or within 40 feet of the open drain. 
b.  Where the developer chooses to leave the drain open and same is crossed by a driveway, the size of pipe shall be determined by the city and no building permit will be approved unless the installation meets the requirements of the city. 
c.  Notwithstanding the controls in this subsection (6), the zoning administrator may refuse to issue a building permit on any lot or lots where the land is subject to floods or where, in the opinion of the city engineer, the topographic features of the property are such that a building could not be properly maintained on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 509, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 11, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 11, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, renamed § 44-154 from "Storm drainage system. (See also the requirements of chapter 20 requirements)" to "Storm drainage system. (See also the requirements of chapters 20 and 40 of this Code)". 
Sec. 44-155. - Water system and fire hydrants. 
All water mains shall be installed along with a service connection for each lot and be in operating condition prior to final plat approval and paving installation. This system shall be connected to the city water system or a source accepted by the county health department. All pipe, valves, hydrants, and other components shall conform to city and county health department specifications and regulations. Fire hydrants shall be located and set in accordance with city specifications and as set forth in chapter 52. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 510, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-156. - Sanitary sewage system. 
A subdivision or land development may be required to connect to a public sanitary sewer system, as required by chapter 52. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 511, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-157. - Wastewater capacity allocation determination guidelines. 
As a supplement to the criteria set forth in this Code, the following guidelines are hereby established in an effort to properly balance residential, commercial and industrial development and to fairly and equitably allocate the city's limited wastewater capacity: 
(1)  The city will maintain a wastewater capacity allocation summary list which includes the project name, developer, number of units/lots at build-out, wastewater capacity requested and a record of the allocation and/or number of lots/units approved. As building permits are issued, wastewater allocations and available capacity will be adjusted accordingly. 
(2)  In order to balance residential, commercial and industrial development, the city will categorize and consider wastewater capacity requests in terms of proposed land use (e.g., industrial, commercial, office/professional, single-family residential and multifamily residential). 
(3)  Residential development will be granted allocation approval in a phased manner. In general, no more than 33 percent of the total dwellings, or a maximum of 50 units/lots, will be approved at any one time. 
(4)  The city manager is authorized to approve allocation requests demanding less than 1,500 gallons per day. 
(5)  Payments for wastewater capacity shall be made in accordance with the fees established by the city. Fifty percent of the wastewater capacity fee shall be paid within 60 days of approval of an allocation. The remaining 50 percent shall be paid as building permits are issued. Wastewater allocations not used within 24 months of payment may be redeemed by the city by refunding the wastewater capacity fees paid to date, less 20 percent, to the owner/developer. 
(6)  The owner/developer may not transfer wastewater capacity allocations from one development to another. 
(Amd. No. 120, 12-13-2004) 
Sec. 44-158. - Wastewater capacity waiting list and wastewater capacity allocation criteria. 
(a)  The city has established the following requirements for securing a position on the city's wastewater capacity waiting list and the following factors and procedures for the allocation available wastewater treatment capacity. 
(1)  Wastewater capacity waiting list. Any person who desires to become a new sewer customer, whether on behalf of such person or as a developer, shall make application for sewer service in accordance with procedures set forth by the city manager. This provision shall also apply to any existing customer who desires to increase its sewage rate of flow by more than ten percent or substantially increase or alter the pollutant characteristics of its sewage. 
(2)  Such persons shall specify the amount of sewer service capacity requested upon application in addition to such other information as may be requested by the city manager to further evaluate the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section. Applicants shall be allowed to secure a position on the sewer service waiting list if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  The subject property is located within the city limits. 
b.  The subject property is property zoned for the anticipated use. 
c.  The applicant has an ownership interest in the subject property. 
d.  The subject property is now, or will be in the future, a public water customer. 
e.  The applicant agrees to pay the projected wastewater capacity fee upon allocation of capacity. 
Those applicants that are on the city's waiting list for sewer service as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall remain on the list with their positions being determined based on the date their request for sewer service was submitted to the city; provided however, that any applicant on the city's waiting list as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived who cannot demonstrate that he meets the requirements in this subsection shall have 60 days from the date the ordinance from which this article is derived is passed within which to demonstrate compliance with the requirements or such person shall forfeit their place on the waiting list. 
(b)  Wastewater capacity allocation determinations. At such time as the mayor and city council can reasonably project available or soon-to-be available wastewater treatment capacity, the mayor and city council shall offer the available or soon-to-be available capacity to those qualified applicants on the current waiting list, in such amounts as determined to be appropriate. The mayor and city council's allocation of available or soon-to-be available wastewater treatment capacity among the pending requests for such capacity shall take into account the following factors: 
(1)  The length of time that the applicant has been on the waiting list. 
(2)  The applicant's willingness to enter into an agreement with the city for the purchase of wastewater treatment capacity. 
(3)  The date the applicant can commit to use, on a continual basis, the capacity requested. 
(4)  The extent to which the applicant is able to accept portions of the requested capacity in phases over a period of time. 
(5)  The waste loading of the projected wastewater, i.e., its projected characteristics, volume and impact on the wastewater treatment. 
(6)  The applicant's prior history of violations of applicable ordinances, laws, rules and regulations with regard to water quality and/or wastewater issues. 
(7)  The applicant's credit worthiness and financial ability to meet its obligations to the city. 
(8)  The current amount of unutilized allocation which the applicant has remaining. 
(c)  Wastewater capacity allocation process. After the mayor and city council have made their allocation determination, any applicant offered any amount of wastewater treatment capacity shall be required to: 
(1)  Enter into a binding agreement with the city for the provision of wastewater capacity. 
(2)  Pay the wastewater capacity fee as established and updated from time to time by the city. 
Any applicant unable to complete either of the above requirements within 60 days of the allocation, or within such later date established by the city, provided that good faith negotiations are proceeding in a diligent manner, shall forfeit the allocation offered to him and shall forfeit his position on the waiting list. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 1, 12-13-2004) 
Sec. 44-159. - Gas system. 
The gas system and any other underground system when it is to be installed in a subdivision or land development shall be installed along with service connections before any paving is laid. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 512, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-160. - Monuments. 
(a)  Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established at the following points: 
(1)  Where plat boundary lines intersect with land lot lines. 
(2)  Monuments shall consist of half-inch diameter metal pin or pipe, a minimum of 18 inches in length. 
(3)  The accurate location, material, and size of all existing monuments shall be shown, on the final plat, as well as the future location of monuments to be placed after street improvements have been completed. 
(b)  Monuments shall be placed at all corners of each lot and driven so as to be set two inches above the finished grade. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 513, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-161. - Streetlights. 
(a)  New subdivisions (residential, commercial and industrial). Streetlights shall be provided by the developer of all subdivisions which propose the construction of a new street to be dedicated to the city or which propose lot access to an existing city street. 
(1)  Prior to the approval of a final plat, the developer shall submit a copy of the approved preliminary plat revised in accordance with this chapter showing the lighting design for the subdivision. The design, after approval by the city manager or his designee thereof, shall be forwarded to the appropriate power provider for approval and the developer shall pay the power provider the appropriate cost for materials and installation. Proof of payment to the power provider shall be required before approval of the final plat. 
(2)  All fixtures and poles shall meet the requirements of this chapter and all maintenance shall be the responsibility of the power provider. Fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 16 feet above the ground and each fixture shall have appropriate arm length to illuminate the street. The city, in addition to other requirements, may require a light to be located at street intersections within the development. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the streetlight installation by the city, the power provider shall submit monthly bills to the city clerk for payment. The city shall assign a special assessment to each property abutting a street with streetlights for payment of the monthly utility costs on a pro rata basis. 
(b)  Specifications. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the material, methods of construction and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction shall conform to the latest specifications of the state department of transportation (Georgia DOT) and the following roadway lighting installation guidelines for the city: 
(1)  All roadway lighting facing city public streets (whether private security lighting or part of the street lighting program) must be approved by the city manager for the city. 
(2)  All lighting that is to be a part of the city lighting program shall be high-pressure sodium lighting. 
(c)  Lighting applications. 
(1)  Residential overhead lighting shall be cobra-head fixtures mounted on existing poles with fixtures to be supplied by the power provider. Bulbs shall be 100 to 150 watt high-pressure sodium spaced 300 to 325 feet apart. 
(2)  Residential underground lighting shall be mounted on decorative post top poles and fixtures unless otherwise specified by the city. Poles and fixtures shall be supplied by the power provider after payment by the developer/applicant. Bulbs shall be 100 to 150 watt high-pressure sodium fixtures mounted on 20-foot poles with a 16-foot mounting height, set back a minimum of six feet from the back of the curb and spaced 150 to 200 feet apart. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial overhead lighting shall be rated roadway fixtures mounted on existing poles with fixtures to be supplied by the power provider. Bulbs shall be either 250 watt high-pressure sodium spaced 275 feet apart or 400 watt high-pressure sodium spaced 325 feet apart. 
(4)  Commercial and industrial underground lighting shall be rated roadway fixtures mounted on steel poles with a minimum mounting height of 30 feet and set back a minimum of six feet from the back of the curb. Poles and fixtures shall be supplied by the power provider after payment by the developer/applicant. Bulbs shall be either 250 watt high-pressure sodium spaced 275 feet apart or 400 watt high-pressure sodium spaced 325 feet apart. 
(5)  Cutoff fixtures may be required. 
(6)  After installation of lights in accordance with the final plat approved by the city, lights shall not be removed unless deemed necessary by the city manager. Additional lights may be requested by individual homeowners upon written approval of all adjacent homeowners. 
(d)  Streetlight standards. 
(1)  The American Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting as sponsored by the Illuminating Engineering Society and approved by the American Standards Association on July 11, 1973, is hereby adopted as the standard (except as noted in subsection (c)(2) of this section) for installation and operation of street lighting. 
(2)  All fixtures installed for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 

 
(3)  The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level except that on local or residential street it may be not less than one-sixty of such average. 
(e)  Street lighting compliance to standards. 
(1)  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within the public right-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the city manager or his designee for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards and no lighting shall be installed or operated without such approval. Should the city manager or his designee disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, the city manager or designee shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting same. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of lighting or lighting system by the city manager or his designee may be appealed to the city council. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision hereunder, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval and it shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to transmit forthwith to the city council all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and to ensure that said appeal is promptly placed upon the agenda of the city council for its determination. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. 
(2)  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public street shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from such street and shall be oriented in such a manner as to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution at the initial light source is perpendicular to the street so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the city manager or his designee shall be obtained before installation of such lighting. 
(3)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public right-of-way. 
(f)  Installation of streetlights. The installation and operation of lighting fixtures located within the rights-of-way of any public street, road, highway, sidewalk or alley in the city or fixed to any pole, lamppost, standard or other supporting device which is located within such rights-of-way will follow the following procedures: 
(1)  Plans and specifications for the proposed installation showing compliance with the standard of the chapter shall be submitted to the city manger or his designee thereof for approval. No installations will be made without this approval. 
(2)  Fixtures illuminating areas adjoining the public streets, roads and the like such as parking area and driveways shall be mounted in such a manner as to ensure that the light pattern is kept off the public roadway. When street or roadway lighting luminaries are to be used for security lighting, they will be mounted on the side of the pole that is opposite from the public street and will be mounted to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street an the vertical light distribution at the initial light source is perpendicular to the street. 
(3)  If lighting fixtures of a type other than those in the classification of street or roadway luminaries are to be used or if the proposed lighting is to be for other than drives, parking areas or other similar area lighting, the plans and specifications submitted will be sufficiently detailed to clearly show that such a proposal is in compliance with these standards and will not cause a hazard to, or interfere with, the normal use of the public street, roads or highways. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 514, 4-11-1994; Amd. No. 221, § 1, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 44-162. - Deceleration lanes and left-turn lanes. 
(a)  Deceleration lanes; where required. A deceleration lane shall be required at each entrance to a residential subdivision of 24 lots or more, commercial or industrial subdivision, multifamily development or nonresidential development at its point of access with a city collector or arterial street. Developments accessing a state route or county road must comply with access requirements and standards established by the respective jurisdiction. 
(b)  Median breaks. If the developer desires to construct or utilize an existing median break to serve the development, a left turn lane leading to the median break shall be required. 
(c)  Deceleration and turn lane constructions standards. 
(1)  If required, additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane or turn lane and a ten-foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the City of Oakwood. 
(2)  Curb and gutter along all deceleration lanes and tapers are required, and shall be constructed in accordance with section 44-145. 
(3)  Drainage improvements, as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration or turn lane, shall also be required. 
(4)  Other project access improvements may be required by the city engineer in addition to or in lieu of a required deceleration lane in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public. 
(5)  Utilities and drain pipes shall be relocated outside of the deceleration lane at the developer's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 12, 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 12, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 44-162, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 44-162 pertained to deceleration lanes. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 44-163. - Driveway construction 
(a)  Permit required. An application for permit to construct or alter a driveway or curb cut occurring on or abutting city road right-of-way shall be made to the zoning administrator under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When such driveways or curb cuts are incidental to the development of a new structure or the development of previously undeveloped property, the driveway permit shall constitute a part of the building permit. 
(2)  When such driveway or curb cut construction constitutes a separate action apart from any other construction on the same site, a driveway permit shall be secured from the zoning administrator. 
(3)  When property abutting a city road right-of-way changes from one use to another and driveways and/or curb cuts have previously been extended across or to a city road right-of-way, or when the type of use or the volume of use of an existing and/or previously approved driveway is substantially changed, application for review shall be submitted and a driveway permit secured from the zoning administrator. Occupancy permit may be withheld until such driveway improvements have been approved. 
(4)  The island area on the right-of-way between successive driveways or adjoining a driveway and between the highway shoulder and right-of-way line shall remain unimproved for vehicular travel or parking. Such areas shall be considered as restricted and may be filled in or graded down only as hereinafter provided in subsection (a)(8) of this section. 
(5)  The surface of the driveway connecting with rural type highway sections shall slope down and away from the highway shoulder a sufficient amount and distance to preclude ordinary surface water drainage from the driveway area flowing onto the highway roadbed. 
(6)  The driveway shall not obstruct or impair drainage in side ditches or roadside areas. Driveway culverts, where necessary, shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the roadway and in no case less than equivalent of 15-inch diameter pipe. The distance between culverts under successive driveways shall be not less than ten feet except as such restricted area is permitted to be filled in under the provisions of subsection (a)(8) of this section. 
(7)  When curb and gutter are removed for constructing a driveway, the new connections shall be of equivalent acceptable material and curb returns provided or restored in a neat, workmanlike manner. The driveway surface shall connect with the highway pavement and the sidewalk, if any, in a neat workmanlike manner. The driveway construction shall include replacement by reason of vehicular travel across the sidewalk. 
(8)  The restricted area between successive driveways may be filled in or graded down only when the following requirements are fully complied with: 
a.  The filling or grading down shall be to grades approved by the zoning administrator; and except where drainage is by means of curb and gutter, water drainage of the area shall be directed away from the highway roadbed in a suitable manner. 
b.  Culvert extension under the restricted area shall be of like size and equivalent acceptable material of the driveway culvert, and intermediate manholes adequate for clean-out purposes may be required where the total culvert length exceeds 100 feet. 
c.  Where no side ditch separates the restricted area from the roadbed, permanent provision may be required to separate the area from the highway roadbed to prevent its use for driveway or parking purposes by construction of a boarder, curb, rail, or posts deemed adequate by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  General design standards. The location, design, and construction of the driveway shall be in accordance with the following standards. Additional access improvements such as, but not limited to, deceleration lanes, dedicated left-turning lanes, center turn lanes, merge lanes, and signalization may be required for safe traffic operations, if deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(1)  A driveway shall be located and restricted as to width as necessary so that the entire driveway and its appurtenances are contained within the frontage along the highway of the property served. At public highway intersections a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from the public highway intersection area and shall not encroach on or occupy areas of the roadway or right-of-way deemed necessary for effective traffic control or for highway signs or signals. A driveway shall be so located and constructed that vehicles approaching or using it will have adequate sight distance in both directions along the highway. 
(2)  The number of driveways permitted serving a single property frontage shall be a maximum of two unless more are deemed necessary by the zoning administrator for reasonable service to the property without undue impairment of safety, convenience, and utility of the highway. 
(3)  If the property has frontage on more than one street, and a driveway permit is requested, and if it is determined that the construction of such a driveway on the major street would cause a nuisance to the surrounding area, a traffic hazard, or unduly congest traffic, then the permit may be denied. 
(c)  Specific design standards. The following specific design standards shall apply to driveways requiring permits as set forth in these regulations: 
(1)  Driveway widths. 

 
(2)  Driveway angle. 

 
(3)  Return radii. 

 
(4)  Percent of property frontage available for driveways and approaches. Each single driveway shall have a maximum width of 30 percent of the property frontage. Where two or more driveways are permitted, no more than 60 percent of property frontage shall be used as driveways. No approval for a curb cut will be given where it is apparent that the intent is not to provide access but to provide parking only. A driveway approach must provide access to something definite on private property such as parking area considerably greater in extent than the width of the driveway, or provide access to a driveway, or to a door at least eight feet wide intended for the entrance of vehicles, etc. (Not applicable for residential driveways.) 
(5)  Minimum distance to side property lines. The more restrictive of subsection (5)a or (5)b of this section shall apply. 
a.  The area along a side property line within five feet of a frontage boundary line shall be a restricted area on which no driveway may be developed on public right-of-way. 
b.  A minimum of five feet between the side property line and the pavement edge or curb shall be left undisturbed or landscaped adjacent to each frontage boundary lien to serve as an island area. This distance shall be measured between the frontage boundary tangency of the driveway radius and edge of pavement measured along edge of pavement. This distance shall be increased to 25 feet where the subject lot abuts a residential district. 
These requirements may be waived when a single driveway is approved to serve two adjacent lots: (See also section 54-216.) 
(6)  Island areas (channelization). 
a.  Minimum island dimensions. 
1.  Distance between double driveways: ten feet minimum at narrowest point. 
2.  Minimum island depth: ten feet where parking lot abuts street right-of-way line. 
b.  Treatment of island of buffer area. In the development of private property and the construction of driveways thereto, it may be necessary to regrade the buffer area by cutting or filling. Such work shall be done in a manner to ensure adequate sight distance for traffic operations, proper drainage, suitable slopes for maintenance operations, and good appearance. The buffer area outside the driveway shall be designed to ensure no access by vehicles. This may be accomplished by the grading, use of curbs, rails, guide post, low walls, low shrubs, etc., in a manner which will not impair clear sight across the area. 
c.  Visibility clearance. No landscaping, fences, terraces, or other natural or artificial features adjacent to any street shall be of a nature impairing visibility from or of approaching vehicular traffic where such visibility is important to safety, nor shall such features in any way create potential hazards to pedestrians. In particular, at vehicular entrances and exits, no off street parking, landscaping, or other material impediment to visibility between the height of 2.5 feet and 12 feet measured from the roadway level, shall be permitted within triangular areas defined by lines connecting points described as follows: 
1.  Nonresidential use. Beginning at a point where the midline of the entrance or exit intersects the public right-of-way, thence to a point of 35 feet along the right-of-way in the direction of approaching traffic, thence to a point of 25 feet toward the interior of the lot along the midline of the entrance or exit, and thence to a point of beginning. 
2.  Multifamily residential use. Beginning at a point where the midline of the entrance or exit intersects the public right-of-way, thence to a point of ten feet along the right-of-way in the direction approaching traffic, thence to a point of ten feet toward the interior of the lot along the mid-line of the entrance or exit, and thence to point of beginning. (See also section 54-82.) 
(7)  Intersection clearance (corner island channelization). The length, width and shape of corner island areas will vary for different locations. The angle of intersections, angle of driveways, width of the right-of-way on both approaches, channelization radii, and other conditions will influence the location of driveways at intersections. The location and angle of an approach in relation to the highway intersection shall be such that a vehicle leaving the service facility may be merged in a lane of traffic moving in the desired direction before crossing the intersection; and that a vehicle entering the facility from the intersection may do so in an orderly and safe manner with a minimum of interference to through traffic. The following conditions shall be applicable in most instances: 
a.  No driveway shall be allowed to encroach upon pavement edge radii. 
b.  The following minimum distances from the intersection right-of-way line shall apply where there is no conflict with the foregoing conditions: 
1.  Traffic volume Average Daily Traffic (ADT) of 1,500 or less: 20 feet. 
2.  Traffic volume ADT over 1,500 but less than 10,000: 35 feet. 
3.  Traffic volume ADT over 10,000 but less than 15,000: 50 feet. 
4.  Traffic volume ADT over 15,000: 65 feet. 
The zoning administrator shall have the authority to increase these distances if in his opinion such action is necessary to ensure proper circulation of traffic. The zoning administrator may also modify these requirements if justifiable on the basis of site conditions. 
(8)  Parking and storage areas. Each establishment required by the zoning regulations in chapter 54 to have off-street parking, when providing off-street parking or storage space, shall provide such parking or storage space off the right-of-way to prevent the storage of vehicles on the driveway or the backing up of traffic on the travel way. Particular attention will be paid to "drive-in facilities" such as banks, car washes, drive-through restaurants, drive-in bill paying facilities, and other service facilities where motorists are served while in their vehicles, to ensure that queues of vehicles will not extend out onto the public streets. 
(9)  Driveway grade. 
a.  Residential driveways. The maximum grade which shall be permitted is 17 percent. 
b.  Apartments, commercial and industrial driveways. The maximum grade which shall be permitted is eight percent. 
c.  Grades within the right-of-way shall be controlled by existing shoulder slope or existing and future sidewalk elevations. 
d.  When driveways are intended for special use vehicles, the underside clearance and/or break-over angle of the subject vehicle shall dictate the maximum driveway grade. 
(d)  General conditions of approval. The following conditions shall apply to all approvals for driveway construction on public right-of-way. 
(1)  The applicant shall represent all parties with a property interest in the proposed driveway and shall certify that any driveway or approach constructed by him is for the bonafide purpose of securing access to his property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing vehicles, or for advertising, storage, or merchandising of goods on the city right-of-way. 
(2)  The applicant shall furnish all materials, do all work, and pay all costs in connection with the construction and maintenance of the driveway and its appurtenances on the right-of-way unless the city council agrees otherwise. The applicant shall arrange for and bear the entire cost of moving poles, trees, signs, hydrants, catchbasins, and other existing installations which may interfere with the proposed driveway. Materials used and type and character of work shall be suitable and appropriate for its intended purpose, and the type of construction shall be as designated and subject to approval of the zoning administrator. The timetable for installation shall be approved by the zoning administrator. The applicant shall make the installation without jeopardy to or interference with vehicular traffic using the highway or pedestrian traffic using the adjacent sidewalk. Street surfaces, shoulders, ditches, and vegetation disturbed shall be restored to equivalent or original condition by the applicant. 
(3)  No revisions or additions shall be made to the driveway or its appurtenances on the right-of-way without the written permission of the zoning administrator. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to make such changes, additions, repairs and relocations within statutory limits to the driveway or its appurtenances on the right-of-way as may at any time be considered necessary to permit the relocation, reconstruction, widening, and maintaining of the highway or to provide proper protection to life and property on or adjacent to the street. The city shall make all reasonable attempts to comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  The applicant, his successors or assignees, agree to hold harmless the city and its duly appointed agents and employees against any action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reasons of the exercise of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations. 
(6)  Whenever an existing road is improved by reconstruction or maintenance work, existing entrances to the road may be altered by the city to conform to the spirit and intent of the policy and standards set forth in these regulations. 
(7)  Whenever the zoning administrator determines that inadequate or indiscriminate access or long stretches of paved or unpaved accesses result in an undue hazard to the motoring public on the thoroughfare, existing entrances may be required to be altered or reduced in extent to conform with the spirit and intent of this policy and upon approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 516, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 2010-CO-11-666, § 13, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 44-164. - Additional construction specifications. 
For those improvements where construction specifications have not been set forth in this chapter, the city engineer shall determine such specifications, and construction of improvements shall be as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 517, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 44-165—44-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 44-193. - Administration and interpretation. 
The zoning administrator shall administer and interpret the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 601, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-194. - Violation and penalty. 
In any case where any land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of this chapter, the city attorney may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action of actions, or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 602, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-195. - Amendment. 
This chapter may be amended. Before enacting such amendment, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least 15 days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 603, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 44-196. - Variances. 
The city council may approve variances to the provisions of this chapter, after recommendation by the planning commission and a public hearing before the city council, notice of which shall be published at least 15 days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 221, § 604, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 44-197—44-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 44-216. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined by the city council that conservation subdivisions in residential zones can provide for the preservation of open space and greenspace for watershed protection and the nonstructural management of stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 101(A), 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 44-217. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(2)  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(3)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(4)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils that will reduce the amount of infrastructure including paved surfaces and utility easements necessary for residential development. 
(5)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(7)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)  To encourage street designs which reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 101(B), 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 44-218. - Applicability; ownership; housing density determination. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts as a use by right. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of chapter 54, zoning, and all other applicable laws except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)  Yield. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 201, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 44-219. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type as described in section 44-220; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan as described in section 44-220 shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 44-220 shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the subdivision and land development regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 301, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 44-220. - Open space. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Open space means the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet wide along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic views such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Aboveground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and nonprotected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Nonadjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces except as specifically authorized in subsection (c) of this section; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities (the plan) that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(3)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners' association or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners' association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not within the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection if approved by the city. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 401, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 44-221. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements and, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 501, 7-11-2005) 
Chapter 46 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; tax sales generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FREEPORT AND AD VALOREM EXEMPTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-19. - Freeport exemption law declared effective. 
The general "constitutional freeport exemption" law as set forth in Ga. Const. art. 7, § 2, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 is hereby made effective within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 2, 12-22-1997) 
Sec. 46-20. - Ad valorem tax exemptions. 
The city does exempt from ad valorem taxation all the value of the following types of tangible personal property or any combination thereof is and shall be exempted from ad valorem taxation: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for herein shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in the state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside the state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside the state. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is first stored in the state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this subsection shall be designated as being "in transit" upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, where such property is being stored. Such official books and records shall contain a full, true and accurate inventory of all such property including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such 'in transit' property shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of the state and of any political subdivision of the state. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 3, 12-22-1997) 
Sec. 46-21. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in section 46-20, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows: 
Finished goods means goods, wares and merchandise of every character and kind but shall not include unrecovered, extracted or unsevered natural resources, raw materials, goods in the process of manufacture or production or the stock-in-trade of a retailer. 
Raw materials means any material, whether crude or processed, that can be converted by manufacture, processing or combination into a new and useful product but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted or unsevered natural resources. 
(b)  All other definitions, terms and provisions of the aforesaid constitutional amendment and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 shall be and the same are hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference thereto. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 4, 12-22-1997) 
Sec. 46-22. - Exemption increase, reduction, etc., to comply with state law. 
Any increase, reduction or revocation of such exemption may be accomplished only by the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 5, 12-22-1997) 
Secs. 46-23, 46-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL TAX DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - CREATION OF SPECIAL TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-25. - Special tax districts created. 
There is hereby created and established special districts for the provision of services within such districts within the City of Oakwood. Fees, assessments and taxes may be levied and collected within such districts to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein and to construct and maintain facilities therefor as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs III and VI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-26. - Purpose for special tax district. 
The special districts shall be created for the following purposes: 
(a)  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic; 
(b)  Storm water and sewage collection and disposal systems; or 
(c)  Parks, recreational areas, programs and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-27. - Creation of tax district. 
(a)  When a service or maintenance of a facility, which is identified by this article, is requested by existing residents, these residents may request the creation of a special tax district to fund the service or maintenance of said facility as set forth in section 46-28 hereof. 
(b)  When construction and maintenance of a facility, which is identified by this article, is requested by existing residents, these residents may request the creation of a special tax district to fund the construction and maintenance of said facility as set forth in section 46-28 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-28. - Procedure for creation of tax district. 
(a)  Any owner of land (or lot owner as hereinafter defined) in any area of the city may present a written request for the creation of a tax district to the city manager. 
(b)  Owner of land or lot owner shall include all persons holding fee simple title according to the real estate records of Hall County, Georgia to real property within the proposed special tax district within the municipal limits of the city at the time the petition for the creation of said district is submitted as provided herein. For the purpose of petitioning the city council for the creation of a new special tax district, the owners of land shall have one vote per platted lot or parcel within a particular proposed special tax district. The term "owner of land" or "lot owner" specifically excludes tenants in possession of property within the special tax district. However, the term shall include the developer of any subdivision of less than ten lots or otherwise not covered by the city's subdivision ordinance who has fee simple title to an existing or proposed road and has promised to dedicate said road to the city. 
(c)  Application fee. An application fee as set forth in Chapter 22 of the Oakwood City Code shall be paid at the time of application. In addition for section 46-27(a) tax districts, a sum equal to the customary rates charged by the utility or service provider for similar developments for a period of two years shall be tendered with the application. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the city manager shall delineate the appropriate boundaries of the tax district, prepare a sketch or plat showing the proposed tax district and prepare a petition for the establishment of a special tax district for circulation among the property owners in the proposed special tax district in accordance with Form 2 hereof. The petition for the creation of the proposed special tax district shall be returned by the applicant to the city manager within 90 days of the initial application. 
(e)  If 75 percent of the lot owners in the proposed special tax district sign the petition for the creation of a tax district, the petition shall be presented to the city council for consideration. The city council shall then conduct a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not to create the proposed special tax district, giving consideration to health, safety and welfare concerns. Unless 100 percent of the lot owners sign the petition, the public hearing shall be advertised one time in the official organ of the county and at least one sign shall be posted in the proposed tax district giving notice of the hearing at least 15 days before the public hearing. The city manager shall verify the signatures on the petition and that the requisite number of lot owners has signed the petition prior to advertising the public hearing. For petitions submitted pursuant to section 46-27(b), said petition must be accompanied by a certificate of title or other document that shows the city's right-of-way in the facility or a letter of commitment from the land owner(s) to convey right-of-way to the city before implementation of the tax district and/or construction of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-29. - Register. 
There is created hereby special tax districts that shall be identified by a number assigned by the city and entered into a registry maintained by the city clerk. Each tax district shall be entered into said registry and shall contain the tax parcel numbers of each lot contained therein. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-30. - Collection. 
The charges for service in each district shall be paid as a district tax and shall be collected concurrently with the ad valorem tax billed to each lot or lot resident within each tax district. The city manager shall be responsible for the collection of the tax assessed to each tax district. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-31. - Approval of city council. 
Upon the recommendation of the staff, the city council shall approve or deny the creation of the special tax district. The special tax district shall be effective upon approval by the city council and the effective date shall be set forth on the final plat. When each requirement of this article is completed and the city council approves the creation of the special tax district, the city will assume the responsibility and make the periodic payments to the utility company or service provider for services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 2. - RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS FOR SPECIAL TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-32. - Determination and modification of service charges for section 46-27(a) special tax districts. 
(a)  For special tax districts created pursuant to section 46-27(a) hereof for the cost of providing services and maintenance, it shall be the landowner's responsibility to construct, install and equip the facility and make any initial improvements at their cost and any and all such improvements shall be installed on property where the city has title to land. 
(b)  For continuing services and maintenance in said special tax districts, the said costs shall be borne by the owners of the property within the special tax district receiving that service. Service charges shall be determined and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the objective of the city council of establish rates, fees and charges that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of services and maintenance of facilities to those properties who benefit therefrom and will be sufficient to meet the cost of budgeted programs, services and maintenance of facilities including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on revenue bond obligations incurred for construction and necessary improvements to the district. 
(c)  In the event of excessive vandalism to improvements within the special tax district that results in the city being billed for repairs, the city may pro-rate these repair bills and add a pro-rata share of these bills to the charge. Charges shall be assessed against all lots within the special tax district whether or not the lot is located within the boundaries of a particular subdivision, so long as the lot is located within the boundaries of the special tax districts. 
(d)  The city may contract with the public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-33. - Responsibility for costs for section 46-27(b) special tax districts. 
The cost of construction or maintenance of a facility under section 46-27(b) shall be advanced by the city. The city shall have the authority to contract with the necessary parties to complete the job. This cost plus administrative costs shall then be paid by the land owners of the special tax district and amortized for up to a 15-year period. The amortized cost of the construction/ maintenance project shall be assigned to each platted lot. Each lot, whether vacant or improved, will pay the same assessment. The special tax district shall end upon the payment of the total amortized costs to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-34. - Inclusion of administrative costs. 
Administrative costs incurred by the city in the collection of the special tax district tax shall be the responsibility of the owners of property in the district for which said costs were incurred. The administrative charge assessed each year shall be set by the city council, as provided in Chapter 22 of the Oakwood City Code, but shall not exceed 15 percent of the amortized amount due in the special tax district each year. The city council shall be authorized to establish different administrative charges for different special tax districts and to adjust the respective rates from time to time by resolution, after taking into consideration all of the cost factors involved in collecting the charges contemplated in this article including, but not limited to, the delinquency rate within a special tax district. The pro-rata portion of the administrative charges shall be charged to the owners of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 46-35. - Lien created. 
In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, the city shall have the rights available under the laws of the State of Georgia for assessment, the creation of a lien upon the property of the owner receiving the service provided together with all rights of execution, levy, foreclosure and sale. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-36. - Deposit required; forfeiture. 
In addition to the other charges authorized under this article, the city shall have the right to require deposits from the lot owners receiving the service in such amount as shall be determined by the city council. This deposit shall be held by the city as security for payment for services rendered, and the city shall have the authority to set off service charges against the deposit for nonpayment for services at such times and on such occasions as shall be determined by the city. Notice of such setoff shall be given to the lot owner by mail at the address of the property services although advance notice of such setoff shall not be required. In the event of a reduction in the deposit of a property owner because of failure to pay charges assessed pursuant to this article, the lot owner shall be required to restore the deposit to its required level upon request by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-37. - Service charges. 
The following rates shall apply: 
(a)  Dwellings units. Each attached and each detached dwelling unit shall be charged the rate applicable to one equivalent residential unit according to the rate schedule that is adopted by the city council as may be amended or modified from time to time. 
(b)  Subdivided lands. All subdivided lands within the district that are not deed restricted from constructing or installing a dwelling unit shall be charged at a rate of one equivalent residential unit multiplied by the number of dwelling units on the respective subdivided parcel of land. 
(c)  Administrative service charge rate. The administration of the services herein provided and for all billing and accounting shall be the responsibility of the city council. An administrative fee that is based on an amount necessary to defer necessary expenses related to the administration of this article shall be set by the city council and added to each tax bill. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-38. - Service charges, billing, delinquencies. 
A charge bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land, as shown from the public land records of Hall County shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is under billed or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may back bill for a period of up to four years but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A one and one-half percent late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any service that becomes delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-39. - Service charges billed in common. 
The service charge may be billed on a common statement and collected along with other city taxes and services. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-40. - Appeals. 
Any customer who believes the provision of this article has been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(a)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager. In the case of service charge appeals, the appellant shall include sufficient information to conduct a review of the service charge. 
(b)  Using the information provided by the appellant, the city manager shall conduct a review of the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(c)  In response to an appeal, the city manager may adjust the service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(d)  A decision of the city manager that is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the mayor within 30 days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the mayor by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The mayor shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days. All decisions of the mayor shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. 
(e)  All decisions by the mayor shall be final. 
(f)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the mayor may be reviewed upon application for writ of certiorari before the Superior Court of Hall County, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 46-41. - Conflict of laws. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the city council that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 46-42. - No waiver. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the municipal boundaries of the city. The City of Oakwood expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2014-CO-11-724, § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Chapter 48 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Due compensation applicable to any telepgraph or telephone company chartered by the laws of this or any other state. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  The City of Oakwood is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. as amended in 2008 by Senate Bill 379 (the "amended law") to collect due compensation from telegraph and telephone companies that maintain and operate lines and facilities occupying municipal street and rights-of-way equal to no more than three percent of actual recurring local service revenues received by such company from its retail, end user customers located within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(2)  If a company does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to the city in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(b)  Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(1)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues as defined in paragraphs 8 and 9 of O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b). 
(2)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city, the payment by such company to the city in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(c)  Authorized designee. The city manager shall, on behalf of the city, exercise the day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1, et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the city council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this chapter division. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between the telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to amended law and this chapter division. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexation and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(d)  Preamble. The preamble to this section is hereby incorporated into this ordinance as if set out fully herein. 
(Ord. No. 642, §§ 1—4, 7-13-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 642, §§ 1—4, adopted July 13, 2009, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, inclusion as § 48-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 48-2—48-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to franchise and regulate telecommunications services, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: 
(1)  Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; 
(2)  Each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; 
(3)  Each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and 
(4)  Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that the term "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means as the term is defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (47 USCA 251 et seq.) (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "cable services" means as the term is defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any cable system as defined in the Cable Act. 
Control or controlling interest means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person, including, but not limited to, a person's compliance with a franchise or revocable license, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise, and the beneficial ownership of shares representing ten percent or more of the votes entitled to be cast by a corporation's voting shares shall create a rebuttable presumption of control. 
Facility services means the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of conduit or related facilities in the streets by a person for sale or lease to third parties, other than affiliated persons, that use such conduit or related facilities for the transmission of telecommunication services, but such person does not itself provide telecommunications service or cable service to such third parties or any locations or other persons in the license area. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets by a telecommunications system to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to provide facility services along licensed routes pursuant to a license, or to construct, install, operate and maintain a telecommunications system as necessary to: 
(1)  Furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; 
(2)  Provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or 
(3)  Transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in section 48-35(b). 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means as defined by 47 USC 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 USC 251), but shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications service means as defined by 47 USC 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 USC 251), but shall not include cable services. In the event that the term "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "telecommunications service" means as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications system means the system, plant, equipment or property within the streets in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 259, § I(1.1), 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 363, § 1.1, 9-24-2001) 
Secs. 48-20—48-34. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 48-35. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided, or use or occupy the streets to provide facility services, without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this article to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act (47 USC 251). 
(b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to operate a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this article. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: 
(1)  May be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services or facility services; 
(2)  Shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed 500 linear feet; or 
(3)  Shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this section, then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(c)  The city council may grant one or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services, private telecommunications services or facility services. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(g)  The grant of franchises and revocable licenses by the city to persons constructing, operating or maintaining a telecommunications system shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 259, § I(2.1), 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 363, § 2.1, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 48-36. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  For the purpose of determining who controls the applicant, a detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including the following: 
a.  The names and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names and business addresses of all persons having control over the applicant; 
c.  Financial information sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system, or to provide facility services, in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law; and 
d.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system, or provide facility services, in compliance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare with respect to the applicant's use of the streets, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant and the areas served by such systems. 
(3)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the telecommunications system or facility services to be constructed in the streets, which shall include the following: 
a.  A map indicating the location of the system or facility services in the streets, and an estimated construction schedule, if known; and 
b.  A statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; 
(4)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references reasonably pertinent to the city's management of the streets or the compensation to be paid to the city, which shall be required or requested by the council or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 259, § I(2.2.01), (2.2.02), 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 363, § 2.2, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 48-37. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. 
(a)  Payable prior to consideration. No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this division. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(b)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this division will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(c)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount shown on the fee schedule maintained by the clerk by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount shown on the fee schedule maintained by the clerk by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city shall reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 259, § I(2.2.03), 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 363, § 2.2.04, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 48-38. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 259, § I(2.4), 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 363, § 2.4, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 48-39. - Evaluation criteria. 
(a)  An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services are provided, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city; 
(2)  Demonstration of adequate financial and technical ability to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, which such demonstration may be made by an adequate bond, security fund, and/or such other demonstration that is reasonably acceptable to the city, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or the Federal Communications Commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The willingness and the ability of the applicant to meet construction requirements and to abide by all conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise (including any terms or conditions imposed pursuant to section 48-41), any public, health, safety and welfare requirements reasonably related to the applicant's use of the streets, and the city's management of streets; and 
(5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations reasonably deemed pertinent by the city for managing the streets and safeguarding the interests of the city and the public in the streets, and for ensuring the city receives fair and reasonable compensation for use of the streets. 
(b)  In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services and in accordance with applicable law, other than section 253 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 USC 253) which is not applicable to persons providing only private telecommunications services or facility services, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 259, § I(2.5), 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 363, § 2.5, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 48-40. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information provided pursuant to this article as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain at which such application shall be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)  The city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this article and applicable law, including 47 USC 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 48-39. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements in order to grant a franchise or revocable license to an applicant when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 259, § I(2.6), 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 363, § 2.6, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 48-41. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in a separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)  The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five years; 
(2)  The franchise area authorized by the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(6)  For the limited purpose of ensuring that the grantee is complying with the terms of the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, the city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records with respect to its obligations under the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods in the streets; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight by the city of the grantee's use of streets and compliance with the franchise or revocable license; 
(12)  Provisions relating to an assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license or the telecommunications system that results in a change in control; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all licenses and permits necessary to provide telecommunications services by use of the city's streets from any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of city operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements of the telecommunications system, or from the provision of facility services; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the telecommunications system, or the provision of facility services; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city reasonably determines are necessary or appropriate to permit the city to manage its streets or ensure compliance with the franchise or revocable license, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(b)  The city manager shall make available to an applicant a model franchise or revocable license, as applicable, containing the terms and conditions the city seeks to impose pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The city manager shall have the right to modify, from time to time, such model franchise or revocable license, so long as such modifications are consistent with this article and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 259, § I(2.7), 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 363, § 363, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 48-42. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services or facility services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than 500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city, or unless the use or occupation of the streets is for the provision of facility services. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2.8, 9-24-2001) 
Secs. 48-43—48-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISE FEES 

Sec. 48-58. - State-issued cable or video franchise. 
A franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state shall be paid annually to the city on or before April 1. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 1-25-2008) 
Sec. 48-59. - Authorized designee. 
The city manager is hereby authorized, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 2, 1-25-2008) 
Secs. 48-60—48-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 48-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the zoning administrator for the city or his designee. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this article, the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC and any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or broadcast signals, multichannel, multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service. 
Building official means the individual issuing building permits. 
Erected includes the terms "constructed," "located" or "relocated." 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Height, when referring to a tower or other structure, shall mean the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower structure or appurtenance. 
Map or zoning map means the zoning map of the city. 
Micro telecommunication facilities means those antennas located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structure where antennas do not project more than 20 feet above the top of the roofline, parapet or top of the structure, whichever is higher, and there are no more than 12 antennas per site. Micro telecommunications facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower, either individually or together. 
Parcel includes the term "plot" or "lot." 
Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure on which is located one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers and cellular telephone towers. 
Used or occupied includes the terms "intended," "arranged" or "designed to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. No. 316, § 2, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-78. - Purpose. 
This article is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the city, telecommunication providers and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunication facilities within the city so as to protect the health, safety, property values and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunication carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the city as a proactive municipality in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this article shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunication facilities in the city; 
(2)  Protect the city's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunication facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennas; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunication towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; and 
(6)  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 1, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-79. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC; and 
(2)  Any present or future telecommunications facilities used for private or public purposes and located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city; provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved or will be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 3, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-80. - Placement of telecommunications facilities by zoning district. 
(a)  Micro telecommunication facilities shall be allowed in all zoning districts as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building official. 
(b)  The placement and installation of all other telecommunications facilities shall be restricted to the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts and shall be subject to city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 4, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-81. - Preferred and disfavored location sites. 
(a)  Preferred location sites. 
(1)  Co-location sites. Any existing telecommunications towers currently being used for transmitting and/or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site; provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this article and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the administrator or the city council to be visually obtrusive. 
(2)  Publicly used structures. Publicly used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city and, due to their institutional or infrastructure uses, are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, antennas should be less noticeable when affixed to utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges and flag poles than when placed on commercial or residential structures. 
(b)  Disfavored location sites. Any residential structure or site shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 5, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-82. - Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  General requirements for all telecommunications facilities. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this article. 
(1)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of such a facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building and safety codes for telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance. All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, to the extent required by any such regulations, then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this article shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
(3)  Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
(4)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, the FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. Any required lighting shall be restricted to dual lights (medium intensity white strobe lights daylight mode and red obstruction lights nighttime mode) unless the FAA or state aeronautics division requires some other form of lighting. 
(5)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. 
(6)  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely comparable with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the equipment shelters or cabinets from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The city council may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms, or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the city. 
(8)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(9)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(10)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  All property necessary to satisfy setback requirements covering the total height of the tower shall be under the ownership or control of the applicant. The requirement for control may be satisfied by lease or easement approved by the local governing authority. Multiple towers on the same site are permitted provided they meet all setback and separation requirements. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers: 
1.  Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the total height of the tower from any adjacent property line, as measured radially from the base of the tower to the property line of the subject property. 
2.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for buildings. 
b.  The city commission may approve a reduction in any of the required setbacks based on a finding that the adjacent land, including its future development pursuant to its zoning designation at the time of the application, will not be impacted in an adverse manner. The criteria used to determine those impacts are those set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Additional requirements for towers. 
(1)  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zoning district as much as possible. Towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(2)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
(3)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(4)  With the exception of those towers to be located on the same parcel of property, towers shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable or if the tower has insufficient antennas mounting space or insufficient structural capacity to accommodate co-location. 
(5)  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the city council or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
(6)  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing such as a chainlink fence not less than six feet in height. 
(7)  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. The clustering of new towers on the same parcel near existing telecommunications facilities is encouraged. 
(8)  Towers shall be located in a manner such that all ice-fall or debris from the tower structure or guy wires will not fall outside the parcel under the ownership or control of the applicant and on which the tower is located. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 6, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-83. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Application requirements for all building permits and uses subject to city council approval. Application for a building permit use subject to city council approval shall be made to the administrator by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit or use subject to city council approval: 
(1)  Basic information. 
a.  Site plans or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission buildings and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas and adjacent land uses. 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in section 48-82(a)(7). 
c.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
d.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility including frequency of service, personnel and equipment needs and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
e.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the state documenting the following: 
1.  Telecommunications facility height and design including technical, engineering and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
g.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage and/or capacity. 
h.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
i.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunication facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
j.  Designation of which location preference identified in section 48-81, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location 1 through 3 or is a disfavored site, the applicant shall provide the following: 
1.  A list of publicly used buildings, co-location sites or other preferred location sites located within the geographic service area; 
2.  An explanation of good faith efforts and measures taken to secure each of these preferred location sites and why each site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible; 
3.  How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and network. 
(2)  Site inventory. Each application shall include a site inventory including a list of all existing and proposed telecommunications facility sites within a one-mile radius of the city and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
a.  Street address; 
b.  Assessor's block and lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; 
c.  Zoning district; 
d.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
e.  The number of antennas per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.); and 
f.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation. 
(3)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the city or county planning department which are located within the applicant's search area. Applicant must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location of any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicant must justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The city will review with special care justifications that rely only upon undue expense and/or undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The city shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site and on the surrounding area. 
b.  In all allowed zoning districts, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
c.  The applicant shall submit information which describes the anticipated capacity of the proposed tower and to what extent co-location will be possible on the proposed tower. 
d.  The applicant must provide a utility inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(4)  Other information requested. The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the administrator to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(b)  Public notice requirements. All telecommunications facilities to be reviewed as uses subject to the city approval shall have public notice requirements in addition to those requirements of chapter 54, zoning. The applicant shall provide the administrator with the names and addresses all abutting property owners and all owners of property lying in whole or in part within a distance of 500 feet of a proposed tower as measured from the property line of the parcel on which the tower is to be constructed. The administrator shall send these property owners a letter postmarked no later than 15 days prior to the public hearing by the city council informing them of the time and place of the public hearing and a general description of the application. 
(c)  Uses subject to city council approval. 
(1)  A request for a use subject to city council approval shall be initiated by application to the administrator and handled in accordance with the special use provisions of chapter 54, zoning. The city council may issue a special use permit under this section provided it shall be determined that all of the requirements of sections 48-82 and 48-83 have been satisfied. 
(2)  In order to cover the actual cost to the city of obtaining expert opinion and studies, fees in addition to those established in chapter 54, zoning, are established for those telecommunications facility applications requiring city council approval. An initial deposit of $1,000.00 shall be paid to the city to review the application. If the actual cost to the city is greater than this deposit, the applicant shall be billed for the difference and payment shall be made prior to the hearing before the city council. If the actual cost is less than the initial deposit, the difference will be refunded to the applicant within 20 days following the city council hearing. 
(3)  In granting a special use permit, the city council may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or to otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 7, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-84. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the administrator or building official may be taken by any person aggrieved or any official of the city affected by the decision of the administrator or building official. Such appeal shall be made pursuant to the appeal provisions set forth in chapter 54, zoning. Appeals from any decision of the city council shall be made to the superior court within 30 days of the decision. Any decision by the administrator or the building official denying a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. Any decision by the city council denying or approving a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 8, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-85. - Nuisances. 
Telecommunications facilities including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling shall be operated at all times within the limits of the city so as to not cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 9, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-86. - Removal of antennas and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the building official, any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance, provided the owner of the facility shall have such extended period as may be required beyond the 30 days if the nature of the cure is such that it reasonably requires more than 30 days and the owner of the facility commences the cure within the 30-day period and thereafter continuously and diligently pursues the cure to completion. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within the required time period, the city may provide notice to the owner requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking such action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower of antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 10, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-87. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunication facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking such action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower of antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 11, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-88. - Preexisting towers/nonconforming uses. 
(a)  All telecommunications facilities operative on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with chapter 54, zoning. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing telecommunication facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A telecommunications facility that has received the city's approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived in the form of either a building permit or special use permit but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)  Placement of an antenna or co-location on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 12, 6-14-1999) 
Sec. 48-89. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the city council finds that the application of this article would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this article may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 14, 6-14-1999) 
Chapter 50 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, § 2, ¶ 3(a)(4); traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; certain powers preserved to local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES OF THE ROAD 

Sec. 50-21. - Adoption by reference. 
Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 and such Uniform Rules of the Road as now or hereafter amended are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with the like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 41, § 2, 3-28-1977; Amd. No. 41, § 1, 8-13-1979; Amd. No. 41, § 1, 1-11-1993) 
Secs. 50-22—50-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-47. - Authority. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 40-6-183 whereby local authorities are empowered to alter lawful speed limits and in accordance with a Traffic Engineering Investigation conducted by the Georgia Department of Transportation for and on behalf of the City of Oakwood, Georgia which established List of Roadways Number 0139-10-2013, the following (as set forth in section 50-48 hereof) "on-system" and "off-system" speed zones with the indicated speed limits are hereby adopted within the municipal limits of the City of Oakwood, Georgia and are approved for the use of speed detection devices: 
(1)  Morning. From 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time on school days only. 
(2)  Afternoon. From 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time on school days only. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-04-670, § 1, 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-716, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 50-48. - List of roadways for the city. 
(a)  On-system. [Following is a list of on-system roadways:] 

 
(b)  Off-system. [Following is a list of off-system roadways:] 

 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-04-670, § 1, 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 2013-CO-10-716, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 50-49. - School zone hours. 
School zone hours as indicated in section 50-48 shall be effective as follows: 
(1)  Morning. From 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time on school days only. 
(2)  Afternoon. From 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time on school days only. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 624, § 3, 9-22-2008) 
Secs. 50-50—50-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING, STANDING AND STOPPING 

Sec. 50-72. - Parking prohibitions. 
All parking is hereby prohibited in, along and upon that portion of Flat Iron Drive in the city from its intersection with State Route 53/Mundy Mill Road and its intersection with Branch Road. Said prohibition against standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times and is indicated on official signs except where it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. When, by this section or any other ordinance of the city, any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city public works director to install appropriate official traffic control devices giving notice thereof and no such regulation shall be effective unless such devices are in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1, 3-15-1996) 
Secs. 50-73—50-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TOW TRUCKS 

Sec. 50-103. - Wrecker services. 
(a)  Officer on scene of accident . Whenever, as a result of any motor vehicle accident or collision on a street or road within the limits of the city, there exists a need for the services of a wrecker or tow truck, the officer on the scene of the accident or collision shall inquire of the person needing the services of the wrecker or tow truck as to whether the person desires to call a specific wrecker service or tow truck operator. In the event the person requests that a specific wrecker service or tow truck operator be called, the officer shall comply with the request, subject to a determination by the officer as to whether the requested wrecker service can perform the needed services in a timely fashion. The determination of the ability of the wrecker service shall be within the discretion of the officer on the scene and based upon the following factors: distance requested wrecker service will have to travel and the time involved; the degree traffic is disrupted or the traffic hazard created and the length of time the officer will need to remain on the scene to supervise the removal. The officer shall document in his report the factors considered in rejecting the person's request and ask the person need[ing] the wrecker services to choose another. The same determination shall again be made by the officer on the scene in regarding to the ability of the requested wrecker service to perform the needed services in a timely fashion. If the second request is reject[ed], the office[r] shall deem that the person needing the services has failed to designate a wrecker service for the removal of his/her property. In all cases whereby the owner or operator of a motor vehicle fails to designate a wrecker service for the removal of his/her motor vehicle for whatever reason, inside the city limits, the city shall contact only those wrecker services which have been approved under this section to be placed on the city wrecker rotational list and have made application to be placed on the rotating list for service calls by the city. 
(b)  Wrecker services placed on a rotational basis for service calls. The chief of police shall establish two rotation lists. The first list shall be for light duty operators and shall consist of those having been approved for light duty service. The second list shall consist of only those wrecker services having been approved for heavy duty service. The rotational list shall be approved and certified by signature of the chief of police. Each wrecker service approved shall be placed on its respective list for as long as they can demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section and shall be used by the city for a period of two weeks. The start of the rotation will begin at 12:01 a.m. on Monday and will run continuously for a period of two weeks. At the end of this period, this wrecker service shall be placed at the bottom of the list and each list shall be rotated in like manner every two weeks. The chief of police shall have responsibility for the maintenance of records that ensure that wrecker services placed on the list are in compliance with the requirements of this section. Any new wrecker service shall be placed at the bottom of the list for which it is approved. Within 30 days after a new company is placed on the rotation list a revised copy of the rotation list will be delivered by personal service or by certified mail to all wrecker services currently on the rotation list. The chief of police shall have responsibility for conducting a meeting with all wrecker services on the rotation lists a minimum of annually. 
(c)  Approval requirements to be placed on the rotational lists. At the time that the wrecker service submits its application to be included on the rotating lists as provided for in subsection (b) of this section, the wrecker service shall provide proof to the city that it has satisfactorily complied with the following requirements: 
(1)  For light duty list it has a minimum of three wreckers for light duty service or a minimum of one wrecker which meets the requirements for heavy duty list with the capacity to handle and transport all types of vehicles including but not limited to automobiles, pickup trucks, commercial trucks and vans, buses and tractor trailers. 
a.  Light duty operator that owns or leases at least three wreckers and proof of title or legally binding and enforceable contracts or leases for at least three wreckers together with equipment sufficient for each wrecker. A light duty wrecker is a wrecker that is only able to tow/haul passenger cars, pickup trucks and vans. One of the three wreckers may be a heavy duty wrecker which would enable the owner or lessee to qualify for approval for inclusion on the heavy duty rotation list as provided for hereafter. 
b.  Heavy duty operator that owns or leases one wrecker and proof of title or legally binding and enforceable contracts or leases one wrecker together with equipment sufficient for the wrecker. A heavy duty wrecker shall be equipped with air brakes and must have a minimum of 26,001 gross vehicle weight (GVW). The wrecker must be capable of towing all other types of vehicles including, but not limited to, automobiles, pickup trucks, commercial trucks, and vans, buses and tractor trailers. 
c.  Each lease or contract shall be for a period of not less than 12 months and must be approved by the city. In the event any lease or contract provided hereunder is terminated during the period of the time that the wrecker service is on the rotation list, the owner of the wrecker service shall promptly notify the city of the termination and shall furnish proof of any new lease or contract which shall be approved by the city. 
d.  Any lease or contractual arrangement shall meet each and every other requirement as specified in this subsection (c) of this section. 
e.  Any wreckers used to meet the minimum of this section must be permanently lettered to include, at a minimum, the name of the wrecker service and the phone number of the business. This lettering must be displayed on both sides of the wrecker and shall not include any magnetic or removable signs. 
(2)  The wrecker service will be available and on call for 24 hours per day, seven days per week, during the time that wrecker service has duty as the list wrecker service. 
(3)  Proof of liability and garage liability insurance, covering all loss and damage to the vehicles as well as the contents and others in an amount not less than $350,000.00. 
(4)  Proof of compliance with all local, state, county and federal inspection requirements and/or local, state, county and federal requirements for the operation of a wrecker or towing service. This is to include all state requirements concerning the receiving and disposing of abandoned vehicles. 
(5)  The wrecker service shall maintain a City of Oakwood business license regardless of whether said wrecker service maintains a business license in any other jurisdiction. 
(6)  An impoundment area located within the city limits of the city with a minimum of one acre, lighted and adequately secured or guarded which may include, but is not limited to, a chain link fence with a barbed wire top. 
(7)  Ownership of a two-way business band radio with applicable license or other method of communication such as cellular telephone. A citizens band radio is not an acceptable method for communication under this section. 
(8)  All vehicle operators shall have the proper driver's license for the type of vehicle which they are operating. All vehicles are appropriately insured and maintained in safe operating condition as required by applicable local, state and federal requirements for the operation of motor vehicles. 
(9)  That it will not charge fees or rates in excess of the amounts provided in Chapter 22 of this Code. The chief of police shall have responsibility for an annual review of the schedule of fees and determine if they are adequate or should be revised. The fee schedule is in no way applicable to private calls. 
(10)  In addition to basic services provided by the wrecker service, the following requirement duties are required for the wrecker service to continue to be placed on the list: 
a.  The wrecker service shall respond promptly to calls for service (within 20 minutes) unless there are extenuating circumstances. 
b.  The wrecker service shall clean up all debris from the street or area of the wreck. 
c.  The wrecker service upon impoundment of a motor vehicle shall promptly make an inventory of the vehicle and all personal property and provide a receipt of the inventory to the owner/operator of the vehicle. 
d.  In the event a wrecker service is unable to respond for a call for service, the next-listed wrecker service will be called. Wrecker services on the rotational list cannot designate that another service take their calls. 
e.  At all times keep the city notified as to the name, owner, address and telephone number of the wrecker service. The wrecker service will immediately notify the city of any change in liability insurance coverage or change in the status of their wrecker fleet. The wrecker service shall also immediately notify the city of any changes in their employee roster or employee's driving privileges. 
f.  It shall be the responsibility of the wrecker service owner to provide the chief of police with proofs of compliance with these requirements as may be necessary for the maintenance of their records. 
g.  Any wrecker service which removes a motor vehicle from public property at the request of a city law enforcement officer or stores such vehicle shall, if the owner of the vehicle or some person acting for the owner is not present, seek the identity of and address of all known owners of such vehicle from the city law enforcement officer requesting removal of such, from such officer's police department within three business days of removal. The city police department shall furnish such information to the person removing such vehicle within three business days after receipt of such request. 
(11)  Wrecker services may be inspected for compliance with this section by the chief of police or his designee. This inspection would be during the time the wrecker service has the duty as the list wrecker service. 
(12)  a.  No wrecker service owner or operator that shall have been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, been on probation, parole or been imprisoned for the violation of any of the following offenses of the United States, this state or any other state, or of any political subdivisions thereof: child molestation; child endangerment; child abuse; prostitution; keeping a place of prostitution; pimping, pandering; masturbation for hire; public indecency; sodomy; aggravated sodomy; rape; statutory rape; sexual battery; aggravated sexual battery; peeping tom; possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or alcohol; or criminal solicitation or attempt to commit any of these listed offenses shall be placed on the city's rotational list for service calls by the city. 
b.  No wrecker service owner or operator that shall have been convicted within the previous five years for the violation of any of the following offenses of the United States, this state or any other state, or of any political subdivisions thereof: driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; contributing to the delinquency of a minor; no insurance; or suspended license shall be placed on the city's rotational list for service calls by the city. 
c.  All wrecker service owners or operators on city list must submit their criminal histories to the chief of police or designee before being approved for placement on the rotational list. 
(Ord. No. 2012-CO-06-704, § 1, 7-9-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-CO-06-704, § 1, adopted July 9, 2012, deleted § 50-103, in its entirety and enacted new provisiions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 50-103 pertained to "Officer on scene of accident." See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 50-104. - Wrecker prohibited to stop at scene of accident unless called. 
It is unlawful for any person operating a wrecker or tow truck within the city to stop at the scene of a motor vehicle accident or collision within the city unless called directly by a party to the accident or collision or as provided in section 50-103. Violation of the provisions of this article is punishable by a fine of $300.00 or 90 days imprisonment, either or both in the discretion of the recorder. 
(Ord. No. 48, § 2, 4-10-1978; Amd. No. 48, § 2, 5-14-1979) 
Secs. 50-105—50-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 50-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling within city limits, as permitted herein. 
Truck means any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, including raw materials, and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds five tons. 
Truck route means any street, or portion thereof, within the city, over which trucks are not prohibited to operate by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 1, 7-9-1979) 
Sec. 50-123. - Application of regulation. 
(a)  Prohibited streets. Except as specifically set out in this subsection (b) of this section, no trucks shall be operated over the following streets: 
(1)  Oak Street from Railroad Street to Allen Street. 
(2)  Tara Country Subdivision. 
(3)  Vista Brook Subdivision. 
(4)  Academy Street from Main Street to Oak Street. 
(5)  Quail Run Subdivision. 
(6)  Main Street. 
(7)  Allen Street. 
(8)  Railroad Street to Tara Drive. 
(9)  Flat Creek Road from McEver to the intersection of Old Oakwood Road. 
(10)  Old Oakwood Road to Mundy Mill Road. 
(11)  Oakwood Road from Main Street to Mundy Mill Drive. 
(12)  Candlestick Lane. 
(13)  Township Drive. 
(14)  Shawnee Drive. 
(15)  McClure Drive. 
(16)  Pebble Creek Drive. 
(17)  Pebble Creek Lane. 
(18)  Terry Street. 
(19)  Walnut Circle. 
(20)  Walnut Street. 
(21)  Explorer Trail. 
(22)  Wood Lane Drive. 
(23)  Plainview Road from Thurmond Tanner Parkway to Railroad Street. 
(24)  Nellie Drive. 
(25)  Prestwick Drive. 
(26)  Crawford Oaks Subdivision. 
(27)  Summerwind Way. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Any truck may be deviated from a truck route and operated over a prohibited street listed herein where necessary to reach a destination point within the city for the conduct of business, provided streets upon which truck traffic permitted are used until reaching the intersection of the prohibited street nearest such destination. 
(2)  Any truck may be operated over a prohibited street listed herein where necessary to leave a point of origin within the city for the conduct of business, provided it leaves such prohibited street at the nearest intersection of a truck route to such point of origin. 
(3)  Any truck may be operated over a prohibited street listed herein if owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or materialmen, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city. 
(c)  All streets within the city except those listed in subsection (a) of this section are open to truck traffic. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 2, 7-9-1979; Amd. No. 63, § 2, 12-10-1979; Amd. No. 63, § 2, 5-9-1983; Ord. No. 2011-CO-09-679, § 1, 10-10-2011) 
Sec. 50-124. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public. 
(b)  The chief of police of the city shall cause those streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly signposted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(c)  The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 3, 7-9-1979) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); obedience to persons directing traffic required, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-2. 
Sec. 50-125. - Violations. 
Violations of the within chapter shall be punished as provided by Georgia law in any court of competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, the Municipal Court of the City of Oakwood, Georgia in accordance with the City of Oakwood Charter of 2007 and Section 1-11 of the Oakwood City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-04-670, § 2, 5-9-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-CO-04-670, § 1, May 9, 2011, repealed § 50-125, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 50-125 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Chapter 52 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 52-1—52-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER (RESERVED) 

Secs. 52-19—52-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local home rule powers under Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6) and (7) include sewage collection and disposal systems and the development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 52-40—52-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 52-67. - Findings. 
The city finds that it is necessary that it establish material and construction standards for the installation of sanitary sewer lines for development projects within the city or that will otherwise connect with lines owned and/or operated by the city so that developers, engineers and general contractors operating within the city have clear and definite guidance in the construction policies and specifications required by the city so that an atmosphere that is conducive to growth is facilitated. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 52-68. - Adoption of City of Gainesville, Georgia, Standard Specifications for Sanitary Sewer. 
The City of Gainesville, Georgia Standard Specifications for Water Mains and Sanitary Sewers, Fourteenth Edition, dated June, 2003, and as revised in January, 2004, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as the standard specifications for all City of Oakwood wastewater collection systems which are connected with the Gainesville wastewater and sanitary sewer system and which flow into and are treated by the Gainesville wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 2, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 52-69. - Adoption of City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, Standard Specifications for Sanitary Sewer. 
The City of Flowery Branch, Georgia Standard Specifications for Water Mains and Sanitary Sewers, as revised August 9, 2004, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as the standard specifications for all City of Oakwood wastewater collection systems which are connected with the Flowery Branch wastewater and sanitary sewer system and which flow into and are treated by the Flowery Branch wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 3, exh. A, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 52-70. - Adoption of Town of Braselton, Georgia, Standard Specifications for Sanitary Sewer. 
The Town of Braselton, Georgia Standard Specifications for Water Mains and Sanitary Sewers, as revised July, 2006, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as the standard specifications for all City of Oakwood wastewater collection systems which are connected with the Braselton wastewater and sanitary sewer system and which flow into and are treated by the Braselton wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 450, § 3, 10-10-2005) 
Sec. 52-71. - Adoption of City of Gainesville Rules and Regulations for Connection to and Use of the City of Gainesville Sanitary Sewer System. 
The city specifically adopts all rules and regulations of the City of Gainesville as set forth in the City of Gainesville Code as of June 30, 2009. 
Sec. 52-72. - Adoption of City of Flowery Branch Rules and Regulations for Connection to and Use of the City of Flowery Branch Sanitary Sewer System. 
The city specifically adopts all rules and regulations of the City of Flowery Branch as set forth in the City of Flowery Branch Code as of June 30, 2009. 
Sec. 52-73. - Adoption of Town of Braselton Rules and Regulations for Connection to and Use of the Town of Braselton Sanitary Sewer System. 
The city specifically adopts all rules and regulations of the Town of Braselton as set forth in the Town of Braselton Code, sections 20-101 through 20-119 and 20-125 as adopted as of June 30, 2009. 
Secs. 52-74—52-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 52-97. - Rules of state adopted by reference. 
(a)  The rules and regulations of the state department of public health governing individual sewage systems are hereby adopted by the city. 
(b)  A copy of the rules and regulations of the state department of public health for individual sewage disposal systems is on file with the city clerk and available for the general public. 
(Ord. No. 27, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-1976) 
Secs. 52-98—52-124. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Use of Public Sewers 

Sec. 52-125. - Discharge to natural outlet prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(2), 10-8-1984) 
State Law reference— Dumping wastes into public storm or sanitary sewer pipeline prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2. 
Sec. 52-126. - Construction of septic tank, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(3), 10-8-1984) 
Sec. 52-127. - Connection required. 
The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city, and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer where available and elevation permits in accordance with the provisions of this division within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line except where approved and adequate facilities now exist and are operating properly. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(4), 10-8-1984) 
Secs. 52-128—52-156. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Private Wastewater Disposal 

Sec. 52-157. - When public sewer unavailable. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 52-127, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(9), 10-8-1984) 
Sec. 52-158. - Permit required. 
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written preliminary permit for construction signed by the building inspector. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement with any plans, specifications, and other information as is deemed necessary by the building inspector or county health department. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid in the amount set forth in the Oakwood Schedule of Fees at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(10), 10-8-1984) 
Sec. 52-159. - Installation to be approved. 
The preliminary permit for the operation of a private wastewater disposal system shall not become final and effective until the installation is completed and approved by the building inspector. The building inspector shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the building inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(11), 10-8-1984) 
Sec. 52-160. - Compliance with all regulations. 
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of state and federal water pollution control agencies of jurisdiction and with the local board of health. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the front footage of the lot is less than 75 feet and the area of the lot is less than 12,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet or to any well. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(12), 10-8-1984) 
Sec. 52-161. - Connected to public sewer when available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 52-127, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days after notification by the city building inspector or by the health department that the operation of the private facility is no longer acceptable, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(13), 10-8-1984; Amd. No. 120, § 2, 10-23-1986) 
Sec. 52-162. - Owner to operate and maintain. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(14), 10-8-1984) 
Sec. 52-163. - No conflict with board of health requirements. 
No statement contained in this subdivision shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(15), 10-8-1984) 
Sec. 52-164. - Private wastewater disposal. 
No person shall discharge private wastewater other than through a direct connection with the public sewer system. Discharge of wastewater removed from private wastewater treatment systems into the city's sewer is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(16), 10-8-1984) 
Secs. 52-165—52-181. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Building Sewers and Connections 

Sec. 52-182. - Storm drains not connected to sanitary sewer. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the city for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(24), 10-8-1984) 
Secs. 52-183—52-225. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Public Sewers; Incompatible Uses (Reserved) 

Secs. 52-226—52-267. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Protection from Damage 

Sec. 52-268. - Tampering, etc., with sewage works prohibited. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall on conviction thereof be punished as prescribed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(47), 10-8-1984) 
Sec. 52-269. - Reimbursement to city for damages. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, damage, fine, penalty, or fee occasioned the city by reason of such violation or violations, including, but not limited to, any fee, penalty, or fine assessed against the city by any state or federal agency as a result of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(52), 10-8-1984) 
Secs. 52-270—52-299. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Powers and Authority of Inspectors (Reserved) 

Secs. 52-300—52-320. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - Penalties (Reserved) 

Secs. 52-321—52-351. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IX. - Service Charges 

Sec. 52-352. - Payment. 
All users of the public sewage system shall pay such service charges, surcharges, connection fees, or other charges for the use of same as are now or hereinafter provided by ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 120, § 1(54), 10-8-1984) 
Secs. 52-353—52-377. - Reserved. 
Subdivision X. - Sewer Rate Schedule 

Sec. 52-378. - User charges. 
All fees shall be in an amount as set forth in the Oakwood Schedule of Fees maintained by the city clerk. 
Sec. 52-379. - Sewer system connection fee. 
All fees shall be in an amount as set forth in the Oakwood Schedule of Fees maintained by the city clerk. 
Secs. 52-380—52-419. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XI. - Industrial Discharge Permit System (Reserved) 

Secs. 52-420—52-441. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 52-442. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this division that occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain system regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System except as exempted in section 52-444(b). 
Industrial Activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or environment or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 201, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 52-443. - Findings, purpose and intent. 
(a)  Findings. It is hereby determined by the city council that: 
(1)  Discharges to the city separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(2)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System; and 
(4)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 101, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 52-444. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibitions of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge, cause or allow others under its control to throw, drain or otherwise discharge into the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants other than stormwater. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows and any other water source not containing pollutants; and 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
The prohibition provision of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(c)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this division if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this division must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city manager. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent and which may be connected to the storm sewer system shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 301, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 52-445. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 401, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 52-446. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
Representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the representatives of the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the representatives of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the representatives of the city access to a facility is a violation of this division. 
(7)  If representatives of the city have been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this division or any order issued hereunder or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 501, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 52-447. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, City of Oakwood Separate Storm Sewer System, state waters or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  The person responsible for the facility, activity or operation or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in subsection (b) of this section is a violation of this division. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 601, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 52-448. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this division may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, representatives of the city are authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this division has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this division and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require, without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city manager to the city council. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city council shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the city council upholding the decision of the city manager, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the representatives of the city or its designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in this subsection. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice or, if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this division, the city, through its police department, may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the municipal court for the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for 90 days or both for each violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this division is a threat to public health, safety, welfare and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and the city may seek cumulative remedies. Additionally, the city may recover attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this division including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 701, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 52-449. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This division is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this division are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this division imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Amd. No. 120, § 802, 7-11-2005) 
Chapter 54 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General planning and zoning authority, Ga. Const. art. 9, § 2, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment means the cessation of the use of the property, by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights to the property to another owner or of resuming the use of the property. 
Abutting means having property or district lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
Accessory apartment means a second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure on the same lot as the main dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single housekeeping unit (family), with provision within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. Such a dwelling is considered an accessory use and/or structure to the main dwelling. 
Accessory building or use means a building or use which: 
(1)  Is not more than two stories in height; 
(2)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; 
(3)  Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or use served; 
(4)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and 
(5)  Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use. 
Agriculture means the cultivation or growth of a field or horticultural crop, including dairying, livestock and poultry raising, farm forestry, and other similar enterprises or uses. 
Airport means any area of land, water or mechanical structure which is used for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including any appurtenant structures and areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings, other airport facilities, rights-of-way or easements. 
Alley means a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in use from that of one district classification to another. 
Amusement arcade means a building or part of a building in which three or more pinball machines, coin-operated billiard tables, videogames, or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained. 
Animal hospital means a facility operated by a licensed veterinarian specifically for the practice of veterinary medicine. 
Antique shop means a store or shop for the sale of relics, objects of ancient times or of an earlier period, works of art, pieces of furniture or decorative objects made at a much earlier period than present. 
Apartment house means a multifamily dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single ownership, designed for use by three or more housekeeping units, living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking on the premises. 
Art gallery means a facility, structure or building used for the display of sculptures, paintings, photographs or other artistic works for public viewing with only incidental sales. 
Automated teller means an accessory facility through which certain banking functions such as deposits and withdrawals can be completed without the personal assistance of a bank employee. 
Automobile sales lot means an area of land on which more than one car, truck, van, boat, agricultural vehicle or implement, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or other motorized vehicle exists, and where such vehicles are indicated as for sale, as evidenced by for sale signs, dealers tags, warranty signs in windows, or other such indications. 
Automotive repair garage means a use of land and/or structures involving maintenance, repair, conversion and other such services on cars, trucks, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and mobile/manufactured homes, typically including vehicle storage and incidental sales of parts. Also referred to as automotive services. 
Basement means that portion of a building located wholly or partly underground but having less than one-half of its height above the grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of determining maximum permitted height. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a dwelling unit, or portion thereof, where short term lodging rooms, with or without meals, are provided for compensation, and where the operator of the inn resides on the premises. 
Berm means an earthen structure used as a screening device in conjunction with the planting of grass, shrubbery and trees. 
Biomedical waste means pathological waste, biological waste cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals), sharps, chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts. 
Boardinghouse means a building, where for compensation, both lodging and meals are provided for persons, provided that a single-family dwelling shall not be deemed to be a boardinghouse by reason of a contribution to or expense sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related by blood or marriage. 
Broadcasting studio means a room or suite or rooms operated as a radio or television broadcasting studio or station with local broadcast capability or intended for satellite distribution of programs. 
Buffer means a landscaped open space and/or screen located between incompatible land uses for the purpose of visibly separating uses through distance and to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established for the purpose of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the common property line. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
Building area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards, buffers and building setbacks have been provided, where construction of principal buildings is permitted. Also know as the building "envelope." 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building inspector means the building inspector of the city or his authorized representative. 
Building, principal, means a building or structure in which is conducted the main use of the property on which the building or structure is located. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the lot on which said structure is located. 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of a building, including any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements shall be observed for those areas adjacent to street rights-of-way. 
Bus terminal means an area and building where buses stop to load and unload passengers and luggage or packages and which may include the sale of bus tickets. 
Campground means land containing two or more campsites which are located, established or maintained for occupancy by people in temporary lodging units such as camp tents, or cabins, for recreation, education or vacation purposes. 
Carport means an accessory structure or portion of a principal structure, consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least two sides, and designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles or boats. 
Carwash means an establishment engaged in the business of washing vehicles with self serve, automated or staffed facilities. 
Cemetery means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, but not including crematories and mortuaries. 
Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the city council and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs, ditches, right-of-way edges, or pavement edges of such street. 
Certificate of occupancy means a legal statement or document issued by the building inspector indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
Church means an institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meeting and other purposes, including education, day care and recreation facilities when owned and operated by such church. 
Circus means the temporary use of land offering entertainment and instruction in the form of such things as thrill rides, games of chance and skill, educational exhibits, display of oddities and the like. The term "circus" also includes carnivals and fairs. 
City engineer means the engineer or engineering firm in the employ of the city, or an authorized representative. 
Clinic means a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
Club, nonprofit, means a building or facilities owned or operated by a group for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not customarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
College means a degree-granting establishment, accredited or qualified, which provides formal academic education and generally requiring for admission at least a high school diploma or equivalent academic training. Accessory uses under this definition include but are not limited to dormitories, cafeterias, bookstores, research facilities, sports facilities and auditoriums. 
Commercial recreation facility means any use of building and/or land that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Amphitheaters and stadiums; 
(2)  Assembly halls, auditoriums and meeting halls; 
(3)  Billiard halls, pool rooms and amusement/video arcades; 
(4)  Bowling alleys; 
(5)  Firearms shooting ranges and turkey shoots; 
(6)  Golf driving ranges, public golf courses, miniature gold courses and baseball batting cages; 
(7)  Private clubs operated for profit, race tracks for animals and motor-driven vehicles, ice and roller skating rinks; 
(8)  Horse and pony-riding rinks; 
(9)  Circuses and carnivals; 
(10)  Indoor and drive-in theaters; 
(11)  Physical fitness facilities and health clubs; 
(12)  Botanical gardens and zoological gardens; 
(13)  Commercial museums and art galleries; 
(14)  Racquetball courts; 
(15)  Bungee jumping. 
Compatibility means the characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include means intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled, and such environmental affects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, air pollution or radiation. 
Comprehensive plan means those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the city council for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Conditional use means a use which would not be appropriate without restriction throughout a zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within a zoning district, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions (such as controls on number, size, area, location and activities) contained in these regulations or required by the city council. Such uses may be permitted only if approved by the city council in accordance with the regulations established herein. 
Conditional zoning means the granting or adoption of zoning for property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, density or actions stipulated by the city council to mitigate adverse impacts that are anticipated without imposition of such conditions. 
Condominium (residential building) means a building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant holds full title to his unit and joint ownership in the common grounds. 
Continuing care retirement community means an age restricted development or facility that provides, to individuals of retirement status, accommodations and care such as board, independent living, licensed nursing care and medical or other health-related services, and that typically enters into contracts to provide care. 
Contractor's establishment means an establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities including, but not limited to, plumbing, electrical work, building, paving, carpentry and other such contracting activities, including the storage of materials and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. 
Convalescent home means a home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are professionally cared for. 
Convenience store means a small retail store which sells pre-packaged food products, household and other items and which may include the sale of gasoline and diesel fuel. 
Conversion means any change in the original use or purpose of a building or lot to a different use. 
Curb cut means a provision for vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Day care center means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, seven or more children under 18 years of age. A day care center of six children or less may be considered to be a home occupation. 
Density means the number of dwelling units developed, or to be developed, per gross acre of land, or the gross square footage of a building per acre of land. 
Development means any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Developmentally disabled person means a person with a disability resulting in substantial functional limitations in such person's major life activities which disability is attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, or autism or is attributable to any other condition related to mental retardation because such condition results in impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior similar to that of mentally retarded persons. 
District, zoning, means a geographical area or areas, designated with the use of symbols on the official zoning map, wherein uses of land are restricted in type, size, height and other limitations as established in these regulations. 
Dormitory means a building, the primary purpose of which is to provide living accommodations for individuals, but which does not include individual kitchen facilities. 
Drive-in means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the customer within a motor vehicle on the outside of the principal building. 
Drive-in theater means a facility designed for the outdoor projection of motion pictures onto a permanent screen to be viewed from the patron's automobile. 
Dry cleaners means an establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services to individual customers. 
Dry cleaning plant means an establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services on a large scale for institutions, businesses or other such establishments. 
Dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for permanent living, and/or sleeping quarters. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more single housekeeping units with separate kitchen and bath facilities for each family or housekeeping unit, including apartment houses, row houses, townhouses, and similar housing types but not including motels, hotels, lodginghouses, hospitals, nursing homes, or public institutions such as prisons and mental institutions. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by one single housekeeping unit only. 
Dwelling, two-family, (duplex) means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by two single housekeeping units living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Easement means a non-possessory interest in land; a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons, of a portion of land for a specified purpose. 
Exterminator means an establishment or person engaged in the service of killing insects, mice, rates or other pests. 
Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than five unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit and using the same cooking facilities; provided, however, that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. Any group which is licensed by the state or any political subdivision thereof, which contains up to six developmentally disabled persons and up to two supervisors or surrogate parents residing on the premises at one time shall constitute a family. 
Farm means an area of land principally devoted to agriculture. 
Farm supply store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of animal feeds, fertilizers, agricultural chemicals, pesticides, seeds and other such farm supplies. 
Fence means a structural barrier for enclosure, screening or demarcation, presenting a solid face or having openings amongst or between its constituents members; also, a wall separate from or extending from a building. 
Finance, insurance and real estate establishments means and includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Banks, savings and loan institutions and credit unions; 
(2)  Security and commodity exchanges; 
(3)  Insurance agents, brokers and service; 
(4)  Real estate brokers, agents, managers and developers; 
(5)  Trusts; 
(6)  Holding and investment companies. 
Flea market means the use of land, structures or buildings for the sale of produce or new or used goods, usually of second quality or at cut-rate prices, in which more than two vendors are accommodated in spaces on the same lot or within the same building. 
Floor area means the gross heated, finished horizontal area of the floors of a dwelling unit, exclusive of basement, attic, carport or garage. 
Funeral home means a building or part thereof used for human funeral services, which may contain space and facilities for: 
(1)  Embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of the dead for burial; 
(2)  Performance of autopsies; 
(3)  Storage of caskets; and 
(4)  Chapel services. 
Garage means an accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles and other personal property as an accessory use. 
Glare means a sensation of brightness within the visual field that causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Grade means the average of the finished ground levels at the center of all walls of a building. 
Greenhouse means a building designed or used for growing or propagating plants, with walls or roof usually designed to transmit light. The term "greenhouses" shall not be construed to include commercial horticultural activities. 
Guesthouse means a lodging unit for temporary guests in an accessory building. No such lodging unit shall contain independent cooking or kitchen facilities and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which is capable of posing a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise, based on factors set forth in applicable regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
Height, building, means the vertical distance measured from the grade to the: 
(1)  Highest point of the coping of a flat roof; 
(2)  Declines of a mansard roof; or 
(3)  Mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
Heliport means an area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the landing and take off of helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Helistop means a heliport, but without auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Home occupation means any occupation or profession engaged in by any occupant of a dwelling. 
Hospital means an institution providing health services, for inpatients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient department, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
Hotel means a public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence which may make provisions for meals, entertainment and various personal services provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes in which ingress and egress from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Household pet means an animal which is customarily kept for company or pleasure within a home or yard which is not exhibited to the public, and raised for commercial purposes, (e.g., show dogs). The term "household pets" includes domestic canines, felines, tropical birds, fish, rabbits, rodents and other animals customarily sold in pet stores. 
Impervious surface means any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land, including, but not limited to, buildings, paved roads, parking lots and driveways, decks, swimming pools and patios, but not including graveled driveways and parking areas. 
Inoperable vehicle means any motorized vehicle, other than those vehicles temporarily disabled, incapable of immediately being driven. Any motorized vehicle without a current vehicle registration tag shall be considered an inoperable vehicle. 
Junk means any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale, or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. The term "junk" may include inoperable vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, machinery, brush, wood and lumber. 
Junkyard or salvage yard means any property involving the abandonment, parking, storage or disassembly of junk, including inoperable vehicles or junked machinery, the abandonment, storage, sale, or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators and/or other old household appliances, used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials, used paper, rags or other scrap materials. 
Kennel means the housing, breeding, boarding or training of four or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals, operated for the purpose of providing income or revenue. 
Laboratory means a place devoted to experimental study, such as testing and analyzing, but not including the manufacturing of products. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands of the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, scraping, excavating, transporting, or filling of land; and any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure, but specifically excluding agricultural and gardening practices. 
Landfill means an area wherein solid wastes are placed, under license, compacted and covered but specifically excluding hazardous or radioactive wastes. 
Landscape strip means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space, the width of which is measured from a given property line and extending the developed portion of the property line. A landscape strip, as distinguished from a buffer, may be disturbed by grading or side development but is maintained as landscaped open space. A landscape strip may consist of grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls, fences or other features designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and outside of the development. 
Landscaping means changing, rearranging or adding to the original vegetation or scenery of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic effect appropriate for the use to which the land is put. It may include reshaping the land by moving the earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation. 
Landscaping service means an establishment engaged in performing a variety of lawn and landscaping services such as lawn fertilizing, mowing, spraying and planting, and the planting and maintenance of landscaping. 
Laundromat means a business that provides home-type washing and drying machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises. 
Library means a building in which literary, musical, artistic or reference materials are kept for use but not generally for sale. 
Loading and unloading space means a space, typically with dimensions of 12 feet by 60 feet, logically and conveniently located for pickups and/or deliveries or for loading and/or unloading, scaled to delivery vehicles to be used, and accessible to such vehicles. 
Lodginghouse means a fraternity house, sorority house, dormitory, or other such building designed and occupied, with or without separate kitchen or housekeeping facilities for each unit. 
Lot means a parcel of land having principal frontage on a public street; a developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street rights-of-way but inclusive of easements. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage means the part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings and structures, but not including unenclosed parking areas. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
Lot, double frontage, means any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public street is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
Lot frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the county superior court clerk; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the same office as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum required front yard (regulatory front building setback) line. 
Mail order office means an establishment which engages in the taking of requests for mail order or telephone or facsimile machine for catalog merchandise but not including the storage or distribution of such merchandise. The term "mail order office" does not include an establishment where orders are picked up or taken in person. 
Manufactured home means a structure, built to conform to national standards embodied in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq., administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes mandatory plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. A manufactured home displays a certificate from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Manufactured home park means a parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned or improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings and facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on such property. 
Manufactured home space means a parcel of land within a manufactured home park which is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual mobile home and accessory structures for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured home subdivision means parcels of land planned or improved for the placement of manufactured homes on individual lots for residential use. 
Manufacturing, processing and assembling means the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The land uses engaged in these activities are usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered under this definition if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement. The term "manufacturing, processing and assembling" also includes the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastic resins or liquors. 
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure made of metal or other durable material affixed to the wall of a building. 
Materials recovery facility means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting streets. 
Mini-warehouse means a building or group of buildings that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, which may include accessory office and/or night watchman's residence, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use; also known as self-service storage facilities. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land or any portion thereof under single ownership which has been designed, planned, or improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for residential use, including land, buildings, and facilities used by the occupants of mobile homes on such property. 
Modular structure means a factory-fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential or commercial purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
Motel means a public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence, which may also include provision of meals, entertainment and various personal services, provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes, distinguished from a hotel in that ingress and/or egress to and from all rooms is made primarily from an exterior walkway rather than from an interior lobby. 
Museum means an establishment engaged in the procurement, care, study, and display of objects of historical, educational and cultural value and interest. 
Nonconforming lot means a lot, the area, width, or other characteristic of which fails to meet requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and which was of record as of the date of adoption of these regulations. The term "nonconforming lot" also means any lot which was subsequently annexed into the city limits which does not meet the requirements of the particular zoning district. 
Nonconforming structure means any building or structure which does not conform to the regulations governing the bulk, location, height or size of buildings or structures permitted in the district. 
Nonconforming use means any building or use of land or building lawfully existing at the date of adoption of these regulations or as a result of subsequent amendments to these regulations, which does not conform with the permitted use provisions established herein for the district in which it is located. 
Nuisance means anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses; anything that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, even though it may otherwise be lawful. 
Nursing home means a long-term care facility which admits patients by medical referral and provides for continuous medical supervision via 24-hour-a-day nursing care and related services in addition to food, shelter, and personal care. A nursing home may be licensed as a skilled nursing facility, an intermediate care facility, or an intermingled facility. 
Off-street means not located on a street, as defined by this section. 
Office means a building or portion thereof wherein predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations are performed, and not involving retail sales or other sales of any kind on the premises. 
Official zoning map means the map, which accompanies the text of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that delineates the geographic location of the boundaries of zoning districts established in this chapter in relation to natural features, manmade features and/or property uses. 
Open air business means any commercial establishment that displays products in a non-enclosed area. 
Open space, landscaped, means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, set aside and maintained as a buffer, landscape strip or other approved open area. 
Outdoor display means the keeping of any goods, junk, material or merchandise outside of a business, building or establishment or in an area visible from a public street, for display, advertisement or purposes of attracting rental or sales. Such definition shall not be construed as to include the temporary loading or unloading of such goods, junk, material or merchandise to or from an enclosed area. 
Outdoor storage means the keeping of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or commercial vehicles in the same outdoor place for more than 24 hours. 
Parking lot means any public or private open area used for the express purpose of temporary parking of private motor vehicles. A parking lot may be the principal use on a given lot or an accessory use to the principal use on a given lot. 
Parking space means an area having an area of at least 160 square feet and 300 square feet including maneuvering space within a parking lot, to be used exclusively as a temporary parking space for a motor vehicle. 
Permitted use means a use which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Personal care means protective care and watchful oversight of a resident who needs a watchful environment but who does not have an illness, injury, or disability which requires chronic or convalescent care, including medical and nursing services. 
Personal care home means a building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals, and personal care, for non-family ambulatory adults. 
Personal care home, congregate, means a personal care home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Personal care home, family, means a personal care home for adults in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
Personal care home, group, means a personal care home for adult persons in a residence or other type of building, non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
Photography studio means an establishment engaged in photography for hire for the general public, including, but not limited to, portrait, passport, wedding and other special occasion photographs. 
Planned unit development means a form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common open space, and a mix of building types and land uses in a more dense setting than allowable on separate zoned lots. 
Planning commission means the city planning commission as previously established by the city Charter or by city ordinance. 
Pool hall means an establishment containing one or more billiard tables, operated for profit, and open to the general public. 
Premises means a lot as otherwise used in this chapter. 
Public use means any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by the federal government, state, this county or other county, the city or other municipality, or any authority, agency, board or commission of the governments in this definition, which is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Government administrative buildings; 
(2)  Police and fire stations; 
(3)  Public health facilities and hospitals; 
(4)  Public works camps; 
(5)  Parks and community centers; 
(6)  Public roads and streets; 
(7)  Airports; 
(8)  Water and sanitary sewerage storage; 
(9)  Intake, collection and treatment and pumping facilities; 
(10)  Public housing facilities; 
(11)  Jails and correctional centers. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicular-type portable structure which can be towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel uses. 
Recreational vehicle (RV) park means any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. 
Recycling collection center means a principal or accessory use that serves as a neighborhood or regional dropoff point for temporary storage of recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers, but specifically excluding processing of such resources. 
Recycling plant means a facility in which recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used in packaging or for production. 
Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values. 
Rehabilitation center means facilities authorized or licensed by appropriate agencies for the primary purpose of rehabilitation of: 
(1)  Offenders against the law; 
(2)  Persons with drug or alcohol abuse problems; 
(3)  Mentally handicapped; and 
(4)  Physically handicapped. 
Residence for caretaker or night watchman means an accessory residence, located inside or in addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land, designed or occupied by security personnel for security reasons only. 
Residential district means any R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or MHP zoning district as indicated on the official zoning map. 
Restaurant means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverages. 
Restaurant, drive-in, means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverage to persons in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink on the premises. 
Retail sales means establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Retail trade establishment, enclosed, means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which operates entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, except for outdoor display or other use during business hours and accessory storage in enclosed, subordinate buildings. Incidental repair is also included. The following are considered enclosed retail trade establishments (list is not all inclusive): 
(1)  Convenience stores including the sale of gasoline; 
(2)  Paint, glass and wallpaper stores; 
(3)  Grocery and miscellaneous food stores, including retail bakeries; 
(4)  Apparel, shoe and accessory clothing stores; 
(5)  Furniture, floor covering and home furnishing stores; 
(6)  Household appliance stores; 
(7)  Radio, television and computer stores; 
(8)  Musical instrument stores; 
(9)  Record, tape and compact disc stores; 
(10)  Eating and drinking places not involving drive-in or drive-through facilities; 
(11)  Drugstores and proprietary stores; 
(12)  Liquor stores; 
(13)  Used merchandise stores; 
(14)  Sporting goods and bicycle shops; 
(15)  Book, art and stationery stores; 
(16)  Hobby, toy and game shops; 
(17)  Jewelry, gift, novelty, souvenir and antique shops; 
(18)  Camera and photographic supply stores, luggage and leather goods stores; 
(19)  Sewing, needlework and piece goods stores; 
(20)  Catalog and mail order stores; 
(21)  Florists; tobacco stores; 
(22)  Optical goods stores; 
(23)  Newsstands; 
(24)  Automotive parts stores not involving repair; 
(25)  Video rental and sales stores; 
(26)  Watches and clocks; 
(27)  Pawnshops; 
(28)  Convenience stores with or without retail gasoline sales. 
Retail trade establishment, unenclosed, means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which does not operate entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, and which all or a portion of the goods and products are displayed and/or stored, or business transacted, in the open-air or other shelter not completely enclosed. The following are considered unenclosed retail trade establishments, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Lumber and building materials; 
(2)  Retail nurseries and garden supply stores; 
(3)  Mobile and manufactured home/modular building dealers; 
(4)  New and used car, truck, boat, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle, and other motorized vehicle sales and leasing; 
(5)  Eating and drinking places including drive-in and drive-through facilities; 
(6)  Fuel oil and liquefied petroleum dealers; 
(7)  Agricultural implement and equipment sales and rental; 
(8)  Christmas tree sales; 
(9)  Flea markets; 
(10)  Monument sales establishments; 
(11)  Automatic teller facilities; 
(12)  Gas stations; 
(13)  Produce stands; 
(14)  Firewood sales. 
Rezoning means an amendment to or a change in the official zoning map. 
Right-of-way means that area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee simple title by the city council or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Roominghouse means a building where, for compensation, lodging only is provided. 
Sanitarium means a hospital used for treating chronic and usually long-term illness. 
Satellite dish antenna means a round, parabolic antenna intended to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. 
School means a facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction. A school is considered public if operated by a unit of government. 
Schools, trade, technical or business, means an establishment in which is offered, for compensation, instruction in a trade, craft, technical field, or business skills. 
Screening means a method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides year-round maximum opacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet or that screens structures and activities from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. The term "screening methods" includes opaque fences, walls, hedges, berms and other features. 
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Semipublic use means any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by private utilities or private companies for a public purpose, or which is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water distribution or transmission lines or systems; 
(2)  Electric power substations, wires, towers, cables, and poles; 
(3)  Railroad facilities; and 
(4)  Bus and air terminals. 
Service, automotive, means an establishment providing services and repairs to motor-driven vehicles, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Rental car facilities; 
(2)  Automobile parking lots; 
(3)  Top and body, paint, automotive glass, transmission, and tire repair shops; 
(4)  Carwashes, including automated and full-service facilities; 
(5)  Oil change and lubrication; and 
(6)  Motor-driven vehicle sales, rebuild, restoration and parts sales. 
Service establishment, business, means a facility engaged in support functions to establishments operating for a profit on a fee or contract basis, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Advertising agencies; 
(2)  Photocopying, blueprinting and duplication services; 
(3)  Mailing agencies; 
(4)  Commercial art and graphic design; 
(5)  Disinfecting, exterminating and pest control; 
(6)  Personnel supply services and employment agencies; 
(7)  Computer and data processing services; 
(8)  Detective, protective and security system services; 
(9)  Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; 
(10)  Publications and business consulting firms; 
(11)  Food catering; 
(12)  Interior decorating; and 
(13)  Locksmiths. 
Service establishment, personal, means a facility engaged in the provision of services to persons and their apparel, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Barber and beauty shops; 
(2)  Coin-operated and full-service laundries and dry cleaners; 
(3)  Photographic studios; 
(4)  Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors; 
(5)  Dance studios, schools and halls; 
(6)  Specialized instructional studios and schools; 
(7)  Day care centers; 
(8)  Massage parlors; 
(9)  Travel agencies. 
Service, lodging, means a facility which offers temporary shelter accommodations, or place for such shelter, open to the public for a fee, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Hotels, motels and motor hotels; 
(2)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses; 
(3)  Bed and breakfast inns; 
(4)  Recreational vehicle parks; and 
(5)  Campgrounds. 
Service, miscellaneous, means those service establishments not otherwise specifically classified, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; 
(2)  Funeral homes, mortuaries and mausoleums; 
(3)  Construction contractors establishments not involving outside storage of vehicles or materials; 
(4)  Palm reading and fortunetelling; 
(5)  Pet grooming, pet psychologists, dog obedience schools; 
(6)  Taxidermists. 
Service station means any building, structure or land used for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil, accessories, and motor vehicle servicing, except that major repairs, body repairs, and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered motor vehicle servicing. 
Services, health, means health care facilities as well as establishments providing support to the medical profession and patients, such as: 
(1)  Medical and dental laboratories, blood banks, oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services; 
(2)  Offices of doctors, dentists and other medical practitioners. 
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a street, alley, or the property boundary lines of a lot and the front, rear, or side lines of a building located on that lot. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking on the property. 
Site plan means a graphic illustration, two-dimensional, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a lot or tract and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific lot or tract of land. 
Slaughterhouse means an establishment where animals are killed, butchered, prepared for further processing, or processed in a final form. 
Solid waste means discarded putrescible and non-putrescible waste, except water-carried body waste and recovered materials, and shall include garbage; rubbish such as paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage; ashes; street refuse; dead animals; sewage sludges; animal manures; industrial waste, such as waste materials generated in industrial operations; residue from incineration; food processing wastes; demolition wastes; abandoned automobiles; drudging and construction waste. 
Story means that portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, arterial, means, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, arterial streets are those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
Street, collector, means, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, collector streets are those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas. 
Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent or semi-permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles, but specifically including tents, bleachers, gasoline pumps, recreational vehicles, travel trailer signs, and structures from which products are vended and similar objects. 
Subdivision means the division of a parcel or tract of land into two or more lots for the purposes of creation of lots for development, the rearrangement of existing lot lines, or for the purpose of transfer of ownership. 
Taxicab station means an establishment engaged in furnishing passenger transportation by automobile or van, not operating on regular schedules or between fixed terminals and containing space for taxicab fleets and related office facilities. 
Temporary use means a use intended for a specified limited duration. 
Townhouse means one of a group of three or more attached dwelling units under fee simple ownership. 
Transitional use means a permitted use, building or structure that by nature or level and scale of activity acts as a transition or buffer between two or more incompatible uses. 
Transportation, communication and utility facilities means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Bus passenger stations and terminals; 
(2)  Airports, heliports and helistops; 
(3)  Taxicab and limousine services; 
(4)  Radio and television studios and broadcasting towers; 
(5)  Recycling collection centers; 
(6)  Truck stops and truck terminals; 
(7)  Trucking and courier services; 
(8)  Marinas; 
(9)  Railroad facilities; 
(10)  Gas, electric, water supply services; 
(11)  Emergency medical services; 
(12)  Ultra-light flight parks. 
Travel trailer means a portable dwelling or lodging unit having no other foundation than wheels, distinguished from a mobile or manufactured home, designed for short-term travel, recreational or vacation use, including pickup campers and motor homes. 
Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant having a single truck diameter of two inches or more which normally grows at maturity to an overall height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
Truck stop means an area principally devoted to the service re-fueling, temporary storage or parking of trucks, including accessory buildings, structures and uses such as restaurants. 
Truck terminal means an area where cargo is stored for routing or reshipment and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis, or an area in which semitrailers and/or trucks are parked and stored. 
Underground storage tank means any one or combination of tanks, including underground pipes connected thereto, which is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances and the volume of which, including the volume of the underground pipes connected thereto, is ten percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. 
Unenclosed area means any area of a given lot or structure which is not covered with a roof and protected by opaque walls on each of the sides of said area or structure. 
Use means any purpose for which a building or structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
Utility means public or private water and sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, cable television lines, roads, driveways, river/lake access facilities, stormwater facilities, railroads, airports and bus terminals. 
Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Warehouse means a building or group of buildings for the storage of goods or wares, with controlled access to contents. 
Wholesale distribution means an establishment engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users or to other wholesalers. 
Wrecked motor vehicle compound means an area used to store disabled motor vehicles until such time as their disposition (either by junkyard, salvage or repair yard) has been determined by the insurance company, the owner of the vehicle, or his legal representative. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. A yard may contain a parking and/or loading area unless otherwise specified by these regulations. 
Yard, front, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, both spaces with street frontage shall be considered front yards. In the case of double frontage lots, the spaces as defined above shall both be considered front yards. 
Yard, rear, means the space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Yard sale means the temporary sale of home furniture, appliances, clothing and/or domestic items owned by an occupant of a residential dwelling and taking place on the premises on which such occupant resides, whether in the yard or in a carport or garage, usually as a result of the occupant moving/relocating to another place of residence. Yard sales which do not take place on the premises on which such occupant resides are considered open-air businesses. 
Zero lot line means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides have no side building set back and rest directly on a side lot line. 
Zoning means a legislative procedure in which the community is divided into districts or zones within which permitted uses, and in some cases conditional uses, are established as well as regulations governing lot size, bulk, height and other development requirements. 
Zoning administrator means the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(b)  Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. III, § 301, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 2016-CO-06-741, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
Secs. 54-2—54-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 54-21. - Authority to amend. 
The city council may from time to time amend the number, shape, boundary or area of any zoning district, or may amend any regulation pertaining to any district; or may amend any article or section of this chapter. The procedure for adopting a new zoning ordinance and for amending the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and zoning map shall be as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 1, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-22. - Initiation of zoning amendments. 
A petition to amend the text of these zoning regulations or the official zoning map may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or any person, firm, corporation or agency that owns property involved in a petition for amendment, subject to the provisions established herein. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 2, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-23. - Frequency of application. 
(a)  The city council or the planning commission may at any time file, in its own name, an application for amendment to the text of the zoning regulations or the official zoning map, except that if a zoning decision of the city council is for the rezoning of property and the amendment to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and zoning map to accomplish the rezoning is defeated by the city council, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the city council. 
(b)  A property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for a map amendment, conditional use permit or variance affecting the same or any portion of a parcel of property more often than once every six months from the date of any previous decision rendered by the city council. 
(c)  A property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for a text amendment affecting the same or any portion of property more often than once every 12 months from the date of any previous decision rendered by the city council. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed as to limit new applications involving the same property for which the application was made, provided the new application contains substantive differences from the original application as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 3, 6-14-1993; Amd. No. 212, § 1, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 54-24. - Withdrawal of amendment application. 
(a)  Any petition for an amendment to the text of the zoning regulations or official zoning map may be withdrawn, at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, at any time prior to closing the required public hearing by the city council upon notice to the zoning administrator. If the public hearing before the city council has been completed, withdrawal by the applicant is not permitted. Any required application fees shall be refunded to the applicant only if such application has not been prepared and submitted for advertisement as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Any petition for a variance or conditional use permit may be withdrawn, at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, at any time before the opening of the meeting of the city council where said petition is scheduled to be considered. Application fees for variances and conditional use permits will not be refunded unless withdrawal within five business days is accepted by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 4, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-25. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Application materials specified in this section shall be required for the following petitions: 
(1)  Amendments to the official zoning map; 
(2)  Conditional use permits; 
(3)  Variances; and 
(4)  Appeals. 
(b)  The application materials are as follows: 
(1)  An application form furnished by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  A legal description of the property to be considered in the application. The legal description shall be by metes and bounds unless an alternative legal description (such as a tax plat map) is accepted by the zoning administrator. Boundary surveys of the property should be submitted with the application whenever available. 
(3)  A letter of intent which describes general characteristics of the proposed development such as type and timeframe of development, background information in support of such application, and any other information deemed pertinent by the applicant. For variance applications, the letter of intent shall address the criteria specified in section 54-29. For zoning map amendment applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in section 54-27. For conditional use permit applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in section 54-28. 
(c)  Applications for variances, conditional use permits and map amendment to commercial or industrial zoning districts shall require a site plan with all information specified. Unless otherwise noted in the approval, the site plan submitted in support of an approved application shall be considered a part of the approval and must be followed. 
(d)  A fee for said application as established by the city council from time to time. 
(e)  Applications which require action by the city council shall also require disclosure of any conflicts of interest as specified in O.C.G.A. ch. 67A, entitled "Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions." 
(f)  Applicants shall submit 15 copies of any required site plans and letters of intent to the zoning administrator for distribution to the applicable bodies and/or review agencies. The zoning administrator may require more or less copies depending on the nature and extent of required review. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 5, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-26. - Site plan requirements. 
All site plans required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(1)  Title of the proposed development and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or other designer of the proposed development. 
(3)  Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing relationship of the site to streets or natural landmarks. 
(4)  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths; buildings; watercourses; parking and loading areas; and other physical characteristics of the property and proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 6, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-27. - Criteria to consider for map amendments. 
(a)  The applicant, zoning administrator, planning commission and city council should review an application for zoning map amendment with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property and whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(5)  The physical suitability of the subject property for development as presently zoned and under the proposed zoning district. 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property, and whether there are existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the rezoning request. 
(7)  The zoning history of the subject property. 
(8)  The extent to which the proposed zoning will result in a use which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, or other public facilities. 
(9)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan, land use plan, or other adopted plans. 
(b)  The zoning administrator, planning commission and city council may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular request. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 7, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-28. - Criteria to consider for conditional uses. 
(a)  The applicant, zoning administrator, planning commission and city council should review applications for conditional uses with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the use. 
(2)  The number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
(3)  The amount and location of open space and the provision of screening is such that buffering of incompatible uses is achieved. 
(4)  Ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe, and the effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
(5)  The location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not cast light on adjacent, adjoining or neighboring properties. 
(6)  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are not inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
(7)  Public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
(8)  The proposed use will not have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of adjacent land uses or the general area. 
(9)  The physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
(10)  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The zoning administrator, planning commission and city council may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular conditional use application. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 8, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-29. - Criteria to consider for variances. 
(a)  The city council is hereby empowered to authorize upon application in specific cases such variance from the dimensional requirements of zoning regulations (any provisions requiring a number to be achieved, such as height in feet, setback, lot area, lot width, parking and loading requirements, etc.) as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same zoning district or of permitted or nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship, after appropriate application in accordance with section 54-25, upon specific findings that all of the following conditions exist. The absence of any one of the conditions shall be grounds for denial of the application for variance. 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other land or structures in the same district; 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these zoning regulations would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners within the district in which the property is located; 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or general welfare in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonable affect their value; 
(5)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(6)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building, or structure; and 
(7)  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structures which are not permitted by right in the district involved. 
(b)  A variance shall not be granted in cases where the requested relief to the property owner can be remedied by a change to a zoning district which otherwise would not require a variance. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 9, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-30. - Procedures for appeals. 
(a)  The city council is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in the interpretation or enforcement of these zoning regulations. 
(b)  The city council is empowered to hear an appeal made by any person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau affected by any decisions of the planning commission or zoning administrator based on this chapter. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed as permitting an appeal of the city council's denial of a rezoning request or conditional use, the appropriate remedy of which would be suit in county superior court. 
(d)  The appeal shall be taken within 30 days, or as provided by the rules of the city council, by filing with the zoning administrator notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the city council. 
(e)  The city council shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give at least 15 days of public notice thereof and due notice to the parties in interest and shall render a decision on the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 10, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-31. - Conditional approval permitted. 
In exercising the powers to grant variances, zoning map amendments and conditional use approvals, the zoning administrator and planning commission may recommend, and the city council may attach any conditions to its approval which it finds necessary to render the proposed zoning district, conditional use or variance compatible with adjacent and nearby properties and land uses. Applications to alter or modify any such conditions shall be considered only after compliance with procedures and notice requirements as established in this chapter, for the particular type of application. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 11, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-32. - Public notice and public hearing required. 
(a)  This section shall apply only to adoption of a new zoning ordinance, applications for amendments to the text of the zoning regulations, and amendments to the official zoning map. Public notice and public hearing shall not be required for applications for variances and conditional use permits. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed application, fees and other information required by this chapter, the zoning administrator shall cause notice of such application to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the community at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing before the city council. Said published notice shall include, as a minimum, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing before the city council, the location of the property being considered, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning district. The zoning administrator shall also cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on said property one or more signs, each of which shall contain the information specified for published notices. The public hearing before the city council shall not take place until said signs have been posted for a least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing before the city council. Posting of signs shall not be required for appeals, since an appeal only applies to interpretation of zoning regulations which apply to all similarly situated properties. 
(c)  The planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing on any matter, although at its discretion it may hold a public hearing during the regular meeting at which said application is to be considered. 
(d)  Public hearings may be delayed, rescheduled or continued at another time and date, provided announcement is given at the time and place of the initially scheduled and advertised public hearing, and provided such date, time and location of the public hearing to be delayed, rescheduled or continued is announced. In cases where the planning commission has exercised its option to table an application, the advertised public hearing before the city council shall nevertheless be held at the time and date the hearing was advertised. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 12, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-33. - Written notice to adjoining property owners. 
(a)  Upon receipt of completed applications for amendment to the official zoning map, the zoning administrator shall provide written notice of the application, including all information for published notices specified in section 54-32, by certified mail at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of public hearing before the city council, to all property owners with land adjoining the subject property, including those across public rights-of-way. Said written notices shall be mailed to the address of the current property owner of adjoining land as indicated on the current tax rolls of the city. Copies of said written notice and postage receipts in the official zoning application file shall be considered sufficient evidence that the city has satisfied this notification. The failure to receive the written notice by a property owner shall not be considered a violation of due process notification requirements. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may, at his discretion, provide written notices to property owners adjoining property which is the subject of a variance application, where in the zoning administrator's opinion adjoining property owners may be affected by the variance requested. Written notices to adjoining property owners in variance applications shall not be considered a mandated due process requirement. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 13, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-34. - Recommendation by zoning administrator. 
The zoning administrator may, as appropriate, customarily submit to the planning commission and city council, prior to a scheduled meeting or public hearing, copies of the site plan and letter of intent along with a written recommendation for approval, disapproval, deferral, withdrawal or other recommendation. Said recommendation shall include adequate justification, considered within the context of the appropriate criteria as specified by this chapter. The recommendations of the zoning administrator shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the city council. Copies of the zoning administrator's recommendations shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 14, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-35. - Planning commission recommendation. 
(a)  Prior to the meeting or public hearing held by the city council, the planning commission shall hold a meeting to consider any zoning ordinance and all applications for amendment to the text of the zoning regulations, amendments to the official zoning map, conditional use applications and variances. 
(b)  After completing its studies of the particular petition, the planning commission shall submit a recommended action in writing to the city council. The planning commission may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the planning commission shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the city council. Copies of the planning commission's recommendations and reports shall be made available to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the city council and at the meeting or public hearing before the city council. 
(c)  The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its recommendations. The city council shall hold the advertised public hearing but shall not take action on any of said applications, until it has received the recommendation of the planning commission within the specified time period. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed application. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 15, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-36. - Conduct of public hearings. 
All public hearings regarding applications considered by the city council, and by the planning commission if it elects to hold a public hearing, shall be held in accordance with any procedures adopted by the city council and, in addition, shall be governed by the following procedures: 
(1)  The presiding officer shall open the hearing by stating the specific application being considered at the public hearing. At this time the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. 
(2)  The zoning administrator or other staff may present a description of the proposed application, any applicable background material, his recommendation regarding action on said application as appropriate, and the recommendations and reports of the planning commission, as appropriate. 
(3)  Persons who support the application will be asked to comment first. The petitioner may, upon recognition and upon statement of name and address, present and explain his application. The petitioner, or his designated agent, is expected to attend the public hearing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to such meeting. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
(4)  Persons who oppose the application or who have questions about the subject application will be asked to comment next. All interested parties after being recognized shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposed application by standing before the appropriate body and identifying their name, address and interest along with any comments on the proposed application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
(5)  The petitioner shall have an opportunity to answer any questions raised by the public, for summary remarks and rebuttal concerning the proposed application. 
(6)  Upon the completion of any comments from interested parties and the petitioner, the public hearing shall be completed and adjourned. 
(7)  All public comments having been heard, the members of the body considering the application may discuss the request among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the petitioner or other interested parties to clarify points made previously or to answer questions. Said petitioner or interested parties may respond upon recognition. Additional questions from the general public may not be asked once the public hearing has been closed. Once the public hearing is closed, and a vote or other action is being considered, unrecognized responses from the petitioner or other participant shall be ruled out of order by the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 16, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-37. - Action by the city council. 
After the public hearing has been completed, the city council may take action to approve or deny the request, refer the application back to the zoning administrator or planning commission for further study, or the city council may table or defer action until a later meeting. In voting on a petition, the city council shall follow applicable bylaws for such body, or in lieu of adopted bylaws, shall generally follow Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 17, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-38. - Simultaneous consideration of multiple applications. 
Except for petitions involving annexation and simultaneous zoning, a petitioner may submit, and the planning commission and city council may simultaneously consider, multiple applications involving the same property, such as a rezoning request, conditional use, and variances, provided that specified filing fees shall be paid for each individual application. The proper order of consideration of multiple applications involving the same property shall be the rezoning request first, conditional use second, and variance third. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 18 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-39. - Petitions for annexation and simultaneous zoning. 
(a)  Petitions for annexation into the city limits are subject to the requirements of title 36, chapter 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.) as it now or hereafter exists. 
(b)  In addition to these requirements for annexation, the petitioners seeking annexation shall also simultaneously submit an application for proposed zoning district for the property in question. Said zoning map applications must meet all application, site plan, public hearing and notice, fee submittal and other requirements specified in this chapter. The planning commission shall review and provide a recommendation on all annexation requests. The public hearing for annexation required by state law, and the required public hearing for rezoning action required by this chapter, may be combined at the discretion of the city council. Simultaneous applications for conditional uses and/or variances shall not be considered along with an annexation petition. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 19, 6-14-1993) 
Sec. 54-40. - Availability of regulations for public review. 
The zoning administrator, or other official in the city shall ensure that copies of the ordinance from which this article is derived are printed and available for distribution to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 212, § 20, 6-14-1993) 
Secs. 54-41—54-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS AND USES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-69. - Use, occupancy and erection. 
No building, structure, land, open space or water shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure, land, open space or water, unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 701, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-70. - Minimum requirements. 
Within each district, the regulations set forth shall be minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 702, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-71. - Height limitations. 
(a)  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except as otherwise specifically exempted in this article, to exceed the maximum height for the district in which said building or structure is located; provided, however, that the city council may permit buildings and structures to exceed height limitations upon approval of a conditional use as specified in these regulations. 
(b)  The height limitations established herein shall not apply to: 
(1)  Chimneys; 
(2)  Smokestacks; 
(3)  Church spires and steeples; 
(4)  Domes; 
(5)  Flagpoles; 
(6)  Public monuments; 
(7)  Observation towers; 
(8)  Water towers; 
(9)  Noncommercial radio and television towers; 
(10)  Electricity transmission towers; 
(11)  Utility poles; and 
(12)  Similar structures. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 703, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-72. - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure shall be erected or use established unless upon a lot of record as defined by these regulations except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 704, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-73. - One principal building on a lot. 
Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot intended for such use; provided, however, that more than one multiple dwelling, office, institutional, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot, subject to setbacks and separation as provided in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 705, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-74. - Separation between principal buildings. 
No principal building shall be located closer than 20 feet to another principal building. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 706, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-75. - Reduction in lot size prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced, divided or changed in size so that lot width, size of yards, lot area per dwelling unit or any other requirement of these regulations is not maintained, unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is acquired for a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 707, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-76. - Annexation. 
Any land area subsequently added to the incorporated area of the city shall at the time of annexation be classified in one or more zoning districts in accordance with article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 708, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-77. - Street frontage requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot, and no lot shall be subdivided, that does not abut for at least 30 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 709, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-78. - Use prohibited when not specified. 
Unless otherwise stated, any use not specifically permitted in a use district as provided in these regulations shall be prohibited in that district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 710, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-79. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
(a)  Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only in side or rear yards, except as otherwise provided by these regulations. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only if they meet the following: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and uses shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any lot line. 
(2)  Where a building housing an accessory use is structurally attached to the principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations applicable to the principal building and shall not be considered an accessory building. 
(3)  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both streets. 
(4)  Detached accessory buildings shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the principal building on a lot. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 711, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-80. - Regulations for specific accessory structures. 
The following specified accessory structures shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Fences and walls. All fences and walls shall conform to the following: 
a.  A permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator. 
b.  No fence or wall shall be erected closer than two feet from a public right-of-way or in such a manner as to obstruct vision on a public right-of-way. 
c.  Barbed wire top strands six feet above the ground may be permitted in agricultural, commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(2)  Gasoline pumps. Gasoline pumps and pump island shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(3)  Canopies and carports. Canopies and other attached or detached structures intended for cover shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(4)  Temporary portable structures. Temporary portable structures shall not be used as a permanent or temporary office, classroom, store or for-hire work space in any district; provided, however, that such temporary portable structures may be used for a temporary construction office for a licensed contractor in any district, upon issuance of a permit by the zoning administrator. Said permit shall be temporary but renewable once after a period of six months. Additionally, such temporary portable structures may be used for temporary facility space in Districts M-1 and M-2 when expansion and/or construction is in progress. Said permit shall be limited to six months with extensions being considered by the zoning administrator on a case by case basis. The permit shall automatically expire 90 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. 
(5)  Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall conform to the following: 
a.  Swimming pools accessory to residences shall be enclosed by a security fence a minimum of six feet in height. Said fence shall provide security against unauthorized use of the swimming pool, and all pools shall meet the requirements of the Southern Standard Building Code on swimming pools. 
b.  A permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator for siting and construction of a swimming pool. Swimming pools which are operated as an accessory use to hotels, motels or other uses shall be restricted to use by the patrons/guests of the principal use on the subject property and shall not be opened to the general public for a fee. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 712, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 2012-CO-03-691, § 1, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 54-81. - Home occupations. 
(a)  A home occupation as defined by these regulations requires an initial review by the city staff with an annual renewal review by the city staff and approval by the city council. Requests for renewal and review shall be submitted to the city clerk no later than October 15 annually. Staff reviews and city council consideration shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  The owner of the dwelling engaged in the home occupation must be an occupant of the dwelling. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the residential character of the building or lot. 
(3)  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted on the premises in connection with the conduct of the approved home occupation. 
(4)  No external alterations of the dwelling solely for the accommodation of a home occupation are permitted, with the exception of one additional outside entrance for business use. 
(5)  One non-illuminated, non-animated business identification sign or nameplate not exceeding four square feet in area indicating the name and/or occupation of the occupant shall be permitted. 
(6)  Home occupations are not permitted, in whole or part, within accessory buildings. 
(7)  A business license shall be obtained from the city prior to the operation of any home occupation. Said business license shall require approval by the zoning administrator upon completion of an annual site review that said license is in compliance with all building/zoning regulations consistent with the City's Office/Professional Zoning District. 
(8)  The following uses are allowable as home occupations (not all inclusive): 
a.  Tutoring, consultation and instruction in music, dance, arts, crafts and similar subjects, limited to six students at one time; 
b.  Day care centers serving six or less persons; 
c.  Professional services (e.g., attorneys, architects, accountants, realtors, insurance and travel agents; secretarial services and answering services); 
d.  Mail order and general offices not involving storage of equipment, materials or vehicles; 
e.  Phone solicitations; 
f.  Beauty salons and barbershops limited to two patrons at a time; 
g.  Food catering and home products sales agents. 
(b)  The failure of a home occupation licensee to comply with any of the conditions in paragraph (a) of this section shall be reasonable grounds for revocation of a home occupation business license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-CO-01-656, § 1, 2-8-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-CO-01-656, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, deleted § 54-81 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 54-81 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Sec. 54-82. - Visibility at intersections. 
No fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting which obstructs the sight lines at elevations between 2.5 and 12 feet above any roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines, or such lines extended, and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 714, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-83. - Vehicle parking in residential zoning districts. 
(a)  Locations limited. In single-family residential zoning districts, the parking of automobiles is permitted in garages, carports or outdoors in designated hard surfaced areas (concrete, asphalt or all-weather surfacing). Unenclosed parking shall not exceed 35 percent of the front yard of a lot. Parking shall be permitted only in designated hard surfaced areas (concrete, asphalt or all-weather surfacing) and shall not be permitted outside such surfaced areas (i.e., no parking in yards). Two additional parking places in designated hard surfaced areas (concrete, asphalt or all-weather surfacing) may be provided in the rear or side of a residence. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles. Parking or storage of such recreational equipment or vehicles shall not take place on any vacant residential lot. In residential zoning districts, recreational equipment such as boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, motor coaches, tent trailers and other similar vehicles may be parked or stored only in side or rear yards, carports or in an enclosed building. If stored regularly in a side or rear yard, the vehicle shall be parked in designated hard surfaced areas (concrete, asphalt or all-weather surfacing). Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading and unloading. The temporary use of recreational vehicles such as motor homes, travel trailers and tent trailers at private residences shall be permitted but limited to a maximum duration in time of 21 days. Such parking or use shall be limited to one recreational vehicle. Connection to city sewer system is prohibited. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles. Parking or storage of commercial vehicles shall not take place on any vacant residential lot. It shall be unlawful to park or store commercial vehicles (self-propelled or towed vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating or gross vehicle weight or gross combination weight, whichever is greater, in excess of 10,000 pounds) or school buses in front yards of residential zoning districts. One commercial vehicle may be parked or stored in a side or rear yard of a lot in a residential zoning district. If stored regularly in a side or rear yard, the vehicle shall be parked in designated hard surfaced areas (concrete, asphalt or all-weather surfacing). Administrative relief may be given by the city manager to use alternative pervious materials due to environmental impacts. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 715, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 2015-CO-03-727, § 1, 5-11-2015) 
Sec. 54-84. - Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles and materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place, abandon, leave, keep, or store junk and salvage materials, including nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery, equipment or parts thereof, out-of-doors upon any public or private land within the city, except within the confines of a licensed junkyard or salvage yard or within designated public disposal areas. 
(b)  Whenever it shall appear to the zoning administrator that this section is being violated, he shall, in writing, notify the owner or tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate such violation by removing the materials to a conforming location, or into an enclosed garage, barn or other building within ten days of the mailing of the notice. 
(c)  If the tenant or owner of the premises on which the violation exists fails to abate the violation within the required time after notice, then the city, by and through its agents, shall abate the violation, charge the cost thereof to the legal owner of the premises, and the legal owner of the premises shall be required to pay the cost of such abatement to the city. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 716, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-85. - Subdivision plats must meet zoning requirements. 
No proposed plat of a subdivision nor any plat of resubdivision shall hereafter be approved by the city council or by the planning commission unless the lots within such plat equal or exceed the minimum size and width requirements set forth in the various zoning districts in these regulations and unless such plat fully conforms with the statutes of the state and regulations of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 717, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-86. - Yard and garage sales. 
(a)  Deposit and permit. Every person desiring to conduct a yard or garage sale in the city shall register for same with the city clerk at city hall and upon making a $25.00 deposit shall be assigned a permit number, which shall be displayed during the sale. 
(b)  Completion of sale and refund of deposit. After the yard or garage sale is conducted, all signs and trash collected on the premises shall be removed within 24 hours after the sale. After the premises have been inspected by an officer of the police department and it is shown that the signs have been removed and trash collected, the parties having been given a permit can return the permit to the city clerk at city hall and the $25.00 deposit will be refunded. 
(c)  Number of sales limited. On any one premises, there shall be no more than three yard or garage sales during a calendar year. Any individual conducting more than three authorized sales per year shall be liable for a city business license. 
(d)  Signs. No signs advertising a yard or garage sale shall be placed on traffic directional signs. 
(e)  Signs for nonresident sales prohibited. It shall be unlawful for anyone residing outside the city to advertise a yard or garage sale, which is to be conducted outside the city limits by the placing of signs on street rights-of-way, highway rights-of-way and utility poles within the corporate limits of the city. The chief of police is hereby authorized to remove said signs. 
(f)  Maintenance of traffic movement. Any person conducting a yard or garage sale shall be responsible for the street being kept clear for the movement of traffic during the time of said sale. 
(g)  Limitation on items to be sold. Yard and garage sales will be allowed for the sale of household goods and clothing, provided that no person, group or organization involved in the sale of such household goods shall offer for sale other items or goods which have been purchased for the purpose of resale. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 718, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-87. - Design standards and requirements for accessory apartments. 
All accessory apartments shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Only one accessory apartment for a total of two dwelling units per lot shall be permitted. 
(2)  The lot must meet the minimum lot size for the zoning district in which it is located, and there must be a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet each for both dwellings. 
(3)  One additional off-street parking space for the accessory apartment is required, which must be located in a side or rear yard. 
(4)  The heated floor area for an accessory apartment shall be at least 400 square feet and shall not exceed the size of the principal dwelling. 
(5)  Accessory apartments shall not be permitted on a lot in conjunction with a home occupation. 
(6)  Accessory apartments created or converted as a part of the principal dwelling must have its entrance at the side or in the rear rather than the front of the principal dwelling, and the apartment shall have an architectural treatment (brick, wood, stucco, etc.) substantially similar to that of the principal dwelling. 
(7)  Accessory apartments must observe the principal building setbacks established in section 54-88 and maximum lot coverage in section 54-631 for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(8)  The county health department must certify that existing/proposed water, sanitary sewer and/or septic tank facilities are adequate to serve both the principal dwelling and the accessory apartment. 
(9)  Accessory apartments created as a separate building detached from the principal dwelling must meet the following standards and requirements (this includes manufactured homes): 
a.  Foundation. Each dwelling must be placed on a permanent foundation. 
b.  If a manufactured home, it shall be installed in compliance with the rules and regulations for manufactured homes made and promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner, as may be amended from time to time. 
c.  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed or skirted. 
d.  Skirting. Each dwelling shall be completely skirted with an appropriate barrier, properly ventilated, to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. Such skirting shall not be required for those homes with a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation. 
e.  The entire exterior of the dwelling shall be coated or finished with a nonmetallic substance such as hardboard siding, wood paneling, "masonite" or other building material approved by the zoning administrator. Conditions requiring unit design enhancements, such as color, roof pitch, window detailing and roofing materials may be attached to the conditional use approval by the city council to ensure the unit is compatible with adjacent and nearby residences. 
f.  In addition to the requirements of subsections (9)a through (9)e of this section, each dwelling shall be established in accordance with the installation instructions from the manufacturer, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VII, § 719, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-88. - Minimum setback and buffer requirements by zoning district. 
The following table contains minimum setbacks and buffer requirements by zoning district: 

 
*See sections 54-431 and 54-432. 
NOTE. Additional setbacks may be required for specific uses as provided in permitted uses sections of particular zoning districts. 
(A) When development in this district abuts an A-1, R-1 or R-2 zoning district boundary, a buffer with a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided along the entire property line abutting said zoning district. 
(B) When development in this district abuts an A-1, R-1 or R-2 zoning district boundary, a buffer with a minimum width of 30 feet shall be provided along the entire property line abutting said district. A 15-foot wide buffer shall be required when this district abuts an R-3, R-4, MHP or O-P zoning district. 
(C) When development within this district abuts an A-1, R-1 or R-2 zoning district boundary, a buffer with a minimum width of 75 feet shall be provided along the entire property line abutting said zoning district. A 50-foot wide buffer shall be required when this district abuts an R-3, R-4, MHP or O-P zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XX, § 2001, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-89—54-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION, INTERPRETATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 54-107. - Administration and interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the zoning administrator who shall be appointed by the city council and serve at its pleasure. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for interpretation of the provisions of these regulations and for maintenance of the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XXI, § 2101, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-108. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XXI, § 2102, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-109. - Development permit required. 
(a)  A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of lands or buildings to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of these regulations before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading, land disturbing activity or alteration of lands or buildings commences; provided, however, that development permits for individual structures within approved single-family residential subdivisions or for single-family dwelling units on individual lots shall not be required. If a land disturbance permit is required pursuant to the city's soil erosion and sediment control regulations set forth in chapter 20, article V, the development permit and land disturbance permit shall be considered one and the same. 
(b)  All development permits shall be issued by the zoning administrator, who shall in no case approve a development permit for the use, construction, or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations or any other codes and laws. Development permits shall be valid for two years from its issuance. 
(c)  If work described in any development permit has not begun within 120 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire, and further work shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XXI, § 2103, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-110. - Building permit required. 
(a)  No building, structure or sign, except as specifically exempted by these regulations, shall be erected, moved, extended, enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced, until the zoning administrator has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  All building permits shall be issued by the zoning administrator. In cases of uncertainty regarding whether a proposed building or structure conforms to any provisions within these regulations, the planning director shall make the determination. Building permits shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 90 days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XXI, § 2104, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-111. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the zoning administrator is required in advance of occupancy or use of any lot or change or extension in the use of any lot; any building or structure hereafter erected; or any change in the use of an existing building or structure. 
(b)  All certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the zoning administrator, and no such certificate shall be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of these regulations. Business licenses shall not be issued until the business conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is located and a valid certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XXI, § 2105, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-112. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense, or as determined by the court of proper jurisdiction. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XXI, § 2106, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-113. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of these regulations, the zoning administrator or any other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of these regulations requiring the presence of the violator in the court of proper jurisdiction; or institute injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a structure or land, the zoning administrator may, in addition to other remedies, require that utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XXI, § 2107, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-114—54-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 54-140. - Use districts. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following use districts: 

 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IV, § 401, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-141. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of the districts listed in section 54-140 are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Oakwood, Georgia." Said map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city or that of a notary public under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Article IV of the Zoning Ordinance, City of Oakwood, Georgia," together with the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The official zoning map may be reproduced so that additional copies of said map may be made available, upon proper certification as described in this subsection. 
(c)  If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the applicable laws of the state, changes are made in boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city commission, with appropriate entry or indication of such amendment on the official zoning map. The formal action by the city commission to change the boundaries of the official zoning map shall be sufficient to make such zoning district change effective. Upon such changes, the zoning administrator is authorized to enter such changes on the official zoning map, and readoption of the said map shall not be required. 
(d)  No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map shall be located in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IV, § 402, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-142. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
(a)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city or a notary public under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Oakwood, Georgia." 
(b)  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IV, § 403, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-143. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
District boundaries shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street right-of-way lines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerline, street right-of-way lines, or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit line of the city, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(3)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines extended, as indicated by boundary survey, deed or legal description maintained in the official file of said zoning adoption or amendment, if available, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(4)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streambeds or river beds, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(5)  In the case where the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the city council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IV, § 404, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-144. - District boundary line divides a lot of single ownership. 
Where a boundary line as appearing on the official zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the enactment of these regulations, the requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lies may be extended to the balance of the lot without recourse or amendment procedure, provided that this provision shall not apply to a double frontage lot. In the case of a double frontage lot, the restrictions of the district applying to the adjoining lots which front on the same street as the lot frontage in question shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IV, § 405, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-145. - Designation after street abandonment. 
Where a public street, alley or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned public street, alley, or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IV, § 406, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-146—54-173. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Nonconforming Lots, Buildings and Uses 

Sec. 54-174. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this chapter, there exist certain incompatible lots, buildings, structures, signs and uses of land which were lawful before these regulations were adopted but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of these regulations or future amendments. 
(b)  It is the intention of this subdivision to permit these nonconformities to continue but that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for variances or for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. V, § 501, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-175. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  In any district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of these regulations, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings or any other permitted use may be erected on any single lot of record existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations, even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, applicable to the particular district involved, provided that building setbacks are observed and the lot shall otherwise conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Except for those lots described in subsection (a) of this section, if two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of these regulations, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by these regulations, the lands involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purposes of these regulations, and no portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by these regulations, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the applicable requirements. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. V, § 502, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-176. - Continuance of nonconforming use. 
(a)  The lawful use of any building, structure, sign or land existing at the time of enactment of these regulations may be continued, subject to the limitations of section 54-177, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of these regulations, except that the use of a principal building, structure or land containing a nonconforming use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Re-established after discontinuance or abandonment for six months. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered discontinued or abandoned if it has not been actively engaged in any principal nonconforming activity during the subject period; 
(3)  Expanded, enlarged or extended, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such use is located; 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement value at the time of destruction as determined by the building official, and provided such rebuilding, alteration or repair is completed within one year of such damage; 
(5)  Moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot occupied by such use, except in conformity with these regulations. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building, structure, or portion thereof, declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, upon order of such official. 
(c)  Changes in ownership or tenancy of a nonconforming use are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. V, § 503, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-177. - Expansion of nonconforming buildings. 
A nonconforming building which contains a conforming use may be expanded, enlarged or extended, provided that any such additions meet the applicable yard and building setbacks, buffer and landscape strip requirements and all other regulations for the district in which it is located. This section shall not, however, be construed as to authorize the expansion of a nonconforming building for a use which is not permitted by the regulations for the district within which such building is located. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. V, § 504, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-178. - Buildings under construction. 
Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. V, § 505, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-179—54-209. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access Requirements 

Sec. 54-210. - Off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
(a)  Off-street automobile parking and loading spaces shall be provided, as specified in this subdivision, for uses and structures hereafter established in all districts at the time of initial construction of any principal building, unless otherwise exempted from this subdivision. For developments phased in timing, parking and loading requirements may also be phased in accordance with the requirements applying for each particular time phase of development. 
(b)  Any building or use that is subsequently enlarged or converted to another use shall meet the off-street parking and loading space requirements of this subdivision, for the enlarged or new use. 
(c)  Required parking and loading spaces shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon by refuse containers, signs or other structures, unless an equal number of spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with these regulations. 
(d)  Required parking and loading spaces shall be provided with vehicular access to a public street or alley. 
(e)  Off-street parking and loading facilities required shall be located contiguous to the principal building or use. However, as much as 25 percent of the required number of parking spaces may be located within 200 feet of the principal building or use, provided proof of ownership of such premises is provided to the zoning administrator. Such distance shall be measured between the nearest point of the parking facility and the nearest point of the principal building or use. If this option of utilizing nearby parking is utilized, then the parking area may not be discontinued or otherwise converted to another is utilized meets the minimum required number of off-street parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VI, § 601, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-211. - Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required. 
The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for each type of permitted use shall be as indicated in the following table. For uses not specifically listed, the off-street parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use as determined by the zoning administrator. When the application of these parking requirements results in a fractional space requirement, the fractional space requirement shall be construed to mean one additional space. 

 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VI, § 602, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-212. - Application to multiple shifts of staff/employees. 
When an entity covered heretofore in section 54-211 has more than one shift of staff/employees, such term shall mean the number of persons engaged in the activities of the entity on the largest shift only. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(602(a)), 12-24-1998) 
Sec. 54-213. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Each parking area of six or more spaces devoted to uses other than residential shall provide handicapped parking spaces (a minimum of 12 feet in width) counted as a part of the total parking required, in accordance with the following scale: 

 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VI, § 603, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-214. - Parking space and lot design flexibility. 
Individual parking spaces shall be a minimum of 160 square feet. The angle of design for parking spaces and parking lots may be 30, 45, 60, 90 degrees or parallel to the curb, provided that sufficient maneuvering aisle width is provided subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VI, § 604, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-215. - Minimum number of off-street loading spaces required. 
(a)  On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, retail business or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading services to avoid undue interference with public use of streets and alleys. 
(b)  Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area 12 feet by 60 feet, with 14-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule. 
(1)  For the uses described in subsection (a) of this section, one loading space shall be provided for the first 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof. 
(2)  Uses in excess of 25,000 square feet shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 

 
(c)  All plans for off-street loading areas shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VI, § 605, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-216. - Parking and loading area design requirements; improvement of parking lots. 
All parking areas containing more than five spaces shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  They shall be graded to ensure proper drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphalt, and maintained in good condition free of obstructions. 
(2)  Parking areas shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(3)  Each parking space shall be clearly marked, and directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained at all times. 
(4)  A parking lot pavement setback of ten feet from any public street right-of-way and five feet from any exterior property line shall be provided, except where access points and interconnections to other parcels have been approved. The parking lot pavement setback shall be increased to 25 feet where such lot abuts a residential district. Concrete or other suitable curb stops shall be installed so as to prevent vehicle encroachment onto setback areas. 
(5)  Not less than ten percent of the total area devoted to parking shall be landscaped open space. 
(6)  Any lighting facilities installed shall be so arranged to prevent the direct illumination of adjacent residential properties or public streets. All lighting facilities installed for shopping center parking areas shall have a minimum maintained illumination of 0.6 footcandles with a uniformity rate of 4:1 (average:minimum). 
(7)  A site plan indicating property lines, parking areas, location of parking spaces, pavement set backs, drainage facilities, paving materials, access and other features required to ensure compliance with this subdivision shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. A permit shall be required prior to the construction of new parking areas, or for the expansion or alteration of existing parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VI, § 606, 4-11-1994; Amd. of 9-22-2008) 
Sec. 54-217. - Parking areas must be appropriately zoned. 
Parking areas, parking lots or parking garages which constitute the principal use of a lot shall only be permitted in C-1, C-2, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. In cases where parking areas, parking lots or parking garages exist or are proposed to serve as accessory parking for a particular building or use, regardless of whether such parking is required by this subdivision, such land, area or lot, including all access drives, shall require the same or less restrictive zoning district as that within which such building or use it serves is located. Similarly, in cases where accessory parking serves a building or use which requires, or was approved as, a conditional use, such parking area and access drives shall require the same conditional use approval as that for which such conditional use or building it serves. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. VI, § 607, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-218—54-242. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Reserved[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, the provisions of Subdivision IV, §§ 54-243—54-258, pertaining to signs have been deleted. 

Secs. 54-243—54-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 54-280—54-306. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - R-1 Single-Family Residential District 

Sec. 54-307. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-1 Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable single-family residential neighborhoods at low densities (up to approximately 1.74 units per acre) free from other uses except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IX, § 901, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-308. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, not including mobile or manufactured homes. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property, including guest houses (not accessory apartments) home gardens, noncommercial greenhouses, and shelters or enclosures for household pets. Noncommercial livestock is a permitted accessory use on lots with a minimum area of two acres, provided that any buildings or enclosures for the maintenance or shelter of animals shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their solely owned and operated customary accessory facilities, including cemeteries, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum area of two acres, principal buildings are setback a minimum of 50 feet from any property line, and parking areas are located outside of the required front yard and separated from any side or rear property line by a minimum six foot high, opaque fence or wall, or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten feet in width. 
(4)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities, operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(5)  Public and semipublic buildings and uses, as defined in section 54-1. 
(6)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
(7)  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school, not offered for profit. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IX, § 902, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-309. - Conditional uses. 
The following are conditional uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District: 
(1)  Accessory apartments, as defined in section 54-1, subject to compliance with section 54-87. 
(2)  Home occupations, subject to the requirements of section 54-81. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IX, § 903, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-310. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. IX, § 904, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-311—54-338. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - R-2 Single-Family Residential District 

Sec. 54-339. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-2 Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable single-family residential neighborhoods at low-medium densities (up to approximately 2.9 units per acre) free from other uses except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. X, § 1001, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-340. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District: 
(1)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property, including guest houses (not accessory apartments) home gardens, noncommercial greenhouses, land shelters or enclosures for household pets. Noncommercial livestock is a permitted accessory use on lots with a minimum area of two acres, provided that any buildings or enclosures for the maintenance or shelter of animals shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their solely owned and operated customary accessory facilities, including cemeteries, provided such uses are located on a lot with a minimum area of two acres, principal buildings are setback a minimum of 50 feet from any property line, and parking areas are located outside of the required front yard and separated from any side or rear property line by a minimum six-foot-high, opaque fence or wall, or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten feet in width. 
(3)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities, operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(4)  Public and semipublic buildings and uses, as defined in section 54-1. 
(5)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
(6)  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school, not offered for profit. 
(7)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(8)  Manufactured homes on individual lots, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  All manufactured homes must be placed on a permanent foundation. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be installed in compliance with the rules and regulations for manufactured homes made and promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner, as may be amended from time to time. 
c.  All towing devices, wheels, axles, and hitches must be removed or skirted. 
d.  Each home shall be completely skirted with an appropriate barrier, properly ventilated, to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. Such skirting shall not be required for those homes with a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. X, § 1002, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-341. - Conditional uses. 
The following are conditional uses in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District: 
(1)  Accessory apartments, as defined in section 54-1, subject to compliance with section 54-87. 
(2)  Home occupations, subject to the requirements of section 54-81. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. X, § 1003, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-342. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. X, § 1004, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-343—54-372. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - R-3 Moderate Density Residential District 

Sec. 54-373. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-3 Moderate Density Residential District is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable residential neighborhoods at moderate densities (approximately six units per acre), with the potential for more variety in housing types than in the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts, free from other uses except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XI, § 1101, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-374. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Moderate Density Residential District: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 single-family residential district, as specified in section 54-340, and subject to the same standards except as indicated in sections 54-88 and 54-631. (Home occupations are conditional uses.) 
(2)  Accessory apartments, as defined in section 54-1, subject to compliance with section 54-87. 
(3)  Single-family attached dwellings, (townhouses), subject to the townhouse regulations as specified in section 54-376. 
(4)  Two-family dwellings, (duplexes) and triplexes with a minimum of 7,260 square feet of land area per dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XI, § 1102, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-375. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the R-3 Moderate Density Residential District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XI, § 1103, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-376. - Townhouse development regulations. 
All developments containing fee simple townhouses shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Lots. Each townhouse shall be located on its own lot of record, and subdivision plat approval shall be required in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations set forth in chapter 44. 
(2)  Minimum lot size, frontage, width. Each townhouse lot shall contain a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet. The minimum lot width and frontage for each lot shall be 18 feet. The minimum lot area for a townhouse development shall be one acre. 
(3)  Setbacks. Townhouses shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located; provided, however, that zero lot line (no side building setback) is permitted between individual townhouse units forming the same building. Between buildings, there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet. The rear setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet. Dwelling units which form a part of a single building shall have the front setbacks and rooflines varied/staggered by a minimum of two feet. 
(4)  Maximum units per building. No more than six townhouses shall be permitted to form any building. 
(5)  Streets. All streets within a townhouse development shall be built to city specifications as provided in chapter 44, the city's subdivision regulations, and dedicated to the city. 
(6)  Maximum density. Townhouse developments shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within the particular zoning district. 
(7)  Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XI, § 1104, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-377—54-395. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District 

Sec. 54-396. - Purpose and intent. 
The R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to provide suitable land for a variety of dwelling types at medium to high densities (up to 10 units per acre) in areas served by public water and sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XII, § 1201, 4-11-1994; Ord. No. 2011-CO-04-669, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-397. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-3 Moderate Density Residential District, as specified in section 54-374, and subject to the same standards except as indicated in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(2)  Apartments. 
(3)  Condominiums, with a minimum lot size of two acres for any condominium development, and subject to the provisions of section 54-400. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XII, § 1202, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-398. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XII, § 1203, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-399. - Apartment development standards. 
The apartment development standards for the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Site plan review by the planning commission and approval by the city council shall be required. 
(2)  Apartment buildings shall be constructed with a separation of at least 20 feet if one or more buildings contain two stories, and a separation of at least 30 feet if one or more buildings contain three or more stories. 
(3)  No principal building shall be constructed less than 40 feet from any property line. 
(4)  Each apartment development shall have a minimum of 20 percent of the development's total land area as landscaped open space. 
(5)  Exterior lighting of the development shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XII, § 1204, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-400. - Residential condominium development regulations. 
All developments containing residential condominiums shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Site plan review by the planning commission and approval by the city council shall be required. 
(2)  Condominium developments shall meet all applicable state laws, including the Georgia Condominium Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.). 
(3)  Proposed condominium bylaws shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval. 
(4)  Residential condominiums shall conform to the setbacks established for the zoning district in which it is located; provided, however, that the rear setback for all residential condominium buildings shall be 25 feet. 
(5)  Maximum density. Residential condominium developments shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within the particular zoning district. 
(6)  Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
(7)  Exterior lighting for the development shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XII, § 1205, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-401—54-428. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - MHP Mobile Home Park District 

Sec. 54-429. - Purpose and intent. 
The MHP Mobile Home Park District is intended to provide areas for mobile home pads, which are leased rather than subdivided for individual ownership, that are served by public water, sanitary sewer and recreational amenities. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIII, § 1301, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-430. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the MHP Mobile Home Park District: 
(1)  Mobile homes and manufactured homes within mobile home parks, but not including mobile homes on individual lots under separate ownership. Replacement of nonconforming mobile homes in a conforming or nonconforming mobile home park is permitted. Commercial uses or home occupations within individual mobile or manufactured homes are not permitted. 
(2)  Administration buildings and customary laundry and service buildings. 
(3)  Community centers and recreation facilities intended to serve residents of the district. 
(4)  Customary accessory uses and structures clearly incidental to one or more permitted uses and structures. 
(5)  Public and semipublic buildings and uses. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIII, § 1302, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-431. - Mobile home park development regulations. 
Development for mobile home parks in the MHP Mobile Home Park District shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Site plan approval required. All mobile home park developments shall require site plan review by the planning commission and approval by the city council. 
(2)  Location and frontage. A mobile home park district development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
(3)  Street requirement. Interior roads serving the development shall be constructed to city standards as specified in chapter 44, the city's subdivision regulations, and in addition shall have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet. If dedicated to the public, the roads within the development shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 40 feet. 
(4)  Lot area and width. A mobile home district development shall have a minimum area of 15 contiguous acres and a lot width of at least 200 feet. 
(5)  Density. The maximum density of a mobile home district development is 12 units per acre. 
(6)  Recreation and other community facilities. Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities for those mobile home parks designed for or containing ten or more mobile homes. 
(7)  Perimeter setback required. No mobile home or other building or structure shall be located closer than 40 feet to any mobile home park perimeter property boundary. 
(8)  Perimeter screening required. A landscaped screen consisting of dense evergreen trees and/or shrubs and having a minimum width of 35 feet adjacent to all public rights-of-way and 15 feet along all other property lines shall be required. A minimum six-foot-high, opaque fence or wall may be erected along property lines not abutting a public right-of-way in lieu of such landscaped screen. All perimeter screening must be maintained. 
(9)  Utilities. All mobile home parks shall be served by approved public water and public sanitary sewer systems. 
(10)  Refuse collection. Each mobile home park shall provide refuse collection pads at locations convenient to each mobile home space, but in no case more than 50 feet from the street serving each mobile home. 
(11)  Space numbering. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sign, not less than one square foot in area, which indicates the appropriate space number or address. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIII, § 1303, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-432. - Mobile home and mobile home space requirements. 
Each mobile home shall be located on a separate pad in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Space size and width. Each mobile home space within the development shall contain a minimum space size of 3,500 square feet and a minimum space width of 20 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Each mobile home shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the front space line or street right-of-way, three feet from the side space line, and five feet from the rear space line. 
(3)  Foundations and tie-downs. Each mobile home shall be supported by piers and foundations and shall be anchored to the ground in accordance with building code requirements, to secure the mobile home against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. 
(4)  Recreation vehicles. Recreational vehicles in mobile home parks shall be limited to motor homes and travel trailers which have toilet, bath, and kitchen facilities and such use shall be limited to 120 days with no extensions. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIII, § 1304, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-433—54-462. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - C-1 Neighborhood Business District 

Sec. 54-463. - Purpose and intent. 
The C-1 Neighborhood Business District is intended to provide areas for limited small-scale commercial uses of a convenience nature serving nearby residential neighborhoods as opposed to a regional market. The district is not intended to accommodate automotive or other types of more intensive commercial activities that are of such magnitude or type that would result in the generation of excessive traffic, noise, odors, pollution, safety hazards, or other adverse impacts which would detract from the desirability of adjacent properties for residential use. In general, the neighborhood business district includes offices and retail and service establishments but excludes those highway-oriented, high traffic generating uses and those which involve use of chemicals and outside sales, storage or display. Institutionalized residential facilities are considered compatible uses in this district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIV, § 1401, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-464. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Business District: 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to principal permitted uses and structures. 
(2)  Art galleries and museums. 
(3)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their customary accessory uses and structures, including cemeteries. 
(4)  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, nonprofit or for profit, not to exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)  Continuing care retirement communities. 
(6)  Convalescent homes. 
(7)  Day care centers. 
(8)  Finance, insurance and real estate establishments. 
(9)  Nursing homes. 
(10)  Offices. 
(11)  Personal care homes, family, group and congregate. 
(12)  Public and semipublic buildings and uses. 
(13)  Single-family residences operated as principal use or in conjunction with one or more permitted uses. Home occupations are permitted as accessory uses, without being subject to the limitations of section 54-81. 
(14)  Restaurants, but not including drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
(15)  Retail trade establishments (enclosed) except and excluding retail establishments selling liquor by the package. 
(16)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities. 
(17)  Schools, parochial, private vocational, technical, business and others, nonprofit or operated for profit. 
(18)  Services, business. 
(19)  Services, health. 
(20)  Services, personal. 
(21)  Shopping centers. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIV, § 1402, 4-11-1994; Amd. No. 220, § 1, 11-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-465. - Conditional uses. 
The conditional uses in the C-1 Neighborhood Business District are planned unit developments, with a minimum lot size of ten acres. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIV, § 1403, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-466. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the C-1 Neighborhood Business District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIV, § 1404, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-467—54-485. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - C-2 Highway Business District 

Sec. 54-486. - Purpose and intent. 
The C-2 Highway Business District is intended to provide adequate space for various types of general business uses that serve residents on a community level rather than neighborhood level, including the retailing of major goods and services of large scale, automotive and other types of more intensive commercial activities and establishments that rely on highway-oriented, passerby traffic. Institutionalized residential facilities are considered compatible uses in this district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XV, § 1501, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-487. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-2 Highway Business District: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Business District as enumerated in section 54-464, but not subject to any specified square footage limitations. 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses. 
(3)  Automobile sales lots, new and/or used. 
(4)  Commercial recreation facilities, enclosed only. 
(5)  Contractor's establishments, building, electrical and plumbing. 
(6)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment. 
(7)  Hospitals. 
(8)  Mini-warehouses and ministorage facilities, where no individual storage stall or compartment exceeds 500 square feet of total floor area. 
(9)  Parking garages and parking lots. 
(10)  Residence for caretaker or night watchman. 
(11)  Restaurants, including drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
(12)  Retail trade establishments, unenclosed, and open air businesses. 
(13)  Services, automotive, including service stations. 
(14)  Services, lodging. 
(15)  Services, miscellaneous. 
(16)  Transportation, communication and utility facilities. 
(17)  Warehousing and storage uses which occupy no more than 20,000 square feet of floor area. 
(18)  Wholesale and wholesale distribution establishments which occupy no more than 20,000 square feet of floor area. 
(19)  Retail trade establishments selling liquor by the package only as sole tenants of a freestanding building meeting all parking and setback requirements so long as the parcel on which said retail establishment is located does not adjoin property zoned for use of a church in any zoning classification or as Oakwood R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or MHP. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XV, § 1502, 4-11-1994; Amd. No. 220, § 2, 11-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-488. - Conditional uses. 
The conditional uses in the C-2 Highway Business District are commercial recreation facilities, unenclosed. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XV, § 1503, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-489. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the C-2 Highway Business District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XV, § 1504, 4-11-1994; Amd. No. 220, § 1, 2-12-2007) 
Secs. 54-490—54-516. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IX. - O-P Office Professional District 

Sec. 54-517. - Purpose and intent. 
The O-P Office Professional District is intended to establish and preserve a compatible land use arrangement and provide suitable areas for the development of offices and professional enterprises, medical and dental facilities, and institutions. This district is also intended to apply to areas with a transitional character, where such permitted uses provide a buffer or transition between more intensive nonresidential and residential districts. This district is most appropriately located on non-local (collector and arterial) streets. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVI, § 1601, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-518. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the O-P Office Professional District: 
(1)  Any use permitted within the R-3 moderate density residential district, as enumerated in sections 54-374 and 54-375 (not subject to conditional use approval) of these regulations and subject to the same restrictions except as indicated in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(2)  Colleges and universities. 
(3)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, continuing care retirement communities, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment, provided such use is located on property fronting an arterial or collector street, that no such dwelling is located closer than 100 feet to a R-1 district boundary, and provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Finance, insurance and real estate establishments. 
(5)  Lodges, clubs, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(6)  Offices, medical, professional, insurance, real estate and general, but not involving retail sales of any kind. 
(7)  Personal care homes, family, group and congregate provided that no such buildings shall be located closer than 100 feet to a R-1 district boundary, provided a copy of the approved state license or permit is filed with the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(8)  Single-family residences, operated as a principal use or in conjunction with one or more permitted uses. 
(9)  Schools, nonprofit or operated for profit. 
(10)  Services, health. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVI, § 1602, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-519. - Conditional uses. 
The following are conditional uses in the O-P Office Professional District: 
(1)  Planned unit developments, with a minimum lot size of ten acres. 
(2)  Commercial recreation facilities, enclosed when developed in conjunction with one or more permitted uses. 
(3)  Services, business. 
(4)  Services, miscellaneous. 
(5)  Services, personal. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVI, § 1603, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-520. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the O-P Office Professional District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVI, § 1604, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-521—54-548. - Reserved. 
Subdivision X. - M-1 Light Industrial District 

Sec. 54-549. - Purpose and intent. 
The M-1 Light Industrial District is established with the purpose of reserving certain areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities, and access to arterial streets for industrial operations, but where such area's proximity to residential and other districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. Uses within this district do not require substantial quantities of water for manufacturing operations and do not necessarily require rail, air and water transportation. Certain commercial uses having an open storage characteristic, or which are most appropriately located as neighbors of industrial uses, are also included within this district. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVII, § 1701, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-550. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District: 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses, including offices, showrooms and administrative facilities. 
(2)  Contractor's establishments. 
(3)  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
(4)  Dry cleaning plants. 
(5)  Exterminators and pest control businesses. 
(6)  Junkyards and used auto parts yards, subject to screening requirements on all four sides of the lot on which said use is located. 
(7)  Kennels. 
(8)  Lumberyards, planing mills and sawmills. 
(9)  Machine shops. 
(10)  Mini-warehouse and mini-storage facilities. 
(11)  Parking garages and parking lots. 
(12)  Public and semipublic buildings, uses and structures. 
(13)  Racetracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, provided the site contains a minimum of 15 acres. 
(14)  Radio and television broadcasting towers. 
(15)  Repair of household appliances. 
(16)  Recycling plants, including any processing activities. 
(17)  Research and scientific laboratories. 
(18)  Residences for caretaker or night watchman. 
(19)  Sign fabrication and painting shops. 
(20)  Services, automotive. 
(21)  Storage buildings and storage yards. 
(22)  Soft drink bottling and distributing plants. 
(23)  Transportation, communication and utility facilities. 
(24)  Welding shops. 
(25)  Wholesaling, wholesale distribution and warehousing facilities. 
(26)  Wrecked motor vehicle compounds and wrecker services, subject to screening requirements on all four sides of the lot on which said use is located. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVII, § 1702, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-551. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the M-1 Light Industrial District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVII, § 1703, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-552—54-580. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XI. - M-2 Heavy Industrial District 

Sec. 54-581. - Purpose and intent. 
The M-2 Heavy Industrial District is established with the purpose of reserving certain areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities, and access to arterial streets for industrial operations, which are objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. Uses within this district may require substantial quantities of water for manufacturing operations and may require rail, air and water transportation. Conditional uses permitted in this district are primarily those known to create a severe safety hazard or to be major producers of air pollution, this being subject to state and/or federal environmental controls. This district is generally not suitable adjacent to residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVIII, § 1801, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-582. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the M-2 Heavy Industrial District: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District, as enumerated in section 54-550. 
(2)  Asphalt plants. 
(3)  Canning establishments. 
(4)  Ceramic production facilities. 
(5)  Cold storage, frozen food lockers and ice manufacture. 
(6)  Concrete, cement, clay, mortar and plaster production. 
(7)  Extraction or removal of sand, gravel, top soil, clay, dirt, precious metals, gems, or other natural resources. 
(8)  Feed, grain, or fertilizer manufacture or storage. 
(9)  Food processing plants, including fish and poultry facilities. 
(10)  Manufacturing, processing and assembling of the following products: chemicals, floor coverings, glass, machinery, metals, rubber, textiles, tobacco, and wood, unless more specifically listed under conditional uses. 
(11)  Residences for a caretaker or night watchman. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVIII, § 1802, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-583. - Conditional uses. 
The following are conditional uses in the M-2 Heavy Industrial District: 
(1)  Acid plants. 
(2)  Asphaltic concrete hot mix and cutback asphalt plants. 
(3)  Automotive and light-duty truck manufacturing. 
(4)  Bulk gasoline terminals and bulk gasoline plants. 
(5)  Cement manufacturing plants. 
(6)  Coating of cans, coils, fabrics, vinyl, metal furniture, appliance surfaces, wire, paper, and flat wood paneling. 
(7)  Conical burners. 
(8)  Cotton gins. 
(9)  Cupola furnaces for metallurgical melting. 
(10)  External floating roof tanks. 
(11)  Fertilizer manufacturing plants. 
(12)  Fiberglass insulation manufacturing plants. 
(13)  Hazardous waste receiving, handling and disposal facilities. 
(14)  Incinerators, including biomedical waste. 
(15)  Kaolin processing facilities. 
(16)  Landfills and materials recovery facilities. 
(17)  Petroleum liquid storage. 
(18)  Pulp mills. 
(19)  Solvent metal cleaning. 
(20)  Volatile organic liquid handling and storage. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVIII, § 1803, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-584. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the M-2 Heavy Industrial District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XVIII, § 1804, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-585—54-601. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XII. - A-1 Agricultural District 

Sec. 54-602. - Purpose and intent. 
The A-1 Agricultural District is established to maintain those areas with land characteristics such as soil moisture, temperature and content suitable for farming, dairying, forestry operations and other agricultural activities; to protect land used or needed for food production and other agricultural uses from encroachment by untimely and unplanned residential, commercial or industrial development; to permit the continuation of agricultural uses in areas where development is anticipated, but where the present application of zoning controls for future, more intensive uses would be unreasonable and premature; prevent the subdivision of land for residential development that requires public services such as paved roads, water and sanitary sewer; and to preserve the rural, open space character of certain areas. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIX, § 1901, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-603. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the A-1 Agricultural District: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, including the production of field crops, fruits, nuts and vegetables; the raising of livestock and poultry; dairying; horticulture; forestry and fisheries; and other uses involving agricultural operations. 
(2)  Animal hospitals. 
(3)  Antique shops. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship. 
(6)  Dwellings, single-family, provided each dwelling is located on a lot that is a minimum of three acres and a minimum lot width of 200 feet. 
(7)  Farm buildings, including barns, chicken houses, grain storage facilities, implement sheds, and structures accessory to agricultural use. 
(8)  Home occupations. 
(9)  Horse stables. 
(10)  Kennels. 
(11)  Marinas and boat storage yards. 
(12)  Mobile and manufactured modular homes, provided each home is located on a lot that is a minimum of three acres and a minimum lot width of 200 feet. 
(13)  Nurseries and greenhouses; plants, trees and shrubs. 
(14)  Produce stands, provided products sold are those grown or produced on the premises. 
(15)  Public and semipublic buildings and uses. 
(16)  Schools, public elementary and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities. 
(17)  Schools, parochial, private and others offering courses in general education not operated for profit. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIX, § 1902, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-604. - Conditional uses. 
The following are conditional uses in the A-1 Agricultural District: 
(1)  Farm supply stores and agricultural-related businesses, such as agricultural implement sales and service, auction facilities, feed and grain stores and other businesses not involving sales or services to the general public, provided such business is located on property a minimum of two acres that fronts on a state or federal highway, and provided such buildings or uses are not located within 500 feet of abutting property zoned or utilized for single-family or mobile home use. 
(2)  Boardinghouses, dormitories and lodginghouses for agricultural workers, provided such dwellings are located on a farm with a minimum size of 20 acres, provision is made to meet all applicable public health requirements, and provided such lodging is intended only for the temporary or seasonal housing of farm workers. 
(3)  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of assembly for nonprofit membership groups, provided such use is located on property a minimum of two acres that fronts on a state or federal highway. 
(4)  Radio and television broadcasting towers, including studios or offices, provided such use is not located within 500 feet of abutting property zoned or utilized for a residence, and provided the height of such tower does not exceed 150 feet without specific authorization from the Federal Aviation Administration and Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIX, § 1903, 4-11-1994) 
Sec. 54-605. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
The area, height, density and placement requirements in the A-1 Agricultural District are as specified in sections 54-88 and 54-631. 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XIX, § 1904, 4-11-1994) 
Secs. 54-606—54-628. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XIII. - Planned Development Districts Mixed Use Zoning 

Sec. 54-629. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of the planned development districts to permit and encourage the development of property which would: 
(1)  Allow greater flexibility with respect to development standards and site planning considerations; 
(2)  Be in the best interest of the city in terms of its long-range development plans; and 
(3)  Permit the establishment or mixture of uses which without proper design and planning might not be compatible with surrounding uses or zoning districts. 
(b)  The planned development districts is to be utilized as a "floating zone" which shall mean that areas may be predesignated as planned development districts at the time of annexation and/or execution of a development agreement with the city by the filing of a site plan which identifies general areas of mixed uses/zonings; however a permanent designation shall result only from a specific and separate application for amendment as set forth herein and approved by the city council. Planned development districts are separate zoning districts and shall follow the same amendment procedures as other districts. Unless otherwise stated in this section, the development standards and the land uses which are presented with the application for amendment shall, if approved, become the standards for the subject property and shall become a part of the zoning regulations. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2001), 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-630. - District classifications. 
The following shall be classified as planned development districts subject to the provisions of this article and to the special provisions for each district: 

 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2004.1), 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-631. - Minimum lot width, lot size, floor area and density requirements. 
The minimum lot width, lot size, floor area and density requirements are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 220, art. XX, § 2002, 4-11-1994; Amd. No. 220, § 1, 7-13-1998; Ord. of 11-10-2008, § 1(2002)) 
Sec. 54-632. - Conditions required for rezoning consideration. 
An area may be considered for rezoning to a planned development district if any one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  More than one land use is proposed for development on a single parcel; 
(2)  Separate land uses which would not otherwise be permitted to locate within the same zoning district are proposed for development on one or more adjacent parcels under single or separate ownership; 
(3)  Exception or variation from the size, setback, frontage, density, uses or other standards which are required in the other conventional zoning districts are being proposed as part of a comprehensive development plan. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2002.1), 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-633. - Special requirements. 
All proposed planned development district applications shall conform to the following specific requirements: 
(1)  The site proposed for planned development district classification must contain an area of five acres or more unless specifically approved by the city council due to special and unusual circumstances. No tract of land shall be considered for a planned development classification which has an area less than one acre except when such tract abuts a nonresidential zoning district or abuts a district with the same zoning classification as that for which the application is filed. In no case shall the minimum tract size be less than the minimum lot area requirements for the comparable conventional district (see sections 54-88 and 54-631 for area requirements) as specified for each planned development classification in this subdivision. (Note. The comparable conventional zoning districts listed in the regulations are as follows: R-1 for a planned residential development, O-P for a planned office development, C-1 for a planned commercial development and M-1 for a planned industrial development.) 
(2)  The site must abut a public street for a distance of at least 100 feet. 
(3)  A suitable plan shall be prepared for the development and this plan shall include the following elements where applicable: 
a.  A plot plan drawn to scale by a registered engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect showing the exact dimensions of the parcel of land under consideration and including the following: 
1.  A site plan drawn to scale and indicating all property dimensions, platting and street systems, proposed building sites, sizes, types of use proposed for buildings, plans for protection of abutting properties, means of ingress and egress, access and circulation arrangements, off-street parking and loading facilities, proposed reservations or dedications for streets and other public facilities and, if requested, a contour map of the site; 
2.  The plan shall give the name of the developers and of the development (if any), a north arrow and scale; 
3.  If the proposal includes the subdivision of land for any purpose or for the provision of new public streets, a proposed lot and street layout shall be submitted as part of the application. Any proposed variation from the standards set forth in chapter 44, the city's subdivision regulations, shall be listed and explained. If the plan is approved, a preliminary plat and final plat shall be submitted as provided by the subdivision regulations in chapter 44. 
b.  A written report shall also be submitted which will explain the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. This report shall include, where applicable: 
1.  A general description of the proposed development and its location; 
2.  The proposed standards for development including restrictions on the use of the property, density standards, setback requirements and any proposed restrictive covenants; 
3.  An explanation of why the proposed development standards are necessary if the proposed standards in this section vary from existing standards in the zoning regulations; 
4.  Plans for the provision of utilities including water, sewer and drainage facilities; 
5.  Plans and methods for protection of abutting properties; 
6.  Data stating the total number of acres (or square feet) proposed for each type of land use, including public facilities, within the proposed development; 
7.  Additional relevant data as may be required by the zoning administrator. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2002.2), 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-634. - Administrative procedures for planned development districts. 
(a)  Any request pertaining to the establishment of a planned development district shall be considered an amendment to the zoning regulations and shall be administered and processed in accordance with the regulations set forth herein and in article II of this chapter. 
(b)  All data, plans and specifications presented as part of the planned development district shall, if approved, be adopted as an amendment to the zoning regulations and shall be the standards of development for that particular planned development. 
(c)  All further development on the property shall conform to the standards adopted for the district regardless of any change in ownership. Any proposed changes to the approved standards shall be treated as amendments to the zoning regulations and must be considered in accordance with the procedures set forth herein and in article II of this chapter. Appeals based upon hardship or an alleged misinterpretation of this chapter by the zoning administrator shall be processed in accordance with procedures set forth in article II of this chapter. In no case shall the approved land uses be appealed. 
(d)  The violation of any provision of the planned development standards as submitted and approved under the provisions herein shall constitute a violation of these regulations. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2003), 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-635. - Planned residential development (PRD). 
(a)  Characteristics. A planned residential development may allow for a more flexible placement, arrangement and orientation of residential structures, the accompanying flexibility in the subdivision of land and the grouping of open space and accessory facilities such as garages and parking. It may also provide for a mixture of housing types (single-family, two-family, multifamily, etc.) according to a carefully drawn plan. The proposed residential development should make maximum use of natural features and, through proper site planning measures, it should conform to the existing character and development pattern of the surrounding area. Every effort should be made to preserve and protect any existing residential uses from adverse impacts which might result from a higher density development. 
(b)  Required plans. All of the general and special requirements for planned developments shall be provided. The following special items shall also be addressed: 
(1)  The site plan shall indicate the proposed size, location, number of units and number of bedrooms of all residential structures. 
(2)  All streets and common open spaces not proposed for dedication to the city shall have the proposed maintenance and ownership agreements explained in detail. 
(3)  The architectural style and proposed siting of all multifamily structures or zero lot line attached single-family structures shall be indicated. 
(4)  The development controls for the development shall be detailed (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.). If standards are not specifically proposed then the applicable standards in the R-1 residential district shall apply. 
(5)  Limited commercial uses may be included within the development; however, they shall be only of convenience neighborhood retail nature intended to serve the needs of the residents of the development unless otherwise specifically approved. Retail uses shall be specified as part of the proposal and limited to 10,000 square feet of floor area. Such uses shall be permitted only in planned residential developments of five acres or larger. 
(6)  A proposed development schedule is required and a listing of proposed uses shall be provided. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2004.2), 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-636. - Planned office development (POD). 
(a)  Characteristics. A planned office development should contain orderly, well-designed office and institutional uses upon a site that result in minimum impact upon the surrounding area. The site plans and building designs should produce a development that can be constructed to achieve maximum utilization of space while maintaining a low-intensity office character protected from more intensive commercial and industrial development and protecting any nearby residential uses. Such a development may also include a limited number of residential and commercial uses. 
(b)  Required plans. All of the general and special requirements for planned developments shall be provided. The following special items shall also be addressed: 
(1)  The site plan shall indicate the proposed size, location, number of stories and estimated number of employees in each office building. 
(2)  The development controls for the district shall be detailed (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.). If standards are not specifically proposed, then the applicable standards in the O-P Office Professional District, together with screening and buffer requirements, shall apply. 
(3)  If residential or commercial uses are proposed in conjunction with the planned office development, then the applicable requirements of the planned residential development district or planned commercial development district shall be provided. 
(4)  A proposed development schedule and a listing of proposed uses shall be provided. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2004.3), 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-637. - Planned commercial development (PCD). 
(a)  Characteristics. A planned commercial development shall provide for the maximum attainable commercial usage of property while employing the best aspects of prior site planning and development controls to ensure: 
(1)  Protection of surrounding residential uses; 
(2)  Safe access by motorists; 
(3)  Minimum traffic congestion; and 
(4)  A development which is consistent with long-range plans of the city. A limited number of carefully planned residential uses may also be included in a planned commercial development. 
(b)  Required plans. All of the general and special requirements for planned developments shall be provided. The following special items shall also be addressed: 
(1)  The site plan shall indicate the proposed size, location and number of stories of each commercial structure. 
(2)  The entrances, exits and number and location of all parking spaces shall be shown in detail, together with all loading and no parking zones. 
(3)  The proposed methods and location of all buffers shall be described. 
(4)  The proposed exterior lighting shall be shown. 
(5)  All proposed signs, advertising or identification graphics shall be indicated, showing their number, size, height and location. 
(6)  The type and number of uses proposed for the commercial development shall be indicated. 
(7)  The development controls for the district shall be stated (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.). If standards are not specifically proposed, then the applicable standards in the C-1 Commercial District shall apply. 
(8)  If residential uses are proposed in conjunction with the planned commercial development, then the applicable requirements of the planned residential development shall be provided. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2004.4), 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 54-638. - Planned industrial development (PID). 
(a)  Characteristics. A planned industrial development should consist of land which has been designated for a planned, organized and controlled industrial use or for multiple but compatible industrial uses in a planned industrial park. The standards employed should be designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible environment for the planned industrial uses and the surrounding land uses. Carefully planned office and commercial uses may be incorporated as part of a planned industrial development. 
(b)  Required plans. All of the general and special requirements for planned developments shall be provided. The following specific items shall also be addressed: 
(1)  A site plan indicating the proposed site preparation and grading, streets and parking areas, loading zones, outdoor storage areas, rail facilities, storm drainage, water, gas and sewage systems and all buffer areas. 
(2)  The development controls for the district shall be detailed (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, etc.). If standards are not specifically proposed, then the applicable standards in the M-1 Light Industrial District, together with the screening and buffer requirements, shall apply. 
(3)  If office or commercial uses are proposed in conjunction with the planned industrial development, then the applicable requirements in the planned office development or the planned commercial development district shall be provided. 
(4)  A proposed development schedule and listing of proposed uses shall be provided. 
(Amd. No. 220, § 1(2004.5), 2-12-2007) 
Secs. 54-639—54-664. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS/CORRIDORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, July 11, 2011, repealed Ch. 54, Art. IV, §§ 54-687—54-693, 54-715—54-722, 54-743—54-746, 54-776—54-781, 54-801—54-803, 54-830—54-831, 54-856, 54-857, 54-878—54-883, 54-902, 54-923—54-925, 54-954—54-964, 54-989—54-997, 54-1028—54-1031, 54-1061—54-1065, 54-1084—54-1086, 54-1111, 54-1112, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. IV, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 54-665. - Findings. 
The city council finds as a matter of public policy that the aesthetic, economic and functional qualities of the city are worthy of enhancement and preservation and are essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, safety and general welfare of the existing and future residents of the City of Oakwood. The city council further finds that proper development of the city's downtown district and major transportation and gateway corridors is best attained by setting certain standards for the overlay zones that will be to the interest, benefit and advantage of each of the owners of nonresidential and attached residential sites within the city. The city further finds that the establishment of such standards will assist it to develop and promote a first class city that will serve to attract and retain high quality industrial and commercial development providing employment growth and economic development within the city. The city council specifically finds that the overlay zones will promote the general health, safety and welfare of the city; improve the efficient operation of traffic around the city; promote safe and efficient movement within the overlay districts for persons using all modes of travel-motorized vehicles, bicycles and walking; create a sense of place that is aesthetically appealing and environmentally responsible; encourage innovative development projects within set standards for landscaping, community design and aesthetics and establish consistent and harmonious design standards for public improvements and private property development within the overlay districts so as to unify the distinctive visual quality of each overlay district and gateway corridor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-666. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of each of the overlay districts and gateway corridors provided for herein is to provide special design requirements for those properties located within the district regardless of their zoning classification in order to maintain a consistent appearance along the major transportation and gateway corridors of the city and throughout each overlay district. The intent of each is to create an identity for that area that will enhance its economic vitality and protect the value of properties within the corridor or district. The major goal of these overlay district design standards is to ensure that the future development of land in each overlay district will conform to the design, direction and intent of the Downtown and Commercial Center Master Plan and the Oakwood Comprehensive Plan. These standards will help to guarantee that the developments occurring within the overlay districts are sited and built to standards that will support this vision and foster smart, pedestrian friendly and sustainable growth. The city's hope is that through these standards, a level of quality and a distinct personality will arise, setting Oakwood out from surrounding areas and ensuring it maintains wide ranging appeal among residents, businesses and visitors alike. Therefore, the purpose and intent of this article is to establish a uniform procedure for review and approval of projects; to protect, enhance, preserve or reuse places, sites, buildings, structures, objects, streets, signs, street furniture, sidewalks, neighborhoods, and landscape features; provide for aesthetic, economic, and functional value of properties, neighborhoods and structures; and address issues of traffic, traffic operations and congestion, transit, bicycle and pedestrian access and safety, aesthetics of the built environment, business viability, neighborhood preservation and public safety in the overlay districts. The scope of this article includes standards for sidewalks; pedestrian and site lighting; street trees; site development; design, materials, location, size and orientation of buildings and accessory structures; landscaping; screening and materials; and signs. These standards are necessary to implement the goals contained in the Oakwood 2030 Comprehensive Master Plan and the Oakwood Downtown and Commercial Center Master Plan. Such goals include, but are not limited to, implementing an integrated transportation and land use plan; creating a town center; applying design guidelines; improving traffic and the pedestrian environment, aesthetics of the built environment, and business viability; preserving neighborhoods and promoting public safety. The design standards adopted in accordance with the requirements of this division shall apply to all properties within the applicable overlay district. Land and structures shall be used in accordance with standards of the underlying zoning classification. 
In summary the purpose of the overlay district regulations shall be: 
(1)  To foster civic pride. 
(2)  To promote attention to accepted design principles. 
(3)  To raise the level of community understanding and expectation for quality. 
(4)  To implement the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  To implement the Downtown and Commercial Center Master Plan. 
(6)  To protect and enhance local visual aesthetic, character and functional qualities of the districts. 
(7)  To stimulate business growth. 
(8)  To increase opportunities for federal and state grant funding. 
(9)  To guide the spatial relationships of structures and open spaces to each other. 
(10)  To provide guidance to professionals and owners undertaking construction. 
(11)  To recommend appropriate design approaches. 
(12)  To provide an objective basis for review, assuring consistency and fairness. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-667. - Guidelines versus standards. 
'Design standards' are specific, legally enforceable, mandatory minimum standards to which a planner, architect, landscape architect, owner, developer or builder is held in developing any land or buildings under this article. These standards ensure that the vision of the community is reflected in the future built environment. For situations in which some of the requirements cannot be met, there are specific requirements for variances. Conversely, 'design guidelines' are simple voluntary advisory documents that encourage specific types or styles of development or building construction in order to promote a vision. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-668. - Relationship to other code provisions. 
The adoption of the within overlay districts is an amendment to the existing zoning provisions of this chapter. As such, each zoning overlay district shall be shown as such on the Official Zoning Maps of Oakwood, Georgia. The design standards are not to be considered comprehensive and are meant as an overlay to the city's existing zoning and development codes. This article does not in any way repeal, replace or otherwise negate any aspects of the remainder of this chapter or any other development regulations. All regulations and standards published pursuant to this article are to be in addition to, or "over and above" any other legal requirements including local, state and federal regulations. In any case where provisions of this article conflict with other sections of this Code and other city regulations, the provisions of this article shall govern or prevail to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-669. - Boundaries and maps. 
(a)  Plainview Corridor Overlay District (PCOD). The boundaries of the Plainview Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Plainview Road from its intersection with I-985 to its intersection with Atlanta Highway (and any extension thereof) as shown on a map entitled "Plainview COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Plainview COD" or the "PCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this article and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(b)  Railroad Corridor Overlay District (RCOD). The boundaries of the Railroad Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Railroad Street from its intersection with the creek forming the northern boundary of Tara Country subdivision to its intersection with Chamblee Road as shown on a map entitled "Railroad COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Railroad COD" or the "RCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(c)  Mundy Mill/Winder Highway Corridor Overlay District (MWCOD). The boundaries of the Mundy Mill/Winder Highway Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Mundy Mill Road from its intersection with I-985, and those lots subdivided thereof, to its intersection with Martin Road/Sloan Mill Road as shown on a map entitled "Mundy Mill/Winder Highway COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Mundy Mill/Winder Highway COD" or the "MWCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(d)  Mundy Mill Corridor Overlay District (MMCOD). The boundaries of the Mundy Mill Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Mundy Mill Road from its intersection with the city limits of the City of Gainesville adjacent to the Downtown Overlay District and those lots subdivided thereof to its terminus at McEver Road as shown on a map entitled "Mundy Mill COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Mundy Mill COD" or the "MMCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(e)  Old Oakwood Corridor Overlay District (OOCOD). The boundaries of the Old Oakwood Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Old Oakwood Road from its intersection with Mundy Mill Road, and those lots subdivided thereof, to the northern city limits of the City of Oakwood as shown on a map entitled "Old Oakwood COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Old Oakwood COD" or the "OOCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(f)  Flat Creek Corridor Overlay District (FCCOD). The boundaries of the Flat Creek Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Flat Creek from its intersection with Oakwood Road, and those lots subdivided thereof, to the westerly city limits of the City of Oakwood as shown on a map entitled "Flat Creek COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Flat Creek COD" or the "FCCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(g)  McEver Road Corridor Overlay District (MCOD). The boundaries of the McEver Road Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of McEver Road from its intersection with the northernmost city limits of the City of Oakwood, and those lots subdivided thereof, to its intersection with the southernmost city limits of the City of Oakwood as shown on a map entitled "McEver Road COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "McEver COD" or the "MCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(h)  Chamblee Road Corridor Overlay District (CCOD). The boundaries of the Chamblee Road Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of McEver Road from its intersection with McEver Road, and those lots subdivided thereof, to its intersection with Thurman Tanner Parkway as shown on a map entitled "Chamblee Road COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Chamblee COD" or the "CCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(i)  Thurmon Tanner Parkway South Corridor Overlay District (TTPSCOD). The boundaries of the Thurmon Tanner Parkway South Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Thurmon Tanner Parkway from its intersection with Plainview Road, and those lots subdivided thereof, to its intersection with H. F. Reed Parkway as shown on a map entitled "Thurmon Tanner Parkway South COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Thurmon Tanner Parkway South COD" or the "TTPSCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(j)  Thurmon Tanner Parkway North Corridor Overlay District (TTPNCOD). The boundaries of the Thurmon Tanner Parkway North Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Thurmon Tanner Parkway from its intersection with Mundy Mill Road, and those lots subdivided thereof, to its intersection with Atlanta Highway as shown on a map entitled "Thurmon Tanner Parkway North COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Thurmon Tanner Parkway North COD" or the "TTPNCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(k)  Atlanta Highway Corridor Overlay District (AHCOD). The boundaries of the Atlanta Highway Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of Atlanta Highway from its intersection with Tumbling Creek Road, and those lots subdivided thereof, to its intersection with Martin Road as shown on a map entitled "Atlanta Highway COD Map" (hereinafter referred to as "Atlanta Highway COD" or the "AHCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(l)  Reed/McBrayer/Martin Corridor Overlay District (RMMCOD). The boundaries of the Reed/McBrayer/Martin Corridor Overlay District shall be 500 feet on either side of the centerline of H. F. Reed Parkway from its intersection with McEver Road to its terminus at Thurmon Tanner Parkway; 500 feet on either side of H.F. Reed Parkway (as to be extended) to Martin Road from its intersection with Thurmon Tanner Parkway to its intersection with Martin Road and 500 feet on either side of Martin Road from its intersection with H.F. Reed Parkway (as to be extended) to its intersection with J. M. Turk Road as shown on a map entitled "Reed/Martin Road Overlay Zone - July, 2008," (hereinafter referred to as the overlay district or the "RMMCOD") which is hereby adopted and made a part of this division and which may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
(m)  Downtown Overlay District (DOD). The boundaries of the Downtown Overlay District (hereinafter referred to also as "DOD") are shown and established on the Official Zoning Map of the City [of] Oakwood and on the Oakwood Downtown Overlay District Map. (See appendix to the Downtown Overlay District Design Standards maintained by the city clerk and the City of Oakwood Planning Department in accordance with the provisions of the within article.) Said maps and all explanatory materials included thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of this definition of the boundaries of the DOD. The boundaries of the DOD are more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the north-eastern right-of-way of Mundy Mill Road and the north-eastern right-of-way of Interstate 985-Lanier Parkway proceed south-westerly along the northern right-of-way of Interstate 985 to the southern property line of parcel 08051001009; thence north-westerly along the south-west property line of parcel 08051001022 and the eastern right-of-way of Plainview Road to the western property line of parcel 08051001006; thence westerly across Plainview Road to the eastern then southern property line of parcel 08051003004A; thence north-westerly along the western property line of parcel 08051003005 and 08051003005A; thence westerly along the southern property line of parcel 08051003005A; thence north-westerly along the western property line of parcel 08051003005A to the western property line of parcel 08052A007008; thence northerly along the western property line of parcel 08052A007007 to the thence north-westerly across Railroad western property line of parcel 08052A007011; thence north-easterly along the north-western property line of parcel 08052A007001 to the north-western property line of parcel 08052A006001; Street to the south and west property lines of parcel 08052002022; thence south-westerly along the southern property line of parcel 08052002022 to the corner of parcel 08052002022; thence north-westerly along the south-western property line of parcel 08052002022 to the southern right-of-way of McClure Drive; thence north-westerly across McClure Drive along the north-western property line of parcel 08052002022 and the south-western property line of parcel 08052002033; thence proceed north-westerly through parcel 08052002022 to the south-eastern property line of parcel 08052002034B; thence north-westerly along the south-western property line of parcel 08052002034B to the south-eastern property line corner of parcel 08052002034; thence northerly along the western property line of parcel 08052002034B; thence easterly along the northern property line of parcel 08052002034B to the south-western property line of parcel 08052002024; thence northerly along the western property line of parcel 08052002024 to the southern right-of-way of Flat Creek Road; thence easterly along the southern right-of-way of Flat Creek Road to the north-eastern property line corner of parcel 08052002024; thence northerly across Flat Creek Road to the south-western property line of the parcel 08052005001; thence north-westerly along the south-western property line of parcel 08052005001 to the south-western property line of parcel 08053003009A; thence north-easterly along the northern property line of parcel 08053003009; thence north-westerly along the western property line of parcel 08053003009; thence north-easterly along the northern property line of parcel 08053003009 to parcel 08053003010; thence north-westerly along the western property line of parcel 08053003010 to the southern right-of-way of Brock Drive; thence easterly and then northerly along the right-of-way of Brock Drive to the southern property line of parcel 08043000011; thence easterly along the southern property line of 08043000011; thence north-westerly along the western property line of parcel 08053003010 to the southern property line of parcel 08053001053; thence north-easterly along the northern property line of parcel 08053003010 to the western property line of parcel 08043000077; thence south-easterly along the south-western property line of parcel 08043000077 to the north-western property line of parcel 08043000037; thence north-easterly along the north-western property line of parcel 08043000037 to the north-eastern right-of-way of Mundy Mill Road; thence south-easterly along the north-eastern right-of-way of Mundy Mill Road to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-670. - Interpretation of boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts of the official overlay map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries following centerlines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries following lot or tract lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines or tract lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(3)  Boundaries following center lines of creeks, streams and rivers. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of water bodies shall be construed to follow such centerlines. In the event of change in the shoreline due to natural causes, the centerline shall move accordingly. 
(4)  Boundaries following right-of-way lines for roads. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the right-of-way lines for public roads and highways shall be construed to follow such right-of-way lines. In the event of a change in the right-of-way such as might typically occur in a road widening project, the boundary will move concurrently with the establishment of the new right-of-way line. 
(5)  Uncertainties. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official or current zoning or district overlay map, or in case any other uncertainty exists as to the proper location of district boundaries, the planning director shall interpret the intent of the official or current zoning map as to the proper location of the district boundaries. 
a.  If and when at some future time, a parcel along a boundary is split in any way, the historical boundary description shall prevail and the new parcel shall continue to be subject to the standards of the overlay district. 
b.  Any outside parcels combined with parcels inside the district boundary shall become subject to the overlay standards, regardless of whether or not the properties are re-platted as one. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-671. - Sub-districts of DOD. 
(a)  Town Center sub-district. 
(1)  Character and intent. This sub-district is comprised of two planning districts from the original Downtown and Commercial Center Master Plan: the Government Town Center district and the Town Commons district. Although these two areas are described as distinct planning units in the master plan, the intent for the uses, spatial relationships and aesthetics of these two areas is similar. Planned as the first phase of proposed Downtown and Commercial Center Master Plan, this key district lies north of the railroad line that bisects the Downtown Master Plan. 
(2)  Sub-district map. The sub-district map is set forth in the DOD Design Standards adopted contemporaneously herewith and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(b)  Main Street Village sub-district. 
(1)  Character and intent. This sub-district is the geographic center of the DOD and is made up of the original Main Street Village District and the Transit Station area. This district is intended for institutional uses in addition to office, recreational and retail opportunities. 
(2)  Sub-district map. The sub-district map is set forth in the DOD Design Standards adopted contemporaneously herewith and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(c)  Commercial Center sub-district. 
(1)  Character and intent. The commercial center sub-district is envisioned as part of a "live work" master plan inter-parcel connectivity, access management plans, well designed and heavily shaded parking areas, significant setbacks from roads, access to major networks of trails and paths, and high quality landscaping. 
(2)  Sub-district map. The sub-district map is set forth in the DOD Design Standards adopted contemporaneously herewith and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(d)  Neighborhood Village sub-district. 
(1)  Character and intent. The neighborhood village is one of the most mixed of the districts and may contain residential, institutional, medical, commercial office and retail uses. It has many of the same requirements as the commercial center sub-district and lies along the same major road corridor. The primary difference is the close proximity of residential neighborhoods on three sides. For this reason buffer and landscape requirements are greater and the height of all buildings is limited to two stories. 
(2)  Sub-district map. The sub-district map is set forth in the DOD Design Standards adopted contemporaneously herewith and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(e)  Residential Neighborhood sub-district. 
(1)  Character and intent. The residential neighborhood sub-district will be the only single use district in the DOD overlay district and is restricted to residential uses only. The residential neighborhood district is intended to be comprised both of preserved historic homes and newly constructed homes built to compliment the architectural styles of neighborhoods. 
(2)  Sub-district map. The sub-district map is set forth in the DOD Design Standards adopted contemporaneously herewith and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(f)  Mundy Mill sub-district. 
(1)  Character and intent. The Mundy Mill district is the largest sub-district in the overlay district and includes the primary industrial and commercial areas of the city. Most of the district is along Mundy Mill Road with minor sections fronting Lanier Parkway/I-985, Thurmon Tanner Parkway and Old Oakwood Road. This district is effectively the primary "gateway" to the city. The intent is to promote the development of high quality frontage along major streets with well-developed pedestrian access and inter-parcel connectivity. 
(2)  Sub-district map. The sub-district map is set forth in the DOD Design Standards adopted contemporaneously herewith and incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2015-CO-07-729, § 1, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 54-672. - Permitted uses. 
All uses permitted by right or as special uses by the underlying zoning district shall be similarly permitted in each overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-673. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Prohibited uses in the Residential Neighborhood, Neighborhood Village, Town Center and Main Street Village sub-districts. The following uses are prohibited in the sub-districts listed above: 
(1)  Any use permitted under M-2 zoning with the exception that minor manufacturing for direct retail sales in the same building is permissible. (Such as an artisan or craftsman shop.) 
(2)  Machine and welding shops. 
(3)  Lumber yards. 
(4)  Contractor's establishments (except for purely professional offices). 
(5)  Kennels. 
(6)  Massage parlors. 
(7)  Mini-warehouse. 
(8)  Racetracks. 
(9)  Storage yards. 
(10)  Commercial manufacturing or distribution plants (minor manufacturing for direct retail sales in the same building is permissible. Such as an artisan or craftsman shop.) 
(11)  Pawn shops. 
(12)  Check cashing establishments. 
(13)  Pay storage facilities of any kind. 
(14)  Automobile service, (including trucks and commercial vehicles) sales (new or used) or leasing (except when no vehicles are stored on site). 
(15)  Boat service, sales, or leasing (except when no boats stored on site). 
(16)  Outdoor commercial recreation facilities such as a batting cage, driving range or similar pay facility (does not apply to public recreation areas such as parks). 
(17)  Hospitals. 
(18)  Drive-throughs of any kind including restaurants, drug stores, etc. 
(19)  Car washes, detail shops and/or service stations. 
(20)  Drive-in theater. 
(21)  Funeral homes. 
(22)  Landscaping or lawn business (except for professional office space only without storage of equipment for outdoor use). 
(23)  Garden center or plant nursery (except florist). 
(24)  Laundry and/or dry cleaning plant distribution center. 
(25)  Indoor firing range. 
(26)  Commercial agricultural use. 
(27)  Flea market. 
(28)  Car washes. 
(29)  Campgrounds. 
(30)  Recreation vehicle parks. 
(31)  Palm reading and fortune telling. 
(32)  Slaughter house. 
(33)  Waste facilities. 
(34)  Transfer station or truck terminal. 
(35)  Taxicab station. 
(36)  Fuel oil and liquefied petroleum dealers. 
(37)  Junkyard or sales of scrap. 
(38)  Any kind of digital or electrical signal transmission towers over ten feet in height. 
(b)  Prohibited uses in the Mundy Mill and Commercial Center sub-districts. The following uses are prohibited in the Mundy Mill and Commercial Center sub-districts. 
(1)  Any kind of residential uses. 
(2)  Massage parlors. 
(3)  Palm reading and fortune telling. 
(4)  Waste facility. 
(5)  Cemetery. 
(6)  Golf driving range, course. 
(7)  Drive-in movie theater. 
(8)  Commercial agricultural use. 
(9)  Flea market. 
(10)  Junkyard or sales of scrap. 
(11)  Landfill. 
(12)  Recycling plant. 
(13)  Wrecked motor vehicle compound. 
(c)  Prohibited uses in the Residential Neighborhood sub-district. Any use not permitted under any residential zoning. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2015-CO-07-729, § 2, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 54-674. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given in Section 54-1 entitled "Definitions" of Chapter 54 of the City Code or by Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. As used in this division, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Appearance means the outward aspect that is visible to the public. 
Appropriate means fitting to the context of a site, neighborhood or community. 
Architectural concept means the basic aesthetic idea of a structure, or group of structures, including the site, signs, buildings and landscape development that produces the architectural character. 
Architectural feature means a significant element of a structure or site. 
Architectural merit means an acknowledgment by a recognized institution or organization of architecture or historical preservation such as the American Institute of Architects (AIA) that a building represents a high quality work or quality example of a specific architectural style. 
Architraves means molding around a door or window. 
Attractive means having qualities that arouse satisfaction and pleasure in numerous, but not necessarily all, observers. 
Building site means each buildable tract or parcel of real property that is contained in the zone defined herein. For the purposes hereof, any adjoining or contiguous property conveyed to an owner of a building site shall be deemed to be part of the building site owned by said owner. Where land availability and configuration dictate, the city in its discretion may approve a smaller tract. 
Build-to lines or zones means a line or zone along a public street to which the main face or wall of a building must directly abut or be built within. Unlike a setback which sets a minimum distance from the road, a "build-to" line ensures the building will be built closer to the road to create the proper sense of scale for the sidewalk and streetscape within the district. The distance is measured from the back of curb and not the right-of-way. 
Certificate of Endorsement (COE) means a document evidencing support of a material change in the appearance of a property located within an overlay district by the person or board designated within an overlay district. A COE is not required for the erection, alteration, restoration, addition, removal or relocation of a sign. 
Cohesiveness means unity of composition among elements of a structure or among structures, and their landscape development. 
Compatibility means harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
Cornice means a horizontal molded projection that crowns or completes a building or wall. 
Design and development standards means those standards adopted hereby by resolution of the Oakwood City Council from time to time and in accordance with the provisions of this article and maintained by the city clerk and the city planning department. 
Designation or designated means a decision by the city council wherein a property or district is declared an overlay district. 
District Design Review Committee (DDRC) means a panel which, when appointed by the city council, consists of five members appointed to consider applications within a specific overlay district, established and perpetuated to consider improvements on the building sites and to possess such other duties and powers as are more fully set forth in this division. The city may establish a DDRC with respect to each individual overlay district and, in that event, reference to the DDRC within that district shall mean the DDRC for the overlay district addressed in that division or resolution. See section 54-674 for a detailed description. 
External design feature means the general arrangement of any portion of structures or landscaping, including the type, and texture of the materials, the type of roof, windows, doors, lights, signs, and fixtures of portions which are open to the public view. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure and site including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, facade, landscaping and other architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative thereto. 
Fenestration means the arrangement of windows in a building. 
Geographic area means land area subject to overlay district regulations. 
Harmony means a quality that represents an attractive arrangement of parts, as in an arrangement of various architectural elements. 
Historical significance means the building or property that has been recognized and proven to be an integral part of a historically significant event or place by one of the following agencies; The Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, The Georgia DNR - Historic Preservation Division, National Trust for Historic Preservation or the federal Advisory Council on Historic Preservation. 
Improvements means any and all building site developments, betterments, modifications and construction including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, walks, towers, tanks, patios, driveways, signs, docks, walls, fences, screens, parking areas, drainage and utility conduit, excavations and grading. Routine maintenance is not an improvement. 
Landscape means plant materials, landscape beds, berms and earthen topography and other physical elements combined in relation to one another and to structures including pavement. 
Landscape zones means a minimum ten feet in width and located immediately adjacent to the curb and shall be continuous. This zone may be used for street trees, streetlights, benches, planters, trash receptacles, bicycle parking racks and other street furniture, pedestrian lights, landscaping or sod. 
Logic of design means widely accepted principles and criteria in the solution of design problems. 
Lunette means a crescent-shaped or semicircular space, usually over a door or window that may contain another window, a sculpture or a mural. 
Material change in appearance means a change in a structure or a parking lot within an overlay district that exceeds ordinary maintenance or repair (defined below) and requires either a sign permit, building permit or land disturbance permit such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  The erection, alteration, restoration, addition or removal of any structure (including signs) or parking lot; 
(2)  Relocation of a sign or building; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation; or 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way. 
Measuring and dimensioning (for building heights and projections) means in meeting the requirements of this article, the following are to be the standards for measuring and dimensioning various elements. The measuring or dimensioning of any element shall be from finished face to finished face except as noted herein. Building setbacks shall be from the right-of-way or property line to the face of the closest building or projection including roof overhangs and attached utilities. Projections shall be considered part of the building and therefore must be included in any setback determination. The height of a building shall be determined by measuring the distance from lowest point in the finished earthen grade around the building to the highest point on the roof or chimney. 
Muntins/mullions means a strip of wood or metal separating and supporting and holding panes of glass in a window or panels set in series. 
Nuisance means includes, but is not limited to, any usage of a building site that: 
(1)  So annoys, disturbs or affects the owners or occupants of any other building site or other property within the district or the owners or occupants of property contiguous to the district so as to obstruct or interfere with the reasonable or compatible use of such other building site or property or so as to render usage of the building site or property dangerous or damaging to persons or property thereon; or 
(2)  Violates any federal, state, county or municipal law. 
Occupant means an entity or person who may or may not also be an owner and is in lawful possession or has the lawful right to use any building site or portion thereof. 
Owner means the record title holder, whether one or more persons or entities, of fee simple title to any building site located within the district and shall include the owner's heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns but exclude those persons holding title thereto merely as security for the performance of one or more obligations. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair means exempt from inclusion in "Material Change in Appearance" defined above. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior of any structure, parking lot or sign in or on an overlay district property to correct deterioration, decay or damage or to sustain the existing form and that does not involve a material change in outer design, material, or appearance thereof. Painting, reroofing, resurfacing, replacement of a broken sign face and other similar types of ordinary maintenance shall be deemed ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Overlay district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration or linkage of sites, buildings, structures, objects or landscapes, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper treatment thereof, united by plan and/or physical development. An overlay district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as such. 
Overlay sub-district means a smaller defined portion of the larger overlay district delineated separately for administrative purposes including the unique application of design standards. 
Parapet means a low protective wall or railing along the edge of a raised structure such as a roof or balcony. 
Project means an improvement, repair, upgrade, addition, change in appearance, modification, alteration or development on a site or building that requires some form of construction or labor to take place. 
Projection means any physical attached part of a building including, but not limited to, a roof overhang, steps, porch, stoop, elevated wood deck, raised patio or an attached utility such as an air-conditioning condenser. Note: Patios at grade may not be considered projections. 
Proportion means balanced relationship of parts of a building, signs and other structures, and landscape to each other and to the whole. 
Routine maintenance means includes cleaning building exterior and property; replacing deteriorated materials that compose less than 25 percent of the building's exterior; painting, provided the paint colors have been previously approved by the DDRC. 
Scale means proportional relationships of the size of parts to one another and to humans. Also a drawing's relative size as referenced against a known dimensional standard. 
Sidewalk clear zones means shall be a minimum of five feet in width but varies per corridor and sub-district and located immediately contiguous to the landscape zone and shall be continuous. Said zone shall be unobstructed for a minimum height of eight feet. 
Street hardware means objects other than buildings that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: street light fixtures, utility poles, traffic lights and their fixtures, benches, litter containers, planting containers and fire hydrants. 
Streetscape means the appearance and organization along a street of buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware and miscellaneous structures. 
Transom window/panel means a small window or panel above a door that is usually hinged to a horizontal crosspiece over the door. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-675. - District Design Review Committee (DDRC). 
The regulatory body designated to review applications for zoning, land disturbance, building and sign permits in each overlay district shall be known as the District Design Review Committee (DDRC). Each DDRC shall also be responsible for reviewing any public or private plans affecting the overlay district for which it is responsible as directed by the mayor and city council. 
(1)  Members. The members of the applicable DDRC shall be formed from the following three groups: city staff, city citizens or business owners from the specific overlay district and registered design professionals. 
a.  Each DDRC shall be comprised of five members. 
b.  Two members shall be the city manager and the planning director or their designees. 
c.  A third member shall be a registered professional [landscape architect, architect, planner or civil engineer licensed in the State of Georgia or a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP)] nominated by the city manager and appointed by the city council annually who shall serve until replaced. This professional may be paid for their services at the city's discretion. 
d.  Members, other than the two staff positions and the registered professional of the DDRC: 
1.  Must be either residents from the specific overlay district or owners of a business located in that overlay district; 
2.  Shall be appointed by the city council; 
3.  Shall serve at the pleasure of the city council; and 
4.  Shall serve four-year terms except as noted below. 
Preference in the selection of appointed members should be given to residents and business owners with expertise in construction, banking, business development, real-estate or design related fields. 
e.  In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for two years and one member for four years. 
f.  Members, except for the registered professional, shall not receive payment for participation, although they may be eligible for reimbursement for expenses as approved by the city council. 
(2)  Powers and duties. 
a.  Power to adopt rules, standards and by-laws: 
1.  Each DDRC may adopt rules, procedures and guidelines for the transaction of its business. 
2.  Each DDRC shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for calling special meetings. 
3.  Each DDRC shall select such officers from among its members as it deems appropriate. A quorum for purposes of making official recommendations shall consist of a majority of its total membership. 
b.  DDRC review for compliance with adopted development standards: 
1.  The DDRC shall review applications for sign permits, land disturbance permits, building permits, fence permits, re-zoning and use permits and concurrent variances and modifications which propose changes to standards contained in this article. These applications shall be evaluated on the applicable standards contained in this article. 
2.  The DDRC may recommend that an applicant apply for variances regarding standards contained in this article to be considered under the procedures set forth in the Section 54-677 hereof. 
3.  Said DDRC recommendations shall be forwarded to the staff of the Oakwood Planning and Development Department. 
4.  Staff of the Oakwood Planning and Development Department shall forward the DDRC's variance recommendations to the Oakwood Planning Commission for initial consideration. 
5.  The Oakwood Planning and Development Department shall issue, issue with modifications or withhold a permit based on a project's conformance with the standards set out in this article, as represented by the Certificate of Endorsement (Section 54-673 of this Code) subject to final action by the city council on variances, re-zoning and modifications to conditions. 
6.  The DDRC may review applications for sign permits to make advisory comments to the planning director regarding whether the proposed signs conform to the standards set forth in Part II, Chapter 36 of this Code. Such review shall not be binding on the planning director or the city. Such review shall not delay or otherwise affect the time requirements set forth in Part II, Chapter 36 of this Code. 
(3)  Conflicts of interest. Each DDRC shall be governed by all conflict of interest laws and provisions of the Oakwood Code of Ethics (Part II, Chapter 2, Articles IV, Ethics). When the subject materials being reviewed include a project on which members of the DDRC have a financial interest directly or indirectly that member shall recuse him or herself from voting on that particular project. 
(4)  Meetings. Each DDRC shall meet in public once a month or as required and be authorized to adopt Rules of Order for the operation of its meetings. 
a.  DDRC meetings shall comply with the public notification requirements of the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
b.  An employee of the City of Oakwood shall attend all DDRC meetings in order to record the minutes. 
c.  A public record shall be kept by the staff of the Oakwood Planning and Development Department of each DDRC's resolutions, proceedings, findings and recommendations and such record shall be maintained in such a place and manner as to allow public access. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-676. - Affirmations and applicability. 
(a)  Affirmation of existing building codes and zoning. Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt property and business owners from complying with other existing city regulations whenever this article does not apply. If provisions in the overlay district conflict with other provisions of Chapter 54 of this Code, the stricter provisions of the overlay district shall apply. 
(b)  Applicability. In order to assure the orderly growth and compatible development of the City of Oakwood, the mayor and city council have adopted concurrently herewith by resolution thereon district design standards as a mandatory land use control for all properties and structures within each defined jurisdiction. (See Boundary Map.) These standards supplement and are adjunct to Oakwood's Comprehensive Plan, the Standard Building Code and this Code concerning zoning, signs and subdivisions. When conflicts occur between requirements of these various regulatory documents, the most strenuous standard applies, as interpreted by the City. Design review is required for all new construction within [the] each overlay district. Plan submittal is required for buildings built on vacant lots or for the replacement of demolished buildings. 
(c)  Existing buildings. If an existing building is significantly renovated or replaced with a new building, the new structure or renovation shall comply with the standards for renovated buildings of the appropriate district. Renovations, which include painting and new construction in the overlay districts, must be submitted to the applicable DDRC. 
(d)  Exemptions and thresholds for review. 
(1)  Exempted projects. 
a.  Interior alterations are exempt. The DDRC shall not consider interiors or exterior features which are not visible from an exterior public space or street. 
b.  If the project is only to carry out routine maintenance, it does not require design review (see definitions). 
c.  Additionally, the replacement of dead, damaged or stolen landscaping, site furniture, paving materials or lighting that was previously approved does not require review. 
(2)  Thresholds for Review by DDRC. If the project falls in any one of the following categories as hereinafter described, it requires design review by the DDRC: 
a.  Major Renovation. Includes building addition, canopy or replacement of 50 percent or more of a building. The renovation or replacement of any complete (more than 75%) side of a building which fronts a street or public space regardless of the percentage of the total building shall also require review. Painting will require review if the color has not been previously approved by the DDRC. 
b.  Landscaping. A landscaping plan is required to screen parking facilities and meet landscape requirements. Any project involving replacing or installing of plant material other than routine maintenance and damage replacement will require review. 
c.  Parking. A plan for meeting the parking requirements associated with new building construction is subject to design review. Any proposed additional parking for an existing building is also subject to review. 
d.  Demolition. Design review is required if a building predates 1950 or has historical significance. Request for demolition permit must be submitted to the DDRC accompanied by a plan for a replacement building. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2015-CO-07-729, § 3, 8-10-2015) 
Sec. 54-677. - Review process and application procedure. 
(a)  Approval of plans required. No improvements shall be constructed, erected, placed, altered, maintained or permitted to remain on any building site by any owner or occupant until final plans and specifications therefore shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by the applicable DDRC. Such final plans and specifications shall be submitted in duplicate over the authorized signature of the owner or occupant, or both, of the building site or the authorized agent thereof. The plans and specifications shall be in such form and shall contain such information as may be reasonably required by the DDRC. 
(b)  Improvements. All improvements must comply with the then-current district design standards established for the district. 
(c)  Project review meeting. Prior to application, the property owner, developer or representative shall schedule a project review meeting with the city planning and development department. The design review is a one-time review process of conceptual design drawings. However, an applicant may return voluntarily for design critiques as often as necessary. The purpose of the review is to identify design issues and provide recommendations and advice to the applicant on the design proposal relative to the district design standards. Conceptual drawings may take the form of dimensioned sketches or may be more refined. However, the graphics should provide sufficient information so the city staff may determine if there are obvious conflicts with applicable codes and regulations. 
(d)  Submittals—Applications. 
(1)  An application for a Certificate of Endorsement (COE) must be submitted to the DDRC in order for it to take formal action on a proposed project. The application for a COE shall be accompanied by all standard applications (as applicable) for zoning changes, ground disturbance permits, sign permits and building permits. All applications for zoning changes, demolition permits, sign permits, ground disturbance permits and building permits within the boundaries of a specific overlay district shall clearly state so. Applications shall be submitted to the Oakwood Planning and Development Department at least 15 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the DDRC. The applicant may present the project at the public meeting and is permitted to amend the application at said meeting in response to concerns addressed by the DDRC. All amendments and stipulations to an approved application shall be attached in writing to the application and signed by the applicant and the chairman of the DDRC. Applications denied by the DDRC may be redrawn and re-submitted to the DDRC for another review. Final approval of a proposed project will be verified by the issuance of a COE and other applicable permits and subject to any required final action by the city council. Any significant deviation which is not in compliance with this Code shall be sufficient grounds for the city to take action as set forth in Sections 54-680—54-682. 
(2)  Applications for improvements to developed sites and/or existing structures shall meet the standards contained in this article for installation of sidewalks, pedestrian lighting and street trees, when the proposed interior and/or exterior renovation of a building and/or site re-development improvements have a declared value equal to or greater than 40 percent of the property's most recent tax assessment. 
a.  Estimated costs of, including but not limited to, demolition, construction, installation and fabrication, including labor and materials, for both interior and exterior improvements, shall be submitted at the time a building and/or land disturbance permit application is filed. 
b.  The declared value of improvements under multiple permits shall be cumulative and shall include the value of improvements under permits issued for the previous seven years from the date the most recent application is filed. 
(e)  Basis for approval. Approval shall be based, among other things, upon adequacy of site dimensions, adequacy of structural design, conformity with the district design standards, harmony of external design with neighboring structures, effect of location and use of proposed improvements upon neighboring lots, proper facing of main elevation with respect to nearby streets, adequacy of screening of mechanical installations and conformity of the plans and specifications to the purpose and intent of this article. No plans will be approved which do not provide for the underground installation of power, electrical, telephone and other utility lines and the complete visual and landscaped screening of all transformer and terminal equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the DDRC shall have the right to disapprove any plans and specifications submitted hereunder on any reasonable grounds including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure to comply with any of the restrictions set forth in this article; 
(2)  Failure to include information in such plans and specifications as may have been reasonably requested by the DDRC; 
(3)  Objection to the exterior design or the appearance of materials employed in any proposed structure; 
(4)  Objection on the ground of incompatibility of any proposed structure or use with existing structures or uses upon other building sites or other property in the vicinity of the subject property; 
(5)  Objection to the location of any proposed structure with reference to other building sites or other property in the vicinity; 
(6)  Objection to the color scheme, finish, proportions, style of architecture, height, bulk or appropriateness of any structure; 
(7)  Objection to the number or size of parking spaces or to the design of the parking areas; or 
(8)  Any other matter which, in the judgment of the DDRC, would render the proposed improvements or use inharmonious with the design standards which the city may promulgate from time to time. 
(f)  Result of inaction. If the DDRC fails either to approve or disapprove plans and specifications submitted to it for approval within 30 days after the same have been submitted, it shall be conclusively presumed that the DDRC has approved said plans and specifications; provided, however, if within the 30-day period, the DDRC gives written notice of the fact that more time is reasonably required for the review of such plans and specifications, there shall be no presumption that the same are approved until the expiration of such reasonable period of time as is set forth in the notice. 
(g)  Approval. The DDRC may approve plans and specifications as submitted, as altered or as amended or it may grant its approval to the same, subject to specific conditions and permit(s) issuance. Upon approval or conditional approval by the DDRC of any plans and specifications, together with any conditions, one copy thereof shall be retained in the city and a copy of such approval together with any conditions shall be returned to the applicant submitting the same. Conceptual site plans and preliminary concepts may be considered by the DDRC prior to completion of the final design. 
(h)  Commencement of work. Upon receipt of approval from the DDRC pursuant to sub-paragraph (g) hereof, the owner or occupant, or both, to whom the same is given shall, as soon as practicable, satisfy any and all conditions of such approval and shall diligently proceed with the commencement and completion of all approved excavation, construction, refinishing and alterations. In all cases, work shall commence within one year from the date the owner receives approval and, if work is not so commenced, approval shall be deemed revoked unless the DDRC, pursuant to written request made and received prior to the expiration of said one-year period, extends the period of time within which work must be commenced. 
(i)  Completion of work. Any improvement commenced pursuant hereto shall be diligently completed in a workmanlike manner and shall be completed within 18 months from the construction starting date. In the event of strike, fire, national emergency, natural disaster or other supervening force beyond the control of owner or occupant, the DDRC may, upon written request made and received prior to the expiration of the period, extend the period of time within which work must be completed. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this article and subject to the penalties set forth in section 54-682 of this article. 
(j)  City not liable. The city and the DDRC shall not be liable for any damage, loss or prejudice suffered or claimed by any person (including environmental claims) on account of: 
(1)  The approval or disapproval of any plans, drawings and specifications, whether or not in any way defective; 
(2)  The construction of any improvement or performance of any work, whether or not pursuant to approved plans, drawings and specifications; 
(3)  The inadequacy of any approved structure; or 
(4)  The development of any lot within the district. 
(k)  General condition of building sites. The owner or occupant of any building site shall at all times keep it and the buildings, improvements and appurtenances thereon in a safe, clean and wholesome condition and comply, at its own expense, with all applicable governmental, health, fire and safety ordinances, regulations, requirements and directives; and the owner or occupant shall at regular and frequent intervals remove at its own expense any rubbish of any character whatsoever which may accumulate upon such building site. Each building site and all improvements thereon shall at all times be constructed, kept and maintained by the owner or occupant of the building site in first-class condition, repair and appearance. All repairs, alterations, replacements or additions to such improvements shall be at least equal to the original work quality and class. The necessity and adequacy of such repairs shall be measured by the same standard as set forth herein for the original construction and maintenance. Landscaping shall be maintained in a well-kept condition. For specific district requirements, see the applicable design standards adopted for each district. 
(l)  Grounds. The grounds of each building site (whether vacant or occupied) shall be maintained in a neat and attractive condition. Upon the failure of any owner and/or occupant to maintain the grounds of a building site (whether vacant or occupied) in a neat and attractive condition, the city may (but shall be under no obligation to) after seven days' prior written notice to such owner and occupant (if other than the owner) enter upon the building site and have the grass, weeds or other vegetation cut or trimmed when, and as often as, the same is reasonably necessary in its judgment and may have dead trees, shrubs and/or other plants and trash removed therefrom and, if appropriate, replaced. The owner of the building site (and when occupied by a non-owner, the occupant) shall be liable to the city for the cost of any such cutting, clearing, maintenance or removal determined by the city to be necessary and such amount shall also constitute a permanent charge and lien upon such building site enforceable by the city through any appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. For specific district requirements, see the applicable design standards adopted for each district. 
(m)  Improvements. Improvements to a building site (whether occupied or vacant) including, without limitation, buildings, walls, walkways, fences, screens, driveways, parking areas and/or signs shall be cared for and properly maintained by the owner or occupant in a neat and attractive condition. Upon the failure of any owner or occupant to repair and maintain improvements to a building site to the reasonable satisfaction of the city, the city or its authorized representatives may in its reasonable discretion (but without obligation to do so) after seven days' written notice to the owner and to the occupant (if other than the owner) enter upon such building site and perform the necessary repair or maintenance when and as often as the same is necessary in its reasonable judgment. The owner of the building site (and when occupied by a non-owner, the occupant) shall be personally liable to the city for the cost of such necessary repair and/or maintenance as was incurred by the city and such amounts shall also constitute a permanent charge and lien upon such building site enforceable by the city by any appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. 
(n)  Delegation of authority. The city may at anytime delegate and assign in writing to the DDRC any or all of its rights and powers under this division, including the corresponding enforcement provisions hereof. 
(o)  Site inspection final completion. Prior to the city's issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO) and/or COE (CO's not issued for renovation projects) for a project or development falling under the purview of this article, the owner or developer (or agent) shall notify the city of the project's substantial completion and the city staff shall visit the site and inspect the work performed. If the work is found to have been completed in compliance with the plans and documents and all other city requirements have been met, the city will issue a CO or draft a COE and deliver it to the owner, developer or agent. Additionally, section 12-52 of this Code shall apply to all inspections required by the this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-678. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Design exceptions. The city may grant design exceptions if a proposed project is a unique and exceptional design concept that enhances the overlay district or, if by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship due to the circumstances unique to the particular property in question. The DDRC, in passing upon applications, shall consider and issue exceptions to said provisions so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship provided such exceptions shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. A hardship shall not qualify as an undue hardship if it is of a person's own making. In granting such exceptions, the DDRC and planning commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met and no reasonable alternative exists. In reviewing such requests, the city shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors and all standards specified in this and other sections of this division. A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in threats to public safety, public expense or create a nuisance. 
Once a design exception is granted by the DDRC, the applicant must seek approval from the planning commission and city council through the provisions of Chapter 54 of this Code. 
(b)  Alternative compliance. In the event an exception or variance is sought for any provisions in this article, the following alternatives are often considered as offsets that may be taken into consideration. 
(1)  Fences and walls in lieu of landscaping: To screen parking when there is not enough room to provide an effective landscape screen, install fences and/or walls. 
(2)  Enhanced architectural details: Offering to provide additional details, specifically period and style appropriate appointments and materials not typically used due to high cost. 
(3)  Adding windows: Providing more and higher quality architecturally appropriate windows to offset other design deficiency. 
(4)  Public seating spaces: Provision of quality public seating meeting the standards in this article to offset other design deficiency. Examples include benches in front of shops and businesses. 
(5)  Decorative pavers: Installing quality pavement designs, especially in areas highly visible to the public such as driveway aprons and building entrances along main streets to offset other design deficiency. 
(6)  Green infrastructure: Providing additional or alternative storm water design solutions such as bio swales, rain gardens and cisterns to offset other design deficiency. 
(7)  Green building technologies: Use of a new, innovative or non-traditional energy efficient building technology to offset other design deficiency. Use of solar panels and insulated prefabricated wall panels would be examples to consider. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-679. - Appeals procedure. 
If the DDRC denies an application, the city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this division. The city council shall also hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that an error in any requirement, decision or determination is made by the DDRC in the enforcement or administration of this division. At its discretion, the city council may accept this appeal and schedule a public hearing to hear public arguments on the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided by Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-680. - Interpretation and enforcement. 
(a)  Interpretation. This article shall be governed by section 54-107 of this Code. 
(b)  Enforcement. This article shall be governed by section 54-108 of this Code. Design standards have been established for each sub-district by resolution pertaining to each such district or sub-district or as general requirements for all districts and shall apply to all improvements contained in the specified overlay district, the boundaries of which are established under section 54-669 hereof. All applications for land disturbance permits shall comply with the standards contained in the article, unless a variance had been granted for relief from the standards contained herein; all rezoning, modification and use permit applications shall comply with the standards contained in this article unless a variance has been approved in the case of modifications and use permits only or a concurrent variance is being sought for relief from the standards contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-681. - Actions or inactions subject to enforcement. 
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this article or the district design standards may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in Section 54-682. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in section 54-682 shall not prevent such equitable relief. This article shall also be governed by section 54-112 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-682. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first complied with the provision hereof, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with this division and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-683. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety. Twenty-four hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy or certificate of endorsement. The city may refuse to issue a CO for the building or COE for other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in this section, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this division, the city through its police department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the municipal court for the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as provided by section 54-112 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-684. - Standards applicable to development and maintenance. 
All matters included in the general design standards shall apply in the development and maintenance of all building sites within the districts designated therein. Additionally, each corridor and district overlay district within the City of Oakwood shall have the separate district design standards adopted by the Oakwood City Council by resolution thereon after public hearing. Each such district shall also include properties within the designated district which are contiguous to the city but not within its corporate limits and/or included on the map referenced herein, a copy of which is maintained by the Oakwood Planning Department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Secs. 54-685—54-699. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Contents of Plans and Specifications 

Sec. 54-700. - Submission of plans and specifications. 
Prior to the commencement of construction of any improvements on a building site, three or more (as required) sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted to the City of Oakwood, District Design Review Committee, P.O. Box 99, Oakwood, Georgia, 30566, Attention: Planning Director. Plans and specifications formally submitted to the DDRC for final review shall be finished in all respects and shall conform to the [within] design and development standards as well as all zoning requirements of the city. Plans and specifications shall be reviewed by the DDRC and comments thereon returned to the owner or its designated agent. All improvements shall as a minimum comply with the construction standards of the Southern Standard Building Code (latest edition) or other applicable standards established by statute, regulation or ordinance and be approved where required by ordinance by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 54-701. - Required information. 
All plans and specifications shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  A topographical and boundary plat showing contour grades (with two-foot contour intervals) and showing the location of all proposed improvements. Existing and finished grades shall be shown at lot corners and at corners of proposed improvements. Lot drainage provisions shall be included as well as cut-and-fill details if any appreciable change in the lot contours is contemplated. 
(2)  Exterior elevations of all buildings, structures and appurtenances. 
(3)  Exterior materials, colors, textures and shapes. 
(4)  Structural design. 
(5)  Landscaping plan including construction details for walkways, fences and walls, elevation changes, watering systems, vegetation and ground cover. 
(6)  Parking area and driveway plan. 
(7)  Screening including size, location, method and description of materials and finish. 
(8)  Proposed utilities and connections including routing of electrical and telephone cables. 
(9)  Exterior illumination including location. 
(10)  Fire and smoke protection system. 
(11)  Signs including location, size, shape, color, materials and finish. 
(12)  Mailbox design including location, size, shape, color, materials and finish. 
(13)  Trash container storage locations and related screening with materials and finish. 
(14)  Sidewalk or access way layout and material composition. 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Secs. 54-702—54-709. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 54-710. - Adoption and maintenance of design standards. 
Design standards for each district established in section 54-669 hereof shall be effective upon adoption by resolution of the city council after public hearing and comment and shall be maintained at city hall by the city clerk and made available to the public through the planning department upon request . 
(Ord. No. 2011-CO-06-674, § 1, 7-11-2011) 
Secs. 54-711—54-1112. - Reserved. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 