THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF NEWNAN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
NEWNAN, GEORGIA 
(2014) 
____________ 
Keith Brady 
Mayor 
____________ 
Cynthia Jenkins, Mayor Pro Tem 
Clayton W. Hicks 
Rhodes Shell 
Bob Coggin 
Ray DuBose 
George M. Alexander 
Dustin Koritko 
City Council 
____________ 
Cleatus Phillips 
City Manager 
____________ 
C. Bradford Sears, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Della Hill 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
NEWNAN, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Clifford B. Glover, III 
Mayor 
____________ 
John P. Goodrum, Jr., Mayor Pro Tem 
Billy A. Abraham, Councilman 
Dr. Daniel D. Sanders, Councilman 
Willie J. Lynch, Sr., Councilman  Doris D. Soucy, Councilman  Dr. Philip G. Swords, Councilman 
City Council 
____________ 
Richard A. Bolin 
City Manager 
____________ 
C. Bradford Sears, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Peggy L. Dewberry 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City Newnan, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1972 Code, as supplemented through January 25, 1988, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. C. Bradford Sears, Jr., City Attorney, and Mr. Richard A. Bolin, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 6-93 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Newnan, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia: 
Section 1. That the Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Newnan, Georgia," published 1993 by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 to 22, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 24, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 12 months or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 24, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective February 22, 1993. 
DONE, RATIFIED AND PASSED by the City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia, this the 8th day of February, 1993, in regular session assembled. 
ATTEST: 

 
Adopted on the second reading this 22nd day of February, 1993 in regular session assembled. 
ATTEST: 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To reincorporate and provide a new charter for the City of Newnan in Coweta County; to provide for the corporate limits of the city; to provide for the powers of the city; to provide for the form and method of government of the city; to provide for the administration of city affairs; to provide for the municipal court of the city; to provide for elections for city offices; to provide for taxation by the city; to provide for financial management of the city; to provide for a retirement system; to provide for all related matters; to repeal a specific Act; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I contains the charter of the city as derived from 1987 Ga. Laws, page 5160. No substantive changes have been made; however, a uniform system of capitalization has been used, obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added by the editor for clarity. Amendments to the charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended section. The absence of such a note indicates this section derives unchanged from the original act. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Section 1.1. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the City of Newnan, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.2. - Corporate boundaries. 
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made in the manner provided by general law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, or a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city manager of the City of Newnan, Georgia, and to be designated "OFFICIAL MAP or Description of the corporate limits of the City of Newnan, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admissible as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
Section 1.3. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  The City of Newnan shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of the State of Georgia as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Section 1.4. - Examples of powers. 
The corporate powers of the City of Newnan, Georgia, may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Property taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by state law; 
(3)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(4)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(5)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(6)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, buy, sell, lease, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(7)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(8)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority under Georgia law; 
(9)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to withdraw such service for refusal or failure to pay for same; and to determine the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(10)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public service; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(11)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and provide lighting for roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; 
(12)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide for other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, to acquire property by condemnation pursuant to Georgia law; 
(13)  Sidewalk maintenance. To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)  Building regulation. To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas and heating, and air-conditioning codes; to regulate all housing, building, and building trades, and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(15)  Planning and zoning. To provide such comprehensive city planning for development by zoning, subdivision regulation, and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(16)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of excessive noise, drunkenness, riots, and other public disturbances; 
(17)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawn shops; the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and flammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(18)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the right-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(19)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(20)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city to the extent that said regulation is not preempted by state law; 
(21)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(22)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(23)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others and provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(24)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(25)  Sewer fees. To levy a sewer fee, charge, or tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees; and to change the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(26)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(27)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public and prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(28)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county correctional institution or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(29)  Animal regulations. To regulate, license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl; to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(30)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including, parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(31)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed, to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; and to require that such vehicles be kept clean, marked properly, and in good repair, all in accordance with the regulations of the city; 
(32)  Pensions. To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(34)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be made therefor; 
(35)  City agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(36)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(37)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen; and to organize and operate a firefighting agency; 
(38)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city; and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(39)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(40)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(41)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city; and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; and 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants including but not limited to the supplementary powers contained in article IX, section IV, paragraph II of the constitution of the State of Georgia; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.5. - Extension of police jurisdiction beyond corporate limits for protection of water supply. 
For the purpose of enabling the authorities of the city to protect fully the reservoirs of the waterworks of the city, the pipe lines, the purity and healthfulness of the water flowing into said reservoirs, and any property or appurtenance of or connected with said waterworks not embraced in the corporate limits of the city as fixed and defined in this charter, the police jurisdiction of the City of Newnan is extended over the following land lots in the original second district of Coweta County, to wit: 8, 9, 10, 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 40, 41, 42, 43, 54, 55, 56, and land lots 6 and 7 of the fifth land district said lands constituting said watershed to the waterworks of the city. The mayor and council shall have power to pass such ordinances and enforce compliance therewith by suitable penalties, looking to the protection of said property and appurtenances and looking to securing the purity and healthfulness of said water, and shall have full power and authority to abate or cause to be abated and removed through its board of health, if one, or other officers, anything which may cause impurity or unhealthfulness of the water of said waterworks. 
Section 1.6. - Extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems beyond corporate limits. 
(a)  The City of Newnan, by and through its water, sewerage and light commission, is authorized and empowered to extend its water, sewerage, and electrical distributions systems and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, without and beyond the corporate limits of the City of Newnan; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations outside said corporate limits under such provisions as the water, sewerage, and light commissioners of the city may prescribe; and to extend its water and sewerage service without and beyond Coweta County under such provisions as the water, sewerage, and light commissioners may prescribe; to classify rates to be charged in such area beyond the said corporate limits; and to make such contracts, agreements, and arrangements as it deems necessary or desirable for the said purpose. 
(b)  The police authority of the city is extended to include the entire utility systems of the city, including all parts thereof and appurtenances thereto, and all lands upon or through which said systems lie or pass. The mayor and council of the city shall have power to pass such ordinances as they deem suitable to protect said property and appurtenances and to enforce compliance therewith by suitable penalties. Any person or persons in any way interfering with or injuring said systems or any part thereof shall be amenable to the laws and ordinances of the city. 
(c)  In addition to the powers otherwise granted in this charter of the City of Newnan, as amended, the mayor and council of the city shall have full powers and authority to condemn property to carry out any and all lawful purposes in the furtherance of its corporate functions, both governmental and proprietary, and when the power and authority granted by this section is exercised by the council, it may be done, whether the land to be condemned is in the hands of an owner, trustee, administrator, guardian, or agent in the manner provided by Georgia law. This right of condemnation by the City of Newnan shall extend beyond its corporate limits where the property is to be condemned is needed by the city and is deemed useful by the mayor and council to afford and make available to the city such property for use in development of and, thereafter, the operation, maintenance, repair, extension, and improvement to any city facility, either governmental or proprietary. 
(d)  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the city shall have full and complete power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire rights to take water from navigable and nonnavigable streams and from lakes and other places inside and outside the corporate limits of the city and inside and outside the County of Coweta; and to exercise such power of eminent domain to acquire land, or any interest therein, inside and outside the corporate limits of said city necessary for water, sewer, and electric lines, and inside and outside the County of Coweta, necessary for water and sewer lines, together with the usual and necessary appurtenances therefor, or such land or any interest therein necessary in order to lay out, grade, open, pave, straighten, maintain, elevate, lower, improve, and relocate streets, lanes, sidewalks, alleys, and ways on, in, across, along, through, under, or over private property and property already devoted to public use; and also under, over, or across the rights of way of public utilities companies, such as railroad, express, telephone, telegraph, electric, gas, and all others having the right to acquire private property by exercise of the power of eminent domain or any similar power. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything in this subsection to the contrary, the board of water, sewerage and light commissioners of the City of Newnan shall have complete and sole control and management of the water, sewerage, and light works of the City of Newnan independent of the city council of the city; shall have the power and authority to charge the citizens of Newnan and all other persons, firms, corporations, or governmental or other entities, such sums as they may deem just and proper for the use of said utilities; shall have power and authority to make all rules and regulations as in their discretion are necessary or proper for the management and control of the water, sewerage, and lights of the City of Newnan; shall have power to enforce said rules and regulations by refusing to supply, or to discontinue the supply to, any person, firm, corporation, or government or other entity who fails or refuses to comply with said rules and regulations; and shall have the power and authority to perform all acts that may in the opinion of said board be necessary or proper for the operation and maintenance of said utility systems. Provided that nothing in the next preceding sentence shall be construed so as to empower said board of water, sewerage and light commissioners of the City of Newnan to discontinue utility services to the City of Newnan or charge the City of Newnan any fee therefor, to take title to and hold real property in its name, or to set the salaries of the persons serving as commissioner on said board. 
Section 1.7. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.8. - Cable television; eminent domain. 
(a)  The General Assembly finds and determines that: 
(1)  Cable television is the general term used to specify the production, transport, and delivery of locally and remotely originated video programming or signals to consumers. It includes any process that enables or permits the passage of information from a sender to one or more receivers in the form of fixed or moving pictures, with or without accompanying visible or audible signals, by means of any electromagnetic or photonic system, including electrical transmission by wire, coaxial cable, radio waves, optical transmission, and guided waves; 
(2)  It is necessary and desirable that the mayor and council of the City of Newnan have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, and operate any system of cable television and any cable television services; to establish rates and charge fees for services rendered or facilities provided; to exchange said services or facilities for services or facilities of like kind or value; to add value by switching, processing, storing, transforming, or in any manner acting upon the content of the information being communicated; to interconnect its systems and services with the systems and services of consumers and other providers; to use cable television to encourage the development of information based organizations in Newnan; to finance any of said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with the laws of Georgia; to exercise the power of eminent domain with regard to any of said systems, both within and outside the corporate limits; and to contract to furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the City of Newnan; 
(3)  The cable television function of the city will serve the following public purposes, among others: community antenna television; broadcast radio and television; network, independent, and superstation programming; narrowcasting; open and closed captioning and other special services for the handicapped; subcarrier services; entertainment programming; professional and amateur sports events; pay-per-view video; public broadcasting; public access programming; public affairs programming; televising city council and other governmental meetings; public library programming; foreign language programming; religious and inspirational programming; background music; weather map graphic information; credited college courses; adult education; instructional programming; distance learning; audiographics; telemedicine; imaging; teleconferencing; local, regional, and national advertising; consumer information service programming; home shopping; user response polling; straw voting; business news; newswire; securities quotations; bulletin boards; emergency alerting; and time and weather announcements; and 
(4)  The exercise of the cable television function by the City of Newnan is a proper exercise of its public powers and is a public purpose for which the power of eminent domain may be exercised. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, and maintain or operate, or both, any system of cable television or any cable television services; to establish rates and charge fees therefor; to exchange services or facilities for services or facilities of like kind; to add value by switching, processing, storing, transforming, or in any manner acting upon the content of the information being communicated; to interconnect its systems and services with the systems and services of consumers and other providers; to use cable television to encourage the development of information based organizations in Newnan; to finance any said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with the laws of Georgia; to exercise the power of eminent domain with regard to any of said systems, both within and outside the corporate limits; and to contract to furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the City of Newnan. 
(c)  In furtherance of the exercise of the powers conferred and granted in this section relating to the operation of a cable television system, the mayor and council shall have the right and authority to finance any of said systems through issuance of bonds for such purposes in accordance with the laws of Georgia and to further exercise the power of eminent domain and to acquire property, both real and personal, by the exercise of such right of eminent domain both inside and outside the corporate limits of the City of Newnan and to exercise such right of eminent domain in accordance with and pursuant to the appropriate laws of the State of Georgia enacted for that purpose. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything in this subsection to the contrary, the Board of Water, Sewerage, and Light Commissioners of the City of Newnan shall have complete and sole control and management of the cable television system and services of the City of Newnan independent of the city council; shall have the power and authority to charge the citizens of Newnan and all other persons, firms, corporations, or governmental or other entities such sums as it may deem just and proper for the use of said system and services; shall have power and authority to make all rules and regulations as in its discretion are necessary or proper for the management and control of the cable television system and services of the City of Newnan; shall have power to enforce said rules and regulations by refusing to supply or to discontinue services to any person, firm, corporation, or government or other entity who fails or refuses to comply with said rules and regulations; and shall have the power and authority to perform all acts that may in the opinion of said board be necessary or proper for the operation and maintenance of said cable television system and services. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed so as to empower said board of water, sewerage, and light commissioners of the City of Newnan to discontinue cable television systems or services to the City of Newnan or charge the City of Newnan any fee therefor, to take title to and hold real property in its name, or to set the salaries of the persons serving as commissioners on said board. 
Section 1.9. - [Additional powers, duties, and authority of the city council with respect to telecommunications systems networks.] 
(1)  It is necessary and desirable that the city council of the City of Newnan, Georgia have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of consumers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the City of Newnan, Georgia, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything in this subsection to the contrary, the board of water, sewerage, and light commissioners in the City of Newnan, Georgia shall have complete and sole control and management of the telecommunications systems network and services of the City of Newnan, Georgia independent of the city council; shall have the power and authority to charge the citizens of the City of Newnan, Georgia and all other persons, firms, corporations, or governmental or other entities such sums as may be just and proper for the use of said system and services, shall have power and authority to make all rules and regulations as in its discretion are necessary or proper for the management and control of the telecommunications network and services for the City of Newnan, Georgia; shall have the power to enforce said rules and regulations by refusing to supply or discontinue services to any person, firm, corporation or government or other entity who fails or refuses to comply with said rules and regulations; and shall have the power and authority to perform all acts that may be in the opinion of said board necessary or proper for the operation and maintenance of said telecommunications system and services. Nothing in this subsection, shall be construed so as to empower the board of water, sewerage, and light commissioners of the City of Newnan to discontinue telecommunications services to the City of Newnan, Georgia or charge the City of Newnan, Georgia any fee therefore, to take title to and hold real property in its name, or to set salaries of the persons serving as commissioners on said board. 
(3)  All matters relative to the acquisition, development, operation and management, and contracting with respect to, of a telecommunications network for the City of Newnan, Georgia are hereby delegated to the board of water, sewerage and light commissioners, and all actions taken prior to the adoption of this resolution were taken with the concurrence of the city council of the city and are hereby ratified. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, § 1, 4-8-97) 
(1993 Ga. Laws, Act No. 178) 
ARTICLE II. - CITY GOVERNMENT 

Section 2.1. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall be vested in the mayor and six (6) council members who collectively shall compose the city council of the City of Newnan. The mayor and six (6) council members shall be elected in the manner provided by article V of this charter. For all purposes under this charter, the mayor shall possess, in addition to his specific powers and duties, all of the powers and duties of a council member. 
Section 2.2. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, only as provided for in article V. 
Section 2.3. - Compensation of mayor and councilmembers as fixed; expenses of office allowable. 
(a)  The mayor shall receive an annual salary and each councilmember shall receive such annual salary as shall be established by ordinance adopted in accordance with state law. Said salaries shall be paid in twelve (12) equal monthly installments on or before the last day of each month. 
(b)  In addition to their salaries, each councilmember may be reimbursed for actual out of pocket expenses incurred on behalf of the city as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Section 2.4. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Except as authorized by general state law neither the mayor nor any council member shall hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor any council member shall vote upon, sign, or veto any question in which he is personally interested. 
Section 2.5. - Conflict of interest; disclosure; use of public property; contracts; eligibility; political activities; penalties. 
(a)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest or himself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
(b)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any council member who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such government for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Ineligibility of elected officials. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any council member shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. No former mayor and no former council member shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until two (2) years after the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(f)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointed officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to an elected office of the city. 
(g)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three (3) years thereafter. 
Section 2.6. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.7. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by article I. 
Section 2.8. - Organizational meeting. 
The City Council shall meet for organization on the first regular meeting date in January of each year. The meeting shall be called to order by the City Clerk or the Mayor of the City then in office and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected officials as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully and truly perform the duties of mayor/councilmember of this City, that I will support and defend the United States Constitution, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and the Charter of the City of Newnan, to the best of my skill and ability and as to me shall seem to the best interest and welfare of the City without fear, favor, or affection. 
I do further swear or affirm that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this State or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not the holder of any office or trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which, by the laws of the State of Georgia, I am prohibited from holding; and that I am otherwise qualified to be a public officer according to the Constitution and Laws of the State of Georgia. SO HELP ME GOD." 
(Ord. No. 99-07, § 1, 1-26-99) 
Section 2.9. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call by the mayor or three (3) other members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally or by telephone personally at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made in accordance with Code section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. 
Section 2.10. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
Section 2.11. - Quorum; voting. 
Four (4) members of the city council shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of four (4) members of the city council shall be required for the adoption of an ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Section 2.12. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing in proper form for its final adoption. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the city council and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced unless said ordinance is an emergency ordinance as provided for in section 2.14 of this charter or unless said ordinance is unanimously approved by all members of the city council, except that when a vacancy in the office of the mayor or a councilmember exists, an ordinance may be adopted on the same day it is introduced provided that it is unanimously approved by all members then holding office. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each council member and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, 11-14-95) 
Section 2.13. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
In addition to other acts required by general state law to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within thirty (30) days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the same form as ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain a declaration stating that an emergency exists describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it was introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four members of the city council shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed thirty (30) days following the date upon which it was adopted but this shall not preclude reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.15. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, except that the requirements of subsection (b) of section 2.12 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, and a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.16 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 2.16. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Newnan, Georgia." Copies of said Code shall be furnished to all offices, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by all others at a reasonable price. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same form as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Section 2.17. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall serve for an indefinite period of time and the city council shall fix his compensation. The city manager shall be selected on the basis of his character and his executive and administrative qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall be a degree in public administration, business, or related degree plus five (5) years' local government experience or a master's degree and three (3) years' experience in local government, a strong financial background, leadership capabilities, long- and short-range planning abilities; and communication, and management skills. At the time of his appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the City of Newnan, but during his tenure he must reside within the city. During his tenure, he shall not engage in any other business or profession. 
(b)  No member of the city council shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within two (2) years after the expiration thereof. 
Section 2.18. - Removal of city manager. 
The city council may remove the city manager by a majority vote. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall become effective, the city council shall by a majority vote adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for the city manager's removal. The city manager may, within ten (10) days, reply in writing and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than twenty (20) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one is requested, and after full consideration, the mayor and council may suspend the manager from duty but shall in any case cause to be paid to him forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary for the next two (2) months following adoption of the preliminary resolution. 
Section 2.19. - Acting city manager to perform duties during absence, disability, or suspension of city manager. 
The city council shall designate a person or persons to perform the duties of city manager on a temporary basis during any absence, disability, or suspension of the city manager. The requirements and prohibitions in section 2.17 of this charter shall not apply to the person or persons so temporarily designated. 
Section 2.20. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this charter. In addition, the city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The city manager shall have the power to appoint and suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he appoints, except as otherwise provided by general state law, this charter, or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general state law; 
(3)  The city manager shall be notified of and shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote; 
(4)  The city manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  The city manager shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  The city manager shall make such other financial reports and any other such reports as the city council may require, at such intervals as the city council may require, concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his direction and supervision; 
(8)  The city manager shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable; and 
(9)  The city manager shall perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the city council. 
Section 2.21. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.6 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee either publicly or privately. 
Section 2.22. - Mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
(a)  The mayor shall be elected as provided elsewhere in this charter. The city council, at the first regular meeting date in January of each year, shall elect by a majority of all council members from among its members a mayor pro tempore who shall serve a term of one (1) year. Both the mayor and mayor pro tempore shall continue to be, to vote, and otherwise participate as members of the city council. 
(b)  In the event that the office of the mayor pro tempore shall become vacant for any reason whatsoever, the city council shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. 
Section 2.23. - Duties of the mayor. 
The mayor, as chief executive officer of the city, in addition to all other duties provided for elsewhere in this charter, shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the official head of the city for service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
Section 2.24. - Duties of the mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any reason, the mayor pro tempore shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of mayor so long as such absence or disability of the mayor shall continue. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 3.1. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and established, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or general law, the department heads and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and department heads shall receive such compensation as is prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a department head of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each department head shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. 
(e)  All department heads under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. 
(f)  The city manager may suspend or remove department heads under his supervision. 
Section 3.2. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or general state law. 
(c)  The city council may provide by ordinance for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
(d)  No member of any board, commission or authority created by and appointed solely by the city council shall hold any elective office of the city. This prohibition specifically does not include the downtown development authority of the City of Newnan; nor to any joint board, commission or authority created by the city with any other governmental entity or agency including, but not limited to, joint library boards, joint airport authorities, joint recreation commissions and area planning and development authorities. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or general state law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office unless he has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating that official to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of office. Such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and shall be administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four (4) members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general state law, each board, commission or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice chairman and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of any such bylaws, rules or regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Section 3.3. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for service rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation involving the city; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, city manager, boards, commissions and authorities appointed solely by the city and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other legal duties as may be required. 
Section 3.4. - City clerk/treasurer. 
The city manager shall appoint a city clerk/treasurer who shall not be a council member. The city clerk/treasurer shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this charter and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council or city manager. 
Section 3.5. - City marshal. 
The chief of police shall act as city marshal. It shall be the duty of the marshal to levy all executions in favor of the city and to advertise and sell the property levied upon in accordance with state law. The marshal shall have the same power to place purchasers in possession as sheriffs in this state have. 
Section 3.6. - Position classifications and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Said plans may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected officials and the city manager are not members of the classified service. 
Section 3.7. - Personnel policies. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and the transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Section 3.8. - Departments, boards and commissions enumerated. 
City departments, boards and commissions may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Departments. Police department, fire department, building department, community development department, streets and sanitation department, finance department, and cemetery department. 
(2)  Boards. Board of zoning appeals and library board. 
(3)  Commissions. Planning commission; water, sewerage and light commission; recreation commission and airport authority. 
(4)  Authorities. Downtown development authority; airport authority. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 4.1. - [Generally.] 
There shall be a court to be known as the "Municipal Court of the City of Newnan, Georgia." 
Section 4.2. - Chief judge, associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time or stand-by associate judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge of the municipal court unless that person is twenty-one (21) years old. The chief judge shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation for judges shall be fixed by city council. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of four (4) members of the city council. 
(e)  Before taking on any duties of office, each judge shall take an oath to be administered by the mayor and shall promise to discharge honestly and faithfully the duties of office without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 20-88, 10-24-88; 1989 Ga. Laws, page 5327) 
Section 4.3. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals. 
Section 4.4. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish all violations of city ordinances. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt in accordance with general state law. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction in accordance with general state law which may include a fine or imprisonment, or both, or may include labor in public service or upon the streets, sidewalks and squares of the city. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as security for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail to assure appearance and fails to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge, and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi, at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. If property or cash is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if said defendant fails to appear at the time and the place fixed for the trial, the case so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared to be forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the power to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(h)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to dispose properly of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by general state law. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general state laws to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Section 4.5. - Appeals. 
Parties dissatisfied with the decision of the municipal court may petition for a writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
Section 4.6. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. Such rules or regulations shall be filed with the city clerk and made available for public inspection. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Section 5.1. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.2. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
On the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year, a municipal election shall be held for council members as set out in this charter. On the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of every other odd-numbered year, a municipal election shall be held for the office of mayor as set out in this charter. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 71), page 3914) 
Section 5.3. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant for any reason whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the unexpired term of that office. 
Section 5.4. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under chapter 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.5. - Division of city into six single-member council districts; authority; effect. 
(a)  The city council shall consist of six (6) council members and a mayor. 
(b)  Elections for the six (6) council members shall be conducted on the basis of six (6) single-family districts to be known as district A, district B, district C, district D, district E, and district F. District E shall consist of a combination of district A and district B, and district F shall consist of a combination of district C and district D. 
District A shall be as follows: The northeast quadrant of the City of Newnan as shown on the map prepared by the Reapportionment Services Office, Georgia General Assembly, for the City of Newnan identified as Plan: Newnan 2, district 1; 
District B shall be as follows: The northwest quadrant of the City of Newnan as shown on the map prepared by the Reapportionment Services Office, Georgia General Assembly, for the City of Newnan identified as Plan: Newnan 2, district 2; 
District C shall be as follows: The central quadrant of the City of Newnan as shown on the map prepared by the Reapportionment Services Office, Georgia General Assembly, for the City of Newnan identified as Plan: Newnan 2, district 3; 
District D shall be as follows: The southern and western quadrant of the City of Newnan as shown on the map prepared by the Reapportionment Services Office, Georgia General Assembly, for the City of Newnan identified as Plan: Newnan 2, district 4; 
District E consists of a combination of Districts A and B as shown on the map prepared by the Reapportionment Services Office, Georgia General Assembly, for the City of Newnan identified as Plan: Newnan 2, districts 1 and 2; 
District F consists of a combination of Districts C and D as shown on the map prepared by the Reapportionment Services Office, Georgia General Assembly, for the City of Newnan identified as Plan: Newnan 2, districts 4 and 5. 
(c)  The council members elected from each voting district are required to reside within that district, and each council member shall be elected in any election, whether it be primary, runoff, special or general election, solely by the voters who reside in the respective voting districts. 
(d)  All council members are required to be elected by majority vote. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 71), page 3914; Ord. No. 30-92, 12-7-92; Ord. No. 03-09, 4-15-03) 
Section 5.6. - Other qualifications for office of mayor, council member. 
In addition to those qualifications established in other provisions of this charter, all candidates for the office of mayor or council member must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, a citizen of the United States, a resident of the city and of the district which they represent for at least one year prior to the election date, and a registered voter of the City of Newnan at the time of the qualifications for office and shall have paid all taxes, assessments, or fees due to or lawfully demanded by the city. 
Section 5.7. - Election of mayor. 
The mayor shall be elected from the city at large by a plurality vote. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 71), page 3914) 
Section 5.8. - Election dates and commencement of terms. 
(a)  The terms of office of council members from districts A, C, D, and F whose terms of office would otherwise expire at the first organizational meeting in January, 1991, are extended so that such terms shall expire at the first organizational meeting in January, 1992. Council members from districts A, C, D, and F elected in 1991 shall have terms of office which expire at the first organizational meeting in January, 1996. Thereafter, council members from districts A, C, D, and F shall be elected in 1995 and every four years thereafter, shall take office at the first organizational meeting in January immediately following their election, and shall have terms of office which expire at the first organizational meeting in January of the fourth succeeding year. 
(b)  The terms of office of council members from districts B and E whose terms of office would otherwise expire at the first organizational meeting in January, 1993, are extended so that such terms shall expire at the first organizational meeting in January, 1994. Council members from districts B and E elected in 1993 shall have terms of office which expire at the first organizational meeting in January, 1998. Thereafter, council members from districts B and E shall be elected in 1997 and every four years thereafter, shall take office at the first organizational meeting in January immediately following their election, and shall have terms of office which expire at the first organizational meeting in January of the fourth succeeding year. 
(c)  The term of office of the mayor shall expire at the first organizational meeting in January, 1990. The person elected to the office of mayor in 1989 shall take office at the first organizational meeting in January, 1990, and shall have a term of office which shall expire at the first organizational meeting in January, 1994. Thereafter, a mayor shall be elected in 1993 and every four years thereafter, shall take office at the first organizational meeting in January immediately following the election, and shall have a term of office which expires at the first organizational meeting in January of the fourth succeeding year. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 71), page 3914) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.1. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government; providing governmental services; and repayment of principal and interest on general obligations; and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.2. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum or for voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.3. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by the general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent that such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus with this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.9 of this charter. 
Section 6.4. - Licenses, permits, and fees. 
The city council shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city for regulating the activity and if unpaid shall be collected as provided in section 6.9 of this charter. The city council may, by ordinance, establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare require. 
Section 6.5. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of thirty-five (35) years, and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book to be kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.6. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for sewer, sanitary, health services or other services rendered inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.9 of this charter. 
Section 6.7. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.9 of this charter. 
Section 6.8. - Construction; other taxes. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.9. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.1 through 6.8 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; allowing exceptions for hardship; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.10. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.11. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.12. - Short-term notes. 
The city must obtain and repay any short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year or as is otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
Section 6.13. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
Section 6.14. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget. 
Section 6.15. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than forty (40) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.16. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of February of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to funds and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.17. - Tax levies. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.18. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose. 
Section 6.19. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than forty (40) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided elsewhere in this charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of February of each year. All appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse on December 31 of each year. The city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Section 6.20. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Section 6.21. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and as a matter of course is signed by him to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of minutes. 
Section 6.22. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.23. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law as now or later amended. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY OF NEWNAN RETIREMENT PLAN[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The retirement plan for the employees of the city is compiled and published separately by the city. The retirement plan was adopted by ordinance dated 3-28-90, number 14-90. An official copy is on file in the city clerk's office. 

ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 8.1. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markethouses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be taken under title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or any other Georgia law applicable now or enacted in the future. 
Section 8.2. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may require by ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
Section 8.3. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter, are declared valid and in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 8.4. - First election under this charter. 
(a)  The first municipal election shall be on the last Tuesday in October, 1988, for district B and district E, and council members from district B and district E shall be elected for four-year terms according to the provisions of this charter. 
(b)  The next municipal election shall be on the last Tuesday in October, 1989, for the office of mayor, and the mayor shall be elected to a four-year term according to the provisions of this charter. 
(c)  The next municipal election shall be held on the last Tuesday in October, 1990, and council members shall be elected for districts A, C, D, and F, for four-year terms according to the provisions of this charter. 
(d)  The elections shall be held pursuant to the amended consent decree entered in civil action number C84-1500N, in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia. 
Section 8.5. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of ninety (90) days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges and powers as may be required or desired to allow an orderly transition. 
Section 8.6. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, departments, personnel or office as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 8.7. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for, is declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Section 8.8. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is not. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural and the masculine, the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 8.9. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof of this charter shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independently of each other. 
Section 8.10. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Newnan, Georgia, in the County of Coweta, approved December 8, 1893 (Ga. L. 1893, p. 272), and all amendatory Acts thereto, are repealed in their entirety. 
Section 8.11. - Reserved. 
Those amendments to the Constitution relating to the City of Newnan and the board of water, sewerage, and light commission which are found and set forth at (Ga. L. 1972, p. 1410); (Ga. L. 1974, p. 1700); and (Ga. L. 1978, p. 2349) and those local laws specifically continuing such amendments in force and effect shall not be repealed by this Act. 
Section 8.12. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on July 1, 1987. 
Section 8.13. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in this Charter. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location and adoption date of the ordinances amending this Charter. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 2; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; exemplification of municipal minutes and other records, O.C.G.A. § 24-7-21; authority to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated, "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Newnan, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1972, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Official citation for Code of Ordinances, § 2.16(b). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Newnan" followed it. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council member. The words "council member" mean any person elected to that office and shall include those persons who hold other offices, who, by the terms of the charter are ex officio. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" mean the County of Coweta. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include the persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Limits, corporation, city. The words "limits," "corporation" or "city" shall mean the corporate limits of the city, the legal boundary of the City of Newnan. 
Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used it means the mayor of the City of Newnan. 
Mayor and council. Whenever the words "mayor and council" are used, they mean the mayor and council of the City of Newnan. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Newnan" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public. 
Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The words "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges, as determined from time to time by the city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Seal. The word "seal" means the city seal, the seal of the corporation. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant", applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" means seven days. 
Written or in writing includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Construction of ordinances. 
The same rules shall be applied in construing ordinances of this city as are applied in construing the statutes of this state, which rules are found in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1, and the same meanings are to be given words found in the ordinances as are given similar words found in the statutes of this state. The words "board" and "council," respectively, shall be construed to mean the city council in session. 
(Code 1972, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effective date of ordinances. 
Ordinances which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time, take effect immediately after their passage, without reference to their publication. 
(Code 1972, § 1-5) 
Charter reference— Ordinance form; procedure, § 2.12. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1972, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Newnan, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Newnan, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which such section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1972, § 1-9) 
Charter reference— Action requiring an ordinance, § 2.13. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Charter reference— Codification and printing of ordinances, § 2.16. 
Sec. 1-10. - Notes and catchlines of sections. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1972, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-11. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1972, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1972, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-13. - Official city time. 
Time referred to in ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city shall mean Eastern Standard Time, and acts and deeds of commission prohibited after a named hour or before a named hour shall be held and understood to mean such hour by Eastern Standard Time, and wherever any reference to time is made in any of the ordinances and regulations of the city, such rules, ordinances and regulations are hereby amended to provide that the time provided therein shall be and is hereby made Eastern Standard Time in accordance with the laws of this state; provided that, when Eastern Daylight Saving Time is being adhered to during the several summer months then official city time shall be Eastern Daylight Saving Time. 
(Code 1972, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited and is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever in this Code or in any ordinance duly adopted, the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the city jail or at public works for not more than 6 months unless otherwise provided by general state law, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation of this code or any ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition existing in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 1-11) 
Charter reference— Jurisdiction and powers of municipal court, § 4.4. 
State Law reference— Penalty to be imposed in certain criminal and traffic cases and upon violation of bond, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to confine persons convicted of violating ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; punishments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-15. - Judgments and sentences to run consecutively. 
All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the municipal court shall run consecutively unless otherwise specifically provided by the court in such judgments and sentences. 
(Code 1972, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-16. - Code enforcement officer. 
The position of code enforcement officer is hereby established for the city. The chief building inspector or official shall designate an individual as the code enforcement officer for the city. The code enforcement officer shall have the authority in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the property or the permit holder or any other person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, issue a citation for violation of the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the city, the city zoning ordinance, the city subdivision regulations, the city tree and landscape ordinances, and any other ordinance or regulation of the city in the same manner as the building official, superintendent of sanitation or zoning administrator of the city or the police chief under section 10-26 et seq., environment, of the Code of Ordinances and require the presence of the violator in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 02-07, § I, 4-9-02) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, the ordinances, rules and regulations listed below are omitted from this edition of the Code of Ordinances, City of Newnan, Georgia. The aforesaid material has been compiled and published separately by the city. Official copies are on file in the city clerk's office where they are available for reference during normal business hours. 
(1) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control; 
(2) Stormwater Detention; 
(3) Floodplain Management; 
(4) Zoning Rules and Regulations; 
(5) Subdivision Regulations; and 
(6) Retirement Plan for City Employees 
Cross reference— Elections, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 16; taxation, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Authority of city to receive gifts and act as trustee. 
The city may receive gifts and act as trustee consistent with the general law of the state regulating the same. 
(Code 1972, § 2-73) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 1.4(7). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-37-2, 36-37-3. 
Sec. 2-2. - Defense of officials by city. 
Pursuant to the grant of authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 45-9-21, the city shall undertake to defend any civil, criminal or quasi-criminal actions brought or maintained against the city, any elected or appointed official, or any employees of the city in their individual capacity which arise out of the performance of their duties or which are in any way connected therewith, whether based upon negligence, violation of contract rights, or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or statutory rights; however, no defense shall be furnished to any person charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement or other like crime with respect to the property or money of or in which the city has an interest. Such costs of defense shall include but not be limited to attorneys' fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation, and all other like costs, expenses and fees. 
(Code 1972, § 2-74) 
Sec. 2-3. - Conflicts of interest. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity of the city to knowingly violate the provisions of section 2.5 of the charter. Penalties for such violation shall be as prescribed therein. 
(Code 1972, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-4. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Intent. It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its council be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the council. The council finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the council in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem, city manager, or city clerk containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member, provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of the alleged misconduct occurrence. 
(2)  Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the council as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the council shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
a.  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
b.  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
c.  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
d.  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(3)  Council or member of the council means the mayor or any council member of the city and any member appointed to any board, authority or commission of the city. 
(c)  Prohibitions. No member of the council shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself of another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the council; 
(7)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and/or; 
d.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use property for purposes other than those officially approved; 
(9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest. 
Prohibition (2) of this subsection shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
b.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
c.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
d.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law. 
Prohibition (5) of this section shall not apply to a member of the council who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by subsection (d) are made to the mayor, mayor pro-tem or city clerk, board or commission chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(d)  Disclosure of conflicts of interest. An appointed member of the council who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the council shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the council's taking official action on matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the council shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. 
(e)  Disqualification. A member of the council shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest directly or indirectly when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(f)  Prohibited contracts. 
(1)  The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the council or with a business in which a member of the council has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: the designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A., § 16-10-6; 
(4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; 
(5)  Contracts entered into with a member of the council, or with a business in which a member of the council has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section issued by the city manager or city attorney following attorney. 
(g)  Restrictions on contracts with former member of the council. The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the council, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid of a committee selection process. 
(h)  Complaints. Any person having a complaint against any member of the council for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the council. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(i)  Board of ethics. 
(1)  Composition of the board of ethics: 
a.  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in paragraphs b. and c. of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics, if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
b.  The mayor and council members shall each delegate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of 14 individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
c.  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these 14 qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
d.  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The council of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(2)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
a.  To establish procedures, rules, and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of it affairs; 
b.  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling of a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
c.  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this section and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
d.  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this section; 
e.  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this section; 
f.  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
g.  To report its findings to the council for such action as the council deems appropriate. 
(j)  Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the council charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered in writing to mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(k)  Penalty and member rights. 
(1)  Any member of the council who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this section shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the council of the city. 
(2)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the council who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least 10 business days before hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(l)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any member of the council or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(2)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. 02-09, § I, 4-9-02) 
Secs. 2-5—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, § 2.1 et seq.; election of council, § 5.1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Number of council members. 
The city shall have six council members elected by districts and a mayor elected at large, except that beginning at the first organization meeting of the city council in January 2014, the number of council members shall increase to seven to and until the first organization meeting of the city council in January 2016, at which time the number of councilmembers shall be again six. 
(Code 1972, § 8-1; Ord. No. 13-17, § I, 8-13-13) 
Charter reference— Composition of city council, § 2.1; elections generally, § 5.1 et seq.; election of mayor, § 5.7. 
Sec. 2-27. - Terms of members; legislative division of government; general powers and duties. 
The members of the city council shall be elected for four-year staggered terms unless otherwise specifically stated. The city council shall be the legislative division of the city government and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute. 
(Code 1972, § 2-20; Ord. No. 13-17, § I, 8-13-13) 
Charter reference— Terms of council members, § 5.5(d). 
Sec. 2-28. - Election; term. 
(a)  Elections for the six council members shall be conducted on the basis of three two-member districts to be known as District One, District Two and District Three. Each of such districts shall be as drawn as set forth in section 2-29. Each district shall have two posts designated as Post A and Post B. 
(b)  The first member from District 1, Post A, shall be Councilmember Clayton Hicks, whose term of office expires at the first organizational meeting of the city council in January, 2016. The first member from District 1, Post B, shall be elected in the November 2013, municipal general election for a term beginning at the first organizational meeting of the city council in January, 2014, and ending at the firs [first] organizational meeting of the city council in January, 2016. 
(c)  The first member from District 2, Post A, shall be Councilmember Rhodes Shell, whose term of office expires at the first organizational meeting of the city council in January, 2014. The first member from District 2, Post B, shall be Councilmember Ray DuBose, whose term of office expires at the first organizational meeting of the city council in January, 2014. 
(d)  The first member from District 3, Post A, shall be Councilmember George M. Alexander, whose term of office expires at the first organizational meeting of the city council in January, 2016. The first member from District 2, Post B, shall be Councilmember Cynthia Jenkins, whose term of office expires at the first organizational meeting of the city council in January, 2016. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, Councilmember Robert W. Coggin, whose term of office expires at the first organizational meeting of the city council in January, 2016, shall serve as a councilmember-at-large until the expiration of his term of office and thereafter such office shall be abolished and no further elections conducted for such office. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, successors to the councilmembers in Districts 1, 2 and 3 shall be elected at the November municipal general election immediately preceding the expiration of their respective terms of office and shall take office at the first organizational meeting of the city council in January immediately following their election for terms of four years. 
(g)  The council members elected from each voting district shall be required to reside within that district, and they shall be elected in any election, whether it be primary, runoff, special or general election, solely by the voters who reside in the respective voting districts. All persons shall be elected to four-year terms unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(h)  A majority vote requirement shall be in effect for all councilmanic positions. 
(Ord. No. 13-17, § I, 8-13-13) 
Charter reference— Division of city into six single-member districts, terms of council members, etc., § 5.5. 
Sec. 2-29. - Councilmanic districts described. 
(a)  As described in section 2-28 hereinabove, for the purpose of electing councilmembers, the City of Newnan shall be divided into three districts. Those districts shall be and correspond to those three numbered districts described in subparagraph (f) of this section and further identified as "Plan: newancc-2013 Plan Type: Local Administrator; Newnan user: Gina". 
(b)  For the purposes of such plan: 
(1)  The term "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Any part of the City of Newnan which is not included in an district described in subsection (a) of this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Any part of the City of Newnan which is described in subsection (a) of this section as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Each district shall have two posts designated as Post A and Post B. 
(f)  Districts defined by "Plan: newancc-2013 Plan Type: Local Administrator: Newnan user - Gina". 

 
(Code 1972, § 8-3; Ord. No. 3-94, § I, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 03-27, § I, 9-8-03; Ord. No. 05-03, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 05-04, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 13-17, § I, 8-13-13) 
Charter reference— Single-member districts drawn according to map contained in Exhibit A to an amended consent decree, § 5.5(b). 
Sec. 2-30. - Compensation of council members; reimbursement of expenses. 
(a)  The council members shall receive $5,500.00 annually which shall be paid to each council member in 12 equal monthly installments. This compensation is subject to all federal, state, and local taxes. 
(b)  The council members are entitled to reimbursement for all expenses incurred in the exercise of their responsibilities on behalf of the city. The council members shall follow the procedures established by the city for all city employees for reimbursements. 
(Code 1972, § 2-26; Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 6-10-03) 
Charter reference— Salaries of council members, § 2.3. 
Sec. 2-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1-94, § I, adopted Jan. 10. 1994, deleted the provisions of former § 2-31, which pertained to committees of council, as derived from Ord. No. 06-91, adopted May 20, 1991. 
Sec. 2-32. - Introduction, enactment of ordinances. 
All ordinances requiring the action of the city council shall be introduced in writing in proper form for its final adoption and may be introduced by any member of the city council. An ordinance may be read and considered at a regular or special meeting of the city council and may be adopted or rejected; however, an ordinance may not be adopted the same day it is introduced unless such ordinance is an emergency ordinance as provided in section 2.14 of the charter or unless such ordinance is unanimously approved by all members of the city council, except that when a vacancy in the office of the mayor or a councilmember exists, an ordinance may be adopted on the same day it is introduced provided that it is unanimously approved by all members then holding office. Formal reading of the ordinance may be waived by a majority vote of the council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-71; Ord. No. 95-27, § I, 11-14-95) 
Secs. 2-33—2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-46. - Organizational meeting. 
The term of office of the mayor and council shall begin at the organizational meeting on the first regular meeting date in January of each year pursuant to the city charter and state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-88, 9-19-88; 1989 Ga. Laws, page 5362) 
Charter reference— Organizational meeting, § 2.8. 
Sec. 2-47. - Number and time of regular meetings. 
There shall be two regular meetings of the city council held in each month. The first meeting shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month at 2:30 p.m. The second meeting shall be held on the fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m. If a regular scheduled meeting falls on a holiday, or it is determined that the time for the meeting is inappropriate, city council shall set an alternate and time for each meeting. 
(Code 1972, § 2-21; Ord. No. 2-94, § I, 1-10-94; Ord. No. 07-15, § 1, 9-25-07) 
Charter reference— City council meetings, § 2.9. 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of city council, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-48. - Call and notice of special meetings. 
(a)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call by the mayor or three other members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally or by telephone personally at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(b)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
(Code 1972, § 2-22) 
Charter reference— Special meetings, § 2.9(b). 
Sec. 2-49. - Quorum; voting. 
Four members of the city council shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of four members of the city council shall be required for the adoption of an ordinance, resolution or motion, except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Charter reference— Quorum; voting, § 2.11. 
Sec. 2-50. - Order of business. 
The following order of business shall be observed in the transactions of business before the board: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Invocation. 
(3)  Reading of minutes. 
(4)  Reports from boards and commissions. 
(5)  Reports on operations by city manager. 
(6)  Reports and communications from mayor. 
(7)  New business. 
(8)  Unfinished business. 
(9)  Visitors, petitions, communications and complaints. 
(10)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1972, § 2-30) 
Charter reference— Requirement to adopt order of business, § 2.10. 
Sec. 2-51. - Records. 
The city clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the council proceedings. 
(Code 1972, § 2-25) 
Charter reference— Clerk/treasurer's duty to maintain city council records, § 3.4. 
Sec. 2-52. - Rescinded action. 
No vote or action of the city council shall be rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special meeting as many members of the council as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken, as provided by statute. 
(Code 1972, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-53. - When resolutions to be reduced to writing. 
Any resolution or proclamation submitted to the city council shall be reduced to writing before being voted upon, at the request of any two members of the council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-32) 
Charter reference— Action requiring an ordinance, § 2.13. 
Sec. 2-54. - Right to address board. 
No person other than the mayor or a member of the city council or other municipal officer or employee shall address that body at any regular or special meeting of the council except upon consent of a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1972, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-55. - Suspension of rules. 
The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by consent of a majority of the members present at any meeting. 
(Code 1972, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-56. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
Except when in conflict with the provisions of this division, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of the council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-35) 
Charter reference— Rules of procedure, § 2.10. 
Secs. 2-57—2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY OFFICIALS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation, § 2.17 et seq. 
State Law reference— City's power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of all municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2(2). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-76—2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-91. - Election and term. 
(a)  The mayor shall be elected by a plurality vote for a four-year term and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified as provided by statute. 
(b)  The election for the mayor shall be from the city at large without restriction as to district. 
(Code 1972, § 2-1) 
Charter reference— Elections and term of mayor, §§ 5.1 et seq., 5.7. 
State Law reference— Municipal office terms to be for four years, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-63. 
Sec. 2-92. - Chief executive officer. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-2) 
Charter reference— Duties of mayor as chief executive officer, § 2.23. 
Sec. 2-93. - Execution of deeds, checks, etc. 
The mayor shall sign all deeds to real property sold by the city, including lots in the city cemeteries, and all checks and other obligations issued or authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-3) 
Charter reference— Mayor to sign contracts, ordinances and other instruments, § 2.23(4). 
Sec. 2-94. - Absence from city. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor to notify the mayor pro tem when he expects or intends to be absent from the city, and the mayor pro tem shall perform all of the duties of the mayor in his absence. 
(Code 1972, § 2-4) 
Charter reference— Mayor pro tempore, § 2.22(a); duties of mayor pro tempore, § 2.24. 
Sec. 2-95. - Compensation of mayor; reimbursement of expenses. 
(a)  The mayor shall receive $10,000.00 annually which shall be paid to the mayor in 12 equal monthly installments. This compensation is subject to all federal, state, and local taxes. 
(b)  The mayor is entitled to reimbursement for all expenses incurred in the exercise of their responsibilities on behalf of the city. The mayor shall follow the procedures established by the city for all city employees for reimbursements. 
(Code 1972, § 2-5; Ord. No. 03-17, § 2, 6-10-03) 
Charter reference— Compensation and expenses, § 2.3. 
Sec. 2-96. - Presiding officer; right to vote. 
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall have the right to vote in all elections and upon all questions which may come before such body, except upon questions where disqualified by reason of interest or otherwise. 
(Code 1972, § 2-6) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 2.23(1). 
Sec. 2-97. - Emergency powers. 
In addition to any and all powers enumerated in the City Code, the mayor, as the chief executive of the city, shall have such other powers as enumerated by state law and as delegated to the mayor in section 9-2 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1972, § 2-7; Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 8-28-12) 
Charter reference— Emergencies, § 2.14. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 
Sec. 2-98. - Mayor pro tempore. 
There shall be elected from the city council a mayor pro tempore who shall be elected at the first regular meeting in January and shall hold his office for one year. He shall be clothed with the powers, privileges and duties of the mayor, when the mayor is absent from the city, is sick or for any reason is legally disqualified from acting. 
(Code 1972, § 2-8) 
Charter reference— Election and term of mayor pro tem, § 2.22. 
Secs. 2-99—2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Appointment, compensation, duties and responsibilities of city attorney, § 3.3. 

Sec. 2-116. - Office created; appointment. 
There is hereby created the office of city attorney, an executive office of the city. The attorney shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-117. - Duty to prosecute and defend suits and actions. 
The attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the city on behalf of the city, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-118. - Enforcement of judgments, decrees, etc. 
It shall be the duty of the attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city, and of all similar interlocutory orders. 
(Code 1972, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-119. - Duty to render advice; written opinions. 
The attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city, and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the city, whenever requested to do so by any city official. Upon request by the mayor or by the council, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. 
(Code 1972, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-120. - Duty regarding special assessment, condemnation. 
It shall be the duty of the attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings. 
(Code 1972, § 2-44) 
Sec. 2-121. - Drafting of contracts, ordinances, etc. 
It shall be the duty of the attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other document or instrument, to which the city may be a party; and upon request of the council, to draft ordinances covering any subject within the power of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-122. - Compensation. 
The city attorney shall, for his retainers and advice, receive such compensation as may be determined by the city council each year. In all litigation or work not contemplated in fixing the retainer, or for which no adequate compensation is provided, he shall be paid such reasonable compensation as the city council may allow. 
(Code 1972, § 2-46) 
Secs. 2-123—2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY CLERK AND TREASURER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Appointment of clerk/treasurer, § 3.4. 
Cross reference— City clerk designated as purchaser for city at tax sales, § 19-39. 

Sec. 2-136. - Merger of offices; appointment. 
The offices of city clerk and city treasurer shall be merged into one office and the respective duties of such offices shall devolve upon and be performed by one officer, bearing the title city clerk and treasurer who shall be appointed in accordance with provisions of the city charter. 
(Code 1972, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-137. - Oath and bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city clerk and treasurer shall take the prescribed oath and be bonded at the city's expense in the amount of not less than $25,000.00. 
(Code 1972, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-138. - Attendance at council meetings; council minutes and records generally. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall attend all meetings of the city council, shall take the minutes thereof and shall record the same in suitable books. He shall keep, in connection with the book recording the proceedings of the council, an index book, in which shall be indexed the subject matter of the important proceedings by the council, with reference to the pages of the record book, where such matters appear. He shall read at each meeting of the council the minutes of the previous meeting, unless otherwise ordered, and shall preserve the original memoranda thereof for reference in case of need. 
(Code 1972, § 2-52) 
Sec. 2-139. - Communication of information to city council. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall communicate to the city council, through the city manager, all information he may acquire which may be conducive to the efficiency of the city government and the welfare of the people. 
(Code 1972, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-140. - Preservation, arrangement, indexing, etc., of papers, records and documents. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall have charge of and be responsible for the preservation of all papers, records and documents of every description belonging to the city and shall arrange and file all such papers in such manner as will facilitate access to them, arranging and filing the same according to their subject matter in chronological order, numbering all files or cases in consecutive order. The city clerk and treasurer shall also keep an index book, in which shall be entered alphabetically the names or subject matter of such papers and documents and the number of the files or cases in which the same are to be found. 
(Code 1972, § 2-54) 
Sec. 2-141. - Issuance of notices. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall issue all notices, personal and general, which the laws, orders and interest of the city require in the administration of its government. 
(Code 1972, § 2-56) 
Sec. 2-142. - Attestation of executions. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall attest all executions issued by authority of the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-57) 
Sec. 2-143. - Attestation and sealing of deeds, contracts, etc. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall attest and affix the city seal to all deeds to real property sold by the city, including lots in the city cemeteries, and all contracts, agreements and other obligations issued or authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-58) 
Sec. 2-144. - Official books relating to money and fiscal transactions. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall keep a regular set of official books in which he shall enter all of the city's money and fiscal transactions of every description in plain detail without complexity of system. Among such official books shall be kept a book in which shall be set forth the form, the condition and the amounts of the debts owed by the city, the dates when such debts were contracted and the purposes for which they were incurred, the various rates of interest borne thereby and the respective times at which such debts shall become due. 
(Code 1972, § 2-59) 
Sec. 2-145. - Collection of taxes and other revenue and responsibility for sums collected. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk and treasurer to collect all taxes levied by the mayor and council according to the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city for the support of the city government, all sums paid as license taxes imposed by the city council for the privilege of conducting business within the city, or otherwise, and all sums realized under assessment levied by the city council for defraying the expenses of paving or otherwise improving the streets or sidewalks or for any other purpose. 
(b)  In general, the city clerk and treasurer shall collect and receive the entire revenue of the city derived from any sources whatsoever. After such collection, the city clerk and treasurer shall be responsible to the city for all sums coming into his possession. 
(Code 1972, § 2-60) 
Charter reference— Collection of delinquent taxes and fees, § 6.9. 
Sec. 2-146. - Deposit of funds; bank books. 
(a)  The city clerk and treasurer shall deposit, to the credit of the city, in the banks designated by the city council as city depositories, all moneys received by him and belonging to the city on the same day he shall receive such moneys or on the following business day. 
(b)  The city clerk and treasurer shall keep official bank books, wherein shall be entered, by the proper officers of the banks in which such deposits shall be made, acknowledgments of such deposits made by him, with the dates thereof, which bank books shall always be open to the inspection of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-147. - Checkbooks and receipts; preservation and numbering of original accounts or demands. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall keep checkbooks, with marginal entries on the stubs thereof showing the dates, numbers and amounts of all checks drawn by him on funds on deposit in the banks referred to in section 2-146 to the credit of the city, with the names of the persons in whose favor checks are drawn and for what purpose and to which department such checks shall respectively be chargeable. He shall, at the time of drawing such checks, take receipts for all moneys paid and he shall number such receipts in regular consecutive order, preserving and numbering the original accounts or written demands corresponding with such checks and receipts. 
(Code 1972, § 2-62) 
Sec. 2-148. - Disbursements by check or draft. 
The city clerk and treasurer, the mayor and the city manager or any two of them acting together shall draw and sign all checks, drafts and/or wire transfers upon the funds of the city deposited in any bank to its credit. No money on deposit in any bank to the credit of the city shall be withdrawn from such bank or disbursed otherwise than through checks or drafts thus drawn and signed by the clerk and treasurer, the mayor and city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-149. - Duties regarding paid bonds, coupons. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall cancel, mutilate and preserve all city bonds and coupons which have been paid, and shall file, arrange, classify and index the same in such a manner as to render them readily available for future reference. 
Sec. 2-150. - Monthly report to city manager. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall make out and submit to the city manager for examination prior to the first regular monthly meeting of the council a report of his transactions as city clerk and treasurer for the preceding month. 
(Code 1972, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-151. - Additional duties. 
The city clerk and treasurer shall perform all other duties which may be imposed upon him by the laws of the state or the provisions of this Code and the ordinances or resolutions of the city or by the direction of the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-65) 
Secs. 2-152—2-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Departments, boards and commissions enumerated, § 3.8. 
Cross reference— Parks commission, § 15-26; city-county recreation commission, § 15-46; parks and recreation department, § 15-71; planning commission, § 16-31. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-166—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-5, § I, adopted August 11, 2009, repealed §§ 2-181—2-187, which pertained to Newnan-Coweta Library Board and derived from Code 1972, §§ 2-101—2-107. 

Secs. 2-181—2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NEWNAN TREE COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-206. - Establishment; purpose. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the City of Newnan Tree Commission and to be herein referred to as the "commission" for the purposes of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs in public places; providing for the pruning and removal trees on private property which endanger public safety and to generally improve the general welfare and health of the people of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-90, § I, 3-12-90) 
Sec. 2-207. - Composition; terms. 
(a)  The tree commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council who shall serve for a term of three years. Each member shall be a resident of the city during their term of office. The current members of the commission shall serve the remainder of the term for which he/she has been appointed. The new member of the commission shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
Vacancies in office during the term of any appointment caused by death, resignation, disqualification or otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council in the same manner as the person was appointed whose office has become vacant. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint a member of the city staff to act as a liaison between the commission and the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-90, § I(a), 3-12-90; Ord. No. 4-94, § I, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 14-3, § I, 2-11-14 ) 
Sec. 2-208. - Compensation. 
The members of the tree commission shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 10-90, § I(b), 3-12-90) 
Sec. 2-209. - Duty; responsibility; authority. 
The tree commission shall have the duty, responsibility, and authority: 
(1)  To study, develop plans and establish goals for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal and disposition of trees and shrubs in all open spaces, including, but not being limited to, the public parks, grounds of public buildings and unpaved portions of public streets and rights-of-ways, and to present such plans, as a recommendation, to the mayor and council on or before October 1 in each calendar year. 
(2)  To recommend to the proper authorities and officials of the city the types and kinds of trees or shrubs to be planted upon the rights-of-ways of municipal streets, public parks and public facilities. 
(3)  To assist the proper authorities and officials of the city in a program to protect and maintain existing trees, shrubs and green areas on all city-owned property and public properties. 
(4)  To recommend to the mayor and council removal of any trees or shrubbery deemed to be hazardous to the public safety or public health. 
(5)  To assist the proper officials and make available to the general public news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees, shrubbery and other greenery within the corporate limits of the city; to recommend from time to time as necessary ordinances and other programs that will be beneficial to protect and maintain existing trees, shrubs and green areas; and to encourage the development of private property owners of landscaped areas with trees and shrubs. 
(Ord. No. 10-90, § I, 3-12-90) 
Sec. 2-210. - Officers; meetings. 
Upon appointment of the initial tree commission by mayor and council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 10-90, § I, 3-12-90) 
DIVISION 4. - KEEP NEWNAN BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-08, adopted April 27, 2004, amended the Code by retitling div. 4. Formerly, div. 4 was entitled "Newnan Clean Commission." 

Sec. 2-211. - Establishment; purpose. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the Keep Newnan Beautiful Commission and to be referred to in this article as the "commission" for the purposes set forth in section 2-213 herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-08, § I, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 04-08, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 2-212. - Composition; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of 12 members who shall be appointed by the city council. Each member shall be a resident of the city during his or her term of office. Initially four members shall be appointed for a term of one year; four members for a term of two years; and four members for a term of three years; thereafter the members shall serve for a period of three years or until such time as the commissioner's successor is appointed by the council. Any member of the commission who misses three consecutive meetings of the commission shall be deemed to have vacated the member's seat on the commission. Vacancies in office during the term of any appointment shall be filled in the same manner as the person was appointed whose office has become vacant. 
(b)  The heads of the city beautification department, street department and sanitation department shall serve as ex-officio members on the commission. The government relations manager, residential manager or equivalent position of the city's designated residential household waste recovery provider shall serve as an ex-officio member on the commission. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. However, the appointed members under Paragraph (a) hereinabove shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 03-08, § I, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 04-08, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 06-7, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 15-5, § I, 3-24-15 ) 
Sec. 2-213. - Duty; responsibility; authority. 
The commission created in this article shall have the duty, responsibility and authority: 
(1)  To study, develop plans, and establish goals, for the care, preservation, improvement and maintenance of a city wide program to provide for and insure a clean city, free from litter, trash and debris and to present such plans, as a recommendation, to the mayor and council within six months of the commissions' first meeting and thereafter on or before August 1 of each calendar year or as often as may be necessary to insure implementation of such plans. 
(2)  To assist and coordinate its activities with the city departments which have the responsibility and duty to provide for and insure a clean city, free from litter, trash, and debris; to assist in establishing city clean up work days with public involvement within the city. 
(3)  To develop educational programs to foster community awareness in the care, preservation, improvement and maintenance of the city to keep the city clean and free from litter, trash and debris; to encourage corporate involvement in the city's efforts to establish anti-littering campaigns within the city. 
(4)  To assist the proper officials and make available to the general public news and information regarding the care, preservation, improvement and maintenance of the city to keep the city clean and free from litter, trash and debris; to recommend from time to time as necessary ordinances and other programs that will be beneficial to preserve, improve and maintain the city clean and free from litter, trash and debris. 
(5)  To elicit volunteer assistance from other members of the county and to appoint such committees as deemed necessary by the commission to accomplish its duties and responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 03-08, § I, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 04-08, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 2-214. - Officers; meetings. 
Upon appointment of the initial commission by the mayor and council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedure for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 03-08, § I, 3-25-03) 
DIVISION 5. - CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-215. - Establishment; purpose. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the city cultural arts commission to be referred to herein as "commission" for the purpose of planning, sponsoring and coordinating appropriate cultural events in the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § I, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 2-216. - Composition; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of 14 citizens members, two members shall be appointed by each of the seven council members. Each member shall be a resident or business owner/operator of the city or the county during his or her term of office. The members shall serve three-year terms, except the terms of the initial appointees shall be staggered: the initial appointment of five members of the commission shall be one year, five members shall be two years and four members shall be three years. Vacancies in office during the term of any appointment shall be filled in the same manner as the person was appointed whose office became vacant. 
(b)  The city manager shall designate a staff member to serve on the commission as liaison between the commission and the city. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be entitled to reimbursement for any actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § I, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 2-217. - Duty; responsibility; authority. 
The commission created in this article shall have the duty, responsibility and authority: 
(1)  To develop plans, to sponsor and to coordinate with other organizations appropriate cultural arts programs and events in the city and to present such plans as a recommendation to the mayor and council monthly or as often as may be necessary to insure orderly development of a plan for planning, sponsoring and coordinating cultural arts programs and events in the city. 
(2)  To assist and coordinate its activities with the city staff, other organizations and the public to insure a successful cultural event program in the city. 
(3)  To elicit volunteer assistance from other members of the residential and business community and to appoint such community as deemed necessary by the commission to accomplish its duties and responsibilities. 
(4)  The commission shall be authorized to accept and collect funds from outside sources through the Coweta Community Foundation or other 501(c)(3), 501(c)(6) or other tax exempt entity to provide a vehicle for non-taxable contributions to the cultural arts programs and events in the city and to utilize such entity, assist in the disbursement of such funds. 
(5)  A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting the business of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § I, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 2-218. - Officers; meetings. 
Upon appointment of the initial commission by the mayor and council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman, one of its members as vice-chairman and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedure for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § I, 6-6-06) 
DIVISION 6. - NEWNAN YOUTH ACTIVITIES COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-6, § I, adopted March 25, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 2-215—2-218. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as §§ 2-219—2-222. 

Sec. 2-219. - Establishment; purpose. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the Newnan Youth Activities Commission to be referred to herein as "commission" for the purpose of planning, sponsoring and coordinating appropriate youth programs, activities and events in the City of Newnan. 
(Ord. No. 08-6, § I(2-215), 3-25-08; Ord. No. 10-11, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 2-220. - Composition; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of 14 citizen members, two members shall be appointed by each of the seven council members. Each member shall be a resident of the City of Newnan or a resident of Coweta County that has professional or substantial volunteer experience with children and youth during his or her term of office. The members shall serve three year terms except the terms of the existing members shall be for the remainder of the term for which each member was appointed, and the initial appointees of the expanded commission shall be staggered by the initial appointment of two members of the commission who shall serve until March 31, 2011, two members who shall serve until March 31, 2012, and three members who shall serve until March 31, 2013. Vacancies in office during the term of any appointment shall be filled in the same manner as the person was appointed whose office became vacant. 
(b)  The City Manager of the City of Newnan shall designate a staff member to serve the commission as liaison between the commission and the city. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be entitled to reimbursement for any actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 08-6, § I(2-216), 3-25-08; Ord. No. 10-11, 7-6-10) 
Sec. 2-221. - Duty; responsibility; authority. 
The commission created in this article shall have the duty, responsibility and authority: 
(1)  To establish a Newnan Youth City Council which shall serve as a forum to assist the commission in determining the needs and concerns of the youth of the city; to expose and educate the city's youth to the operations of their local government; and to assist the city's youth in dealing with issues affecting the city's youth including but not limited to gangs, youth, crime, racism, alcohol/drug abuse, teenage pregnancy, recreation, jobs and education involving the city's youth in the creation of a better city, county, state and nation in which to live and raise families in the century ahead. 
(2)  To develop plans, to sponsor and to coordinate with other organizations appropriate youth programs, activities and events in the City of Newnan and to present such plans as a recommendation to the mayor, city council as often as may be necessary to insure orderly development of a plan for planning, sponsoring and coordinating youth programs, activities and events with the assistance of the Newnan Youth City Council in the City of Newnan. 
(3)  To assist and coordinate its activities with the city staff, other organizations and the public to insure a successful youth program in the City of Newnan. 
(4)  To elicit volunteer assistance from other members of the residential and business community to accomplish its duties and responsibilities. 
(5)  The commission shall be authorized to accept and collect funds from outside sources including individuals, validly organized 501(c)(3), 501(c)(6) or other tax exempt entities to provide a vehicle for non-taxable contributions to the youth programs, activities and events in the City of Newnan. 
(6)  A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting the business of the commission except where there exists a vacancy or vacancies on the commission then a majority of the members of the commission then serving shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting the business of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 08-6, § I(2-217), 3-25-08; Ord. No. 10-11, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 11-16, § I, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 2-222. - Officers; meetings. 
Upon appointment of the initial commission by the mayor and council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman, one of its members as vice-chairman and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedure for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 08-6, § I(2-218), 3-25-08; Ord. No. 10-11, 7-6-10) 
DIVISION 7. - NEWNAN CHRISTMAS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-223. - Establishment; purpose. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the City of Newnan Christmas Commission to be referred to herein as the "Christmas commission" for the purpose of planning and sponsoring appropriate events celebration the Christmas holiday season, all subject to the approval of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 14-19, 12-16-14 ) 
Sec. 2-224. - Composition; terms; compensation. 
(a)  Each council member shall appoint one member to the commission. Each member shall be a resident of the city or a business owner/operator of a business located in the city during his or her term of office. The initial term of all members shall expire on February 1, 2018. Subsequent terms shall be for a period of three years or until such time as the member's succession is appointed by the council. Vacancies in office during the term of any appointment shall be filled in the same manner as the person was appointed whose office became vacant. 
(b)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be entitled to reimbursement for any actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
( Ord. No. 14-19, 12-16-14 ) 
Sec. 2-225. - Duty; responsibility; authority; officers and meetings. 
(a)  The commission created in this article shall have the duty, responsibility and authority: 
(1)  To develop plans and to sponsor for appropriate events celebrating the Christmas holiday season and to present such plans, as a recommendation to the mayor and council by August 1 of each year and as often as may be necessary to insure orderly development of a plan for celebration during the holiday season. 
(2)  To assist and coordinate its activities with the city staff and public to insure a successful celebration of the Christmas holiday season. 
(3)  To review and recommend to the city council types and placement of holiday decorations within the city. 
(b)  Upon appointment of the initial commission by the mayor and council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman, one of its members as vice-chairman and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedure for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
( Ord. No. 14-19, 12-16-14 ) 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, § 6.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 19. 

Sec. 2-226. - Fiscal year, submission of budget, annual appropriation ordinance. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the city shall begin on January 1 of each year and end on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  The budget document for the next ensuing fiscal year shall be submitted to the city council each year 40 days prior to the beginning of the next fiscal year by the city manager. The budget document shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the governing authority from time to time, but shall contain a comparison of current revenues and expenditures with the proposed revenues and expenditures. At the time the budget is submitted to the city council, a notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation containing the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed budget. This hearing shall be at least seven days prior to adopting the appropriation ordinance. A notice of the adoption of the annual appropriation ordinance shall be published at least seven days prior to the meeting date. 
(c)  At the first meeting in January of each year the city council shall enact an appropriation ordinance for the ensuing fiscal year in which shall be itemized all anticipated revenues to be received during the fiscal year, all anticipated expenditures for the fiscal year and all payments to be applied toward the city's bonded indebtedness. 
(Code 1972, § 25-60) 
Sec. 2-227. - Incurring indebtedness prior to appropriation. 
No indebtedness shall be incurred, excepting such indebtedness as may be payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a designated specified source, unless there is a prior appropriation out of which such indebtedness could be paid, as provided by statute; provided that, during the first quarter of any fiscal year, before the enactment of the current appropriation ordinance, the city may operate under the appropriation ordinance of the preceding year. 
(Code 1972, § 25-61) 
Sec. 2-228. - Signing and approval of contracts. 
The mayor or any other person designated by the city council may sign, on behalf of the city, any contract authorized by the city council. No contract may be entered into without the authority of the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 25-62) 
Sec. 2-229. - Approval of bills before payment. 
All bills payable by the city other than for the payment of salaries established by the city council, recurring monthly expenditures for operations and bond payments, shall be submitted to the city council for approval before payment. The city manager will approve all bills before they are paid. 
(Code 1972, § 25-63) 
Sec. 2-230. - Payment of money by clerk-treasurer. 
The clerk-treasurer shall pay out money in payment of all bills, for salaries, or for any other purpose including the retirement of principal and interest on bonds or tax anticipation warrants as provided by statute. 
(Code 1972, § 25-64) 
Sec. 2-231. - Annual audit of city accounts. 
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later than three months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the city made by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of the state, to be designated by the city council. Copies of such audit report shall be filed with the city clerk and in such other places as may be required by law. 
(Code 1972, § 25-65) 
Secs. 2-232—2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-7, § I, adopted June 12, 2012, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 2-251—2-253, 2-271—2-273, 2-291—2-301, 2-321—2-328, 2-346—2-348, 2-366—2-371, 2-391—2-394, 2-411—2-413, 2-431—2-439, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1972, §§ 25-101, 25-103—25-121, 25-123—25-128, 25-130—25-143, 25-145—25-154. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of city manager, § 2.20; contracting procedures, § 6.21; centralized purchasing, § 6.22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-251. - Scope. 
This article shall govern acquisitions by the City of Newnan for supplies, services, construction, and related contracts and agreements. This article supersedes and repeals existing ordinances to the extent they are inconsistent with the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-252. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide guidance for the purchase of supplies, services, and construction for the city while adhering to all laws of the City of Newnan, State of Georgia, and United States. The intent of this article is to establish, foster, and maintain the following principals: 
(1)  To consistently consider the best interests of the city in all purchasing transactions. 
(2)  To purchase without prejudice, seeking to obtain the maximum value for each dollar expended while maintaining quality standards and high efficiencies. 
(3)  To strive for the highest degree of ethical conduct concerning the city purchasing policy. 
(4)  To structure a purchasing policy in such a way as to foster efficiency, consistency and proper use by the entire city. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-253. - Application. 
This article shall apply to all expenditures of public funds unless otherwise listed in section 2-254 of this article. It shall also apply to contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and construction entered into by the city. When the purchase involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the purchase shall be conducted in accordance with mandatory applicable federal and state laws and regulations. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest that is otherwise consistent with the law. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-254. - Exemptions. 
The following expenditures are exempted from the competitive purchase requirements of this article; however, the city manager may develop procedures to oversee all transactions made by the entire city: 
(1)  Real estate acquisitions; 
(2)  Costs contained within intergovernmental agreements; 
(3)  Dues, memberships, and professional subscriptions; 
(4)  Utility services including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electricity, and gas; 
(5)  Legal services; 
(6)  Legal advertisements; 
(7)  Payments to arbitrators; 
(8)  Conferences, seminars and classes; 
(9)  Reimbursements for valid, approved travel expenses as submitted on a travel expense report; 
(10)  Instructors or speakers for internal training events; 
(11)  Surplus property acquisitions from other governments or governmental agencies; 
(12)  Medical services; 
(13)  Employee benefits payments; 
(14)  Fuel purchases; and, 
(15)  U.S. Postal Service, United Parcel Service, Federal Express, Airborne, or other delivery services. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-255. - Administration of purchase procedures. 
Under the direct supervision of the city manager, the finance director shall be responsible for the administration of purchasing policies and procedures to each department within the city. Consistent with this article, and with the approval of the city council, the finance director may adopt operating procedures related to the execution of this article. 
Employees involved in the purchasing process shall take full responsibility for understanding the city's policies and procedures regarding purchasing and vendor relations. Purchasing decisions are business decisions made on behalf of the City of Newnan and therefore should be made with the utmost consideration for what is in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-256. - Public access to purchasing information. 
Purchasing information shall become public record to the extent provided by law, once an award is made by the city, and shall be available to the public upon written request as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-257. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Best value means the best value to the city based on all factors, including: cost, contractors ability, capacity, or skill; ability to perform within the time required; character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency; quality of contractor's performance on previous purchases or contracts, if applicable; and, the ability of the contractor to provide future maintenance, repair, parts and services, if necessary. 
Bid means a written offer, more formal than a quote, to furnish supplies, equipment, vehicles, or services in conformity with the specifications, delivery terms, and conditions required at a guaranteed maximum cost. The user will sometimes prepare an invitation to bid, which is formal notification, through posting and advertisement, that the city is soliciting goods or services. 
Bid bond means a financial security provided to guarantee that a bidder will enter into a contract with the city if a bid is awarded. 
Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics needed to meet city requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
Brand name specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity. 
Change order means any written alteration to specifications, delivery point, time of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity or other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
City includes all departments, divisions, employees, and City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
City council means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Confidential information means any information which is available to an employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of the city and which is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine operation, repair or maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property. 
Contract means all types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the purchase of supplies, services or construction. 
Contractor means any person, persons, or business having a contract with the city or a using agency thereof. 
Disadvantaged business means a small business which is owned or controlled by a majority of persons, not limited to members of minority groups, who have been deprived of the opportunity to develop and maintain a competitive position in the economy because of social disadvantages. 
Employee means any individual drawing a salary or wages from the city, whether elected or not; any non-compensated individual performing personal services for the city or any department, agency, commission, council, board or any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the city; and any non-compensated individual serving as an elected official of the city. 
Emergency means any situation resulting in imminent danger to public health or safety or the loss of a substantial governmental service. 
Finance director means the Finance Director for the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Financial interest means: 
(1)  Ownership of any interest or involvement in any relationship from which, or as a result of which, a person within the past year has received, or is presently or in the future entitled to receive, more than $100.00 per year, or its equivalent; 
(2)  Ownership of 51 percent of any property or business; or 
(3)  Holding a position in a business such as officer, director, trustee, partner, employee, or the like, or holding any position of management. 
Gratuity means a payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service or anything of more than nominal value (defined as $25.00), present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received. 
Invitation to bid (ITB) means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
Payment bond means a bond with a good and sufficient surety or sureties payable to the city for which the work is to be done and intended for the use and protection of all subcontractors and all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery, and equipment in the prosecution of the work provided for in the contract. 
Performance bond means a bond with a good and sufficient surety for sureties for the faithful performance of the contract and to indemnify the city for any damages occasioned by a failure to perform the same within the prescribed time. Such bond shall be payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of the city. 
Purchase means the buying, procurement, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring of any supplies, services or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of supplies, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
Professional services means the services of an attorney, architect, accountant, engineering or planning firm, financial consultant, investment advisor, or other professional. 
Public works project means the building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing of a public structure or building or other public improvement of any kind to any public real property. Such term does not include the routine operation, repair, or maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property. 
Purchase order means a document generated by the user, via a purchasing requisition, and submitted to the finance department to formalize a purchase transaction with a vendor or to assure the proper set-aside of funds for a purchase. The vendor's acceptance of a purchase order shall constitute a legal, binding contract with the city. 
Qualified products list means an approved list of supplies, services or construction items described by model or catalogue numbers, which, prior to competitive solicitation, the city has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
Quote means a verbal or written promise from the vendor or contractor guaranteeing that the cost of specific goods, supplies, or services will not be exceeded. 
Request for proposal (RFP) means all documents used for soliciting competitive proposals. The RFP defines, in detail, the terms, conditions, and specifications of goods or services required by the city. 
Request for qualification (RFQ) means a request seeking a written presentation of the professional qualifications and experience of a proposed contractor. 
Responsible bidder means a person who has the capability in all respects to fully perform the contract requirements, and the tenacity, perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment and credit which will assure good faith performance. 
Responsive bidder means a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids. 
Services means the furnishing of labor, time, materials, or effort by a person, persons, or business for the delivery of items including, but not limited to, data, findings, plans, studies, recommendations, reports, and representation. 
Sole source means those purchases made pursuant to a written determination that there is only one source for the requested goods, services or construction items. 
Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing supplies, services or construction items for delivery. 
Supplies means all items including, but not limited to, commodities, equipment, materials, printing, insurance and real property, excluding land or a permanent interest in land. 
Using department/division (user) means the department which has the authority and responsibility for determining the need for an item or service, its related specifications, and date needed. 
Vendor means any person, persons, or business which provides, or offers to provide, goods or services to the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-258. - Appropriate expenditures. 
The purchase of supplies, services and construction shall comply with the provisions of this article and with all procedures as implemented by the city manager. To ensure that all purchases are appropriate and necessary, each user shall ensure that purchases conform to the aforementioned requirements. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-259. - Tax-exempt status. 
The City of Newnan is a government agency and therefore exempt from sales and use taxes. Forms to ensure that all purchases are tax-exempt are available from the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-260. - Budgeted expenditures. 
It is the responsibility of each user to ensure all purchases made for or by their agency or department is consistent with, and conforms to, the current approved fiscal year budget prior to committing such funds. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-261. - Purchase order request. 
With the exception of sections 2-254, 2-323 and 2-324 of this article, the user shall generate a requisition prior to the purchase of all supplies and services which exceed $500.00. All such requests shall be submitted to the finance department for processing (with quotes, bids, or other required documentation attached) and approval by the city manager. A purchase order shall be issued by Finance for all approved purchases and returned to the user, typically via email, for order processing. 
(1)  Receiving of goods. It shall be the responsibility of the user to ensure that all purchased goods and services are received, inspected and verified prior to approval for payment. 
(2)  Disputes with vendor. Any disputes with the vendor regarding purchases of goods and services are to be handled by the user prior to approval of payment. If payment has already been made when the dispute arises, the finance director shall assist when needed to insure resolution in a timely and efficient manner. Depending on the dollar amount involved in the dispute, acceptable resolution may also involve the city manager and council. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-262. - Payment processing. 
All receipts and/or invoices shall be properly coded with the correct account number, signed by the user, and submitted to the finance department within five working days of the receipt of goods or services. The project name shall also be listed on all project-related invoices. Payment terms (due date), unless specified on the vendor invoice, shall default to net 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-263. - Reimbursements. 
A check request or travel expense form is used to request reimbursement, depending on the type of purchase made. Proof of payment and signature of the user are required on the documentation accompanying all requests for reimbursement of purchases made by employees of the city. Additionally, all reimbursement requests must include the purpose of the purchase or trip and appropriate receipts. If a receipt is lost, a copy of the purchaser's cancelled check or credit card statement confirming the purchase may be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-264. - Split purchases. 
Purchases shall not be artificially divided in order to circumvent the dollar limitations and associated procedures established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-265. - Occupational tax certificate. 
Any vendor providing services or delivering goods to the city must have a current, valid occupational tax certificate to operate within the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-266. - Record keeping. 
At the conclusion of a contract, the original contract and any bids, specifications, and other pertinent documents shall be retained by the city for a period consistent with the record retention laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-267. - Sales tax. 
The city shall be exempt from paying sales and use tax on all purchases. In accordance with state law, all vendors shall pay sales and use tax on the supplies and equipment purchased for use on city projects or jobs. No vendor shall attempt to avoid payment of the sales and use tax by having the city purchase supplies for use by the vendor on city projects or jobs. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-268. - Ineligible source list. 
The following vendors shall be placed on an Ineligible Source List pursuant to the provisions of this section for a reasonable period not to exceed three years, based upon the recommendation of the finance director: 
(1)  Any vendor who submits a bid or proposal in bad faith; 
(2)  Any vendor who willfully or repeatedly breaches a contract with the city; 
(3)  Any vendor who repeatedly refuses to accept a bid or proposal award; 
(4)  Any vendor who has established a pattern or practice of unethical or immoral business practices; 
(5)  Any vendor who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or, 
(6)  Any vendor who is owned, controlled, or managed, in whole or in part, by any other vendors described in (1) through (5) above. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-269. - Public works law compliance. 
Public works projects, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-2(10), exceeding $100,000.00 shall comply with the provisions of the Georgia Local Government Public Works Construction Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. The purchase of road construction contracts are subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq., O.C.G.A. § 36-91-2(12) and this ordinance, where applicable. Those projects which qualify for and utilize federal aid highway program (FAHP) funding are further subject to the City of Newnan policy for competitive negotiation qualifications-based selection for projects using federal aid highway program (FAHP) funding as set out in section 2-271 hereinbelow. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 16-11, § I, 10-11-16 ) 
Sec. 2-270. - Project delivery methods. 
In compliance with local and state law, the city manager shall have the authority to establish procedures and authorize the use of construction delivery methods for public works, road construction, or other construction projects. The delivery methods may include but are not limited to design-bid-build, design-build, and construction management at risk. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-271. - City of Newnan policy for competitive negotiation qualifications-based selection for projects using federal aid highway program (FAHP) funding. 
(a)  General. Except as provided in (b) and (c) below, the City of Newnan shall use the competitive negotiation method for the procurement of engineering and design related services when FAHP funds are involved in the contract (as specified in 23 U.S.C. 112(b)(2)(A)). The solicitation, evaluation, ranking, selection, and negotiation shall comply with the qualifications-based selection procurement procedures for architectural and engineering services codified under 40 U.S.C. 1101—1104, commonly referred to as the Brooks Act. In accordance with the requirements of the Brooks Act, the following procedures shall apply to the competitive negotiation procurement method: 
(1)  Solicitation. The solicitation process shall be by public announcement, public advertisement, or any other public forum or method that assures qualified in-state and out-of-state consultants are given a fair opportunity to be considered for award of the contract. Procurement procedures may involve a single step process with issuance of a request for proposal (RFP) to all interested consultants or a multiphase process with issuance of a request for statements or letters of interest or qualifications (RFQ) whereby responding consultants are ranked based on qualifications and request for proposals are then provided to three or more of the most highly qualified consultants. Minimum qualifications of consultants to perform services under general work categories or areas of expertise may also be assessed through a prequalification process whereby statements of qualifications are submitted on an annual basis. Regardless of any process utilized for prequalification of consultants or for an initial assessment of a consultant's qualifications under an RFQ, a RFP specific to the project, task, or service is required for evaluation of a consultant's specific technical approach and qualifications. 
(2)  Request for proposal (RFP). The RFP shall provide all information and requirements necessary for interested consultants to provide a response to the RFP and compete for the solicited services. The RFP shall: 
a.  Provide a clear, accurate, and detailed description of the scope of work, technical requirements, and qualifications of consultants necessary for the services to be rendered. The scope of work should detail the purpose and description of the project, services to be performed, deliverables to be provided, estimated schedule for performance of the work, and applicable standards, specifications, and policies; 
b.  Identify the requirements for any discussions that may be conducted with three or more of the most highly qualified consultants following submission and evaluation of proposals; 
c.  Identify evaluation factors including their relative weight of importance in accordance with subparagraph 23 CFR Part 172.7(a)(1)(iii) of this section; 
d.  Specify the contract type and method(s) of payment to be utilized in accordance with 23 CFR Part 172.9; 
e.  Identify any special provisions or contract requirements associated with the solicited services; 
f.  Require that submission of any requested cost proposals or elements of cost be in a concealed format and separate from technical/qualifications proposals as these shall not be considered in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase; and 
g.  Provide a schedule of key dates for the procurement process and establish a submittal deadline for responses to the RFP which provides sufficient time for interested consultants to receive notice, prepare, and submit a proposal, which except in unusual circumstances shall be not less than 14 days from the date of issuance of the RFP. 
(3)  Evaluation factors. 
a.  Criteria used for evaluation, ranking, and selection of consultants to perform engineering and design related services must assess the demonstrated competence and qualifications for the type of professional services solicited. These qualifications-based factors may include, but are not limited to, technical approach (e.g., project understanding, innovative concepts or alternatives, quality control procedures), work experience, specialized expertise, professional licensure, staff capabilities, workload capacity, and past performance. 
b.  Price shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. All price or cost related items which include, but are not limited to, cost proposals, direct salaries/wage rates, indirect cost rates, and other direct costs are prohibited from being used as evaluation criteria. 
c.  In-state or local preference shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. State licensing laws are not preempted by this provision and professional licensure within a jurisdiction may be established as a requirement which attests to the minimum qualifications and competence of a consultant to perform the solicited services. 
d.  The following non-qualifications based evaluation criteria are permitted under the specified conditions and provided the combined total of these criteria do not exceed a nominal value of ten percent of the total evaluation criteria to maintain the integrity of a qualifications-based selection: 
1.  A local presence may be used as a nominal evaluation factor where appropriate. This criterion shall not be based on political or jurisdictional boundaries and may be applied on a project-by-project basis for contracts where a need has been established for a consultant to provide a local presence, a local presence will add value to the quality and efficiency of the project, and application of this criteria leaves an appropriate number of qualified consultants, given the nature and size of the project. If a consultant outside of the locality area indicates as part of a proposal that it will satisfy the criteria in some manner, such as establishing a local project office, that commitment shall be considered to have satisfied the local presence criteria. 
2.  The participation of qualified and certified Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) sub-consultants may be used as a nominal evaluation criterion where appropriate in accordance with 49 CFR Part 26 and the City of Newnan's FHWA-approved DBE program. 
(4)  Evaluation, ranking, and selection. 
a.  Consultant proposals shall be evaluated by the City of Newnan based on the criteria established and published within the public solicitation. 
b.  While the contract will be with the prime consultant, proposal evaluations shall consider the qualifications of the prime consultant and any sub-consultants identified within the proposal with respect to the scope of work and established criteria. 
c.  Following submission and evaluation of proposals, the City of Newnan shall conduct interviews or other types of discussions determined three of the most highly qualified consultants to clarify the technical approach, qualifications, and capabilities provided in response to the RFP. Discussion requirements shall be specified within the RFP and should be based on the size and complexity of the project as defined in City of Newnan written policies and procedures (as specified in 23 CFR Part 172.5(c)). Discussions may be written, by telephone, video conference, or by oral presentation/interview. Discussions following proposal submission are not required provided proposals contain sufficient information for evaluation of technical approach and qualifications to perform the specific project, task, or service with respect to established criteria. 
d.  From the proposal evaluation and any subsequent discussions which have been conducted, the City of Newnan shall rank, in order of preference, at least three consultants determined most highly qualified to perform the solicited services based on the established and published criteria. 
e.  Notification must be provided to responding consultants of the final ranking of the three most highly qualified consultants. 
f.  The City of Newnan shall retain acceptable documentation of the solicitation, proposal, evaluation, and selection of the consultant accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR Part 18.42. 
(5)  Negotiation. 
a.  Independent estimate. Prior to receipt or review of the most highly qualified consultant's cost proposal, the City of Newnan shall prepare a detailed independent estimate with an appropriate breakdown of the work or labor hours, types or classifications of labor required, other direct costs, and consultant's fixed fee for the defined scope of work. The independent estimate shall serve as the basis for negotiation and ensuring the consultant services are obtained at a fair and reasonable cost. 
b.  Elements of contract costs (e.g., indirect cost rates, direct salary or wage rates, fixed fee, and other direct costs) shall be established separately in accordance with 23 CFR Part 172.11. 
c.  If concealed cost proposals were submitted in conjunction with technical/qualifications proposals, only the cost proposal of the consultant with which negotiations are initiated may be considered. Concealed cost proposals of consultants with which negotiations are not initiated should be returned to the respective consultant due to the confidential nature of this data (as specified in 23 U.S.C. 112(b)(2)(E)). 
d.  The City of Newnan shall retain documentation of negotiation activities and resources used in the analysis of costs to establish elements of the contract in accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR Part 18.42. This documentation shall include the consultant cost certification and documentation supporting the acceptance of the indirect cost rate to be applied to the contract (as specified in 23 CFR Part 172.11(c)). 
(b)  Small purchases. The small purchase method involves procurement of engineering and design related services where an adequate number of qualified sources are reviewed and the total contract costs do not exceed an established simplified acquisition threshold. The City of Newnan may use the state's small purchase procedures which reflect applicable State laws and regulations for the procurement of engineering and design related services provided the total contract costs do not exceed the federal simplified acquisition threshold (as specified in 48 CFR Part 2.101). When a lower threshold for use of small purchase procedures is established in State law, regulation, or policy, the lower threshold shall apply to the use of FAHP funds. The following additional requirements shall apply to the small purchase procurement method: 
(1)  The scope of work, project phases, and contract requirements shall not be broken down into smaller components merely to permit the use of small purchase procedures. 
(2)  A minimum of three consultants are required to satisfy the adequate number of qualified sources reviewed. 
(3)  Contract costs may be negotiated in accordance with state small purchase procedures; however, the allow ability of costs shall be determined in accordance with the federal cost principles. 
(4)  The full amount of any contract modification or amendment that would cause the total contract amount to exceed the established simplified acquisition threshold would be ineligible for Federal-aid funding. The FHWA may withdraw all federal-aid from a contract if it is modified or amended above the applicable established simplified acquisition threshold. 
(c)  Noncompetitive. The noncompetitive method involves procurement of engineering and design related services when it is not feasible to award the contract using competitive negotiation or small purchase procurement methods. The following requirements shall apply to the noncompetitive procurement method: 
(1)  The City of Newnan may use their own noncompetitive procedures which reflect applicable State and local laws and regulations and conform to applicable federal requirements. 
(2)  The City of Newnan shall establish a process to determine when noncompetitive procedures will be used and shall submit justification to, and receive approval from, the FHWA before using this form of contracting. 
(3)  Circumstances under which a contract may be awarded by noncompetitive procedures are limited to the following: 
a.  The service is available only from a single source; 
b.  There is an emergency which will not permit the time necessary to conduct competitive negotiations; or 
c.  After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined to be inadequate. 
(4)  Contract costs may be negotiated in accordance with the City of Newnan noncompetitive procedures; however, the allow ability of costs shall be determined in accordance with the federal cost principles. 
[(d)]  Additional procurement requirements. 
(1)  Common grant rule. 
a.  The City of Newnan must comply with procurement requirements established in state and local laws, regulations, policies, and procedures which are not addressed by or in conflict with applicable federal laws and regulations (as specified in 49 CFR Part 18.36). 
b.  When state and local procurement laws, regulations, policies, or procedures are in conflict with applicable federal laws and regulations, the City of Newnan must comply with Federal requirements to be eligible for federal-aid reimbursement of the associated costs of the services incurred following FHWA authorization (as specified in 49 CFR Part 18.4). 
(2)  Disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) program. 
a.  The City of Newnan shall give consideration to DBE consultants in the procurement of engineering and design related service contracts subject to 23 U.S.C. 112(b)(2) in accordance with 49 CFR Part 26. When DBE program participation goals cannot be met through race-neutral measures, additional DBE participation on engineering and design related services contracts may be achieved in accordance with the City of Newnan's FHWA approved DBE program through either: 
1.  Use of an evaluation criterion in the qualifications-based selection of consultants (as specified in 23 CFR Part 172.7(a)(1)(iii)(D)); or 
2.  Establishment of a contract participation goal. 
b.  The use of quotas or exclusive set-asides for DBE consultants is prohibited (as specified in 49 CFR Part 26.43). 
(3)  Suspension and debarment. The City of Newnan must verify suspension and debarment actions and eligibility status of consultants and sub-consultants prior to entering into an agreement or contract in accordance with 49 CFR Part 18.35 and 2 CFR Part 180. 
( Ord. No. 16-11, § II, 10-11-16 ) 
Secs. 2-272—2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ETHICAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 2-281. - Vendor relations. 
All employees shall conduct all purchase functions in a professional manner and shall promote equal opportunity and fairness in all vendor relations. All purchase functions shall be conducted impartially to assure fair competitive access by responsible vendors. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-282. - Gratuity. 
It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give or agree to give any city employee or official or for any city employee or official to solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept from another person a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, or recommendation as part of any on-going or previous process to procure goods or services. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-283. - Kickbacks. 
It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity or offer of employment to be made by, or on behalf of, a contractor, vendor, subcontractor, or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a contract or order. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-284. - Financial interest. 
It shall be unethical for any city employee or official who is participating directly or indirectly in the purchase process to hold a financial interest in the company conducting business with the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-285. - Use of confidential information. 
It shall be unethical for any city employee or official to knowingly use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Secs. 2-286—2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLICITATION, BIDDING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2-301. - Maximum practicable competition. 
All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the city's needs, and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this section applies to all specifications including, but not limited to, those prepared for the city by architects, engineers, designers and draftsmen. When required by federal or state law, the city will comply with all disadvantaged business provisions. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-302. - Brand name specification. 
Since use of a brand name specification is restrictive of product competition, it may be used only when the user, upon approval from the city manager, makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item or items will satisfy the city's needs. The user shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name item or items can be obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can satisfy the city's requirements, the purchase may be made as a sole source purchase. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-303. - Brand name or equal specification. 
Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate three, or as many different brands as are practicable, as "or equal" preferences and shall further state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the user determines that: 
(1)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available; 
(2)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description, not including a brand name specification; 
(3)  The nature of the product or the nature of the city's requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the purchase; or 
(4)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the city's best interests. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-304. - Public notice requirements. 
In order to provide adequate notice to potential vendors, whenever the city issues an invitation to bid, request for proposals, or request for qualifications, the public notice requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Supplies, equipment and services. Notices to purchase supplies, equipment or services shall be given not less than 15 calendar days prior to the date set forth for the opening of bids. Such notice may include publication in the legal organ of the city or by electronic means on an internet website of the city or an internet website recognized by the city. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening, along with such details and specifications as will enable the public to know the extent and character of the offering. 
(2)  Public works projects. Notices for public works projects, with the exception of road construction, shall be posted conspicuously in the Newnan City Hall and shall be advertised in the legal organ of the county; or by electronic means on the city's official internet website or an Internet website identified by the city. Bid opportunities that are advertised in the legal organ shall be advertised a minimum of two times, with the first advertisement occurring at least four weeks prior to the opening of the proposals. The second advertisement shall follow no earlier than two weeks from the first advertisement. Bid opportunities that are advertised solely on the Internet shall be posted continuously for at least four weeks prior to the opening of the proposals. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of proposal opening along with other details and specifications which will enable the public to know the extent and character of the offering and in accordance with state law. 
(3)  Road construction projects. Notices for road construction projects shall be posted conspicuously in the Newnan City Hall and shall be advertised in the legal organ of the city. The advertisement must run at least two times during the two weeks prior to the bid opening. The first advertisement must run two weeks prior to the bid opening. The second advertisement must run one week after the first advertisement. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of proposal opening along with other details and specifications which will enable the public to know the extent and character of the offering and in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-305. - Local vendor preference. 
If factors such as quality, previous performance, and availability are equal and acceptable for all vendors, the bid may be awarded to a local vendor if the local vendor's quote, or bid, is within three percent of the lowest bidder. Local vendor preference may only be given when the total amount of the lowest bid does not exceed $25,000.00. A local vendor is defined as one who holds a current, valid occupational tax certificate issued by City of Newnan. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-306. - Responsibility of bidders. 
The failure of a bidder to supply prompt information in connection with an inquiry with respect to the bidder's qualifications or responsibility may be grounds for a determination of non-responsibility with respect to such bidder. A copy of the determination shall be sent promptly to the bidder in this case. The final determination shall be made part of the contract file and be made a public record once an award is made. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-307. - Modification of bids. 
Any clerical mistake, which is patently obvious on the face of the bid, may be corrected upon receipt of a written request and verification submitted by the bidder. A non-material omission in a bid may be corrected if the city determines the correction to be in the best interests of the city. Omissions effecting or relating to the bid price shall be deemed material and shall not be corrected after bid opening. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-308. - Withdrawal of bids. 
Bids may be withdrawn at any time prior to bid opening. After bids have been publicly opened, the bidder shall give notice in writing of this claim of right to withdraw his bid due to an error within two business days after the public bid opening. Such requests for withdrawal may be considered if the price was substantially lower than other bids due solely to a mistake therein, provided the bid was submitted in good faith, and the mistake was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake. If a bidder or offeror withdraws a bid or proposal without penalty because of a mistake, he or she may not later submit a bid or proposal for the work if the project is re-bid. Additionally, he or she may not subcontract with the contractor who is awarded the project or supply material or labor to the project or benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-309. - Reserved rights. 
The city reserves the right to cancel any advertised bid and to reject any or all bids if it determines that such action is in the best interests of the city. The reasons for such bid rejection or cancellation shall be made part of the bid file. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-310. - Discussions with responsible bidders. 
Discussions may be conducted with responsible bidders who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-311. - Disqualification of bids. 
Any bid which is incomplete in any material aspect or submitted without required, or requested, bonds or insurance certificates shall be immediately disqualified from consideration. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Secs. 2-312—2-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PURCHASE METHODS 

Sec. 2-321. - Sole source purchase. 
A contract may be awarded without competition when the city manager determines, after the user conducts a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required supply or service. The user shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. The city council shall approve all sole source purchases in excess of $25,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-322. - Government contracts. 
Where the State of Georgia or Federal Government (GSA) takes bids and develops purchase contracts on certain items and it is determined that the purchase of these items is in the best interests of the city, the city manager shall have the authority to allow the use of such contracts. Bids received by local government units within the State of Georgia are also eligible provided such bids were solicited within the previous six months and the use of such bid is authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-323. - Emergency purchases. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city manager may make, or authorize others to make, emergency purchases of supplies, services or construction items if immediate action is required to prevent disruption of operations or services, or if there is a threat to public health, safety or welfare, and where the adverse effect of such emergency may worsen materially with the passage of time; provided that such emergency purchases shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. All emergencies where the cost is $25,000.00 or greater require ratification of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-324. - Routine purchases. 
Users, or their designee(s), shall be authorized to make purchases up to $500.00 without competitive solicitation or issuance of a purchasing requisition, provided such purchase complies with all applicable provisions of this article and is within the legal limits of the adopted budget. 
City-issued credit cards may be used by employees to streamline routine purchases (those not exceeding $500.00), reduce overhead costs and reduce the printing and distribution of purchase order documents and warrant payments to suppliers. Users are ultimately responsible for the proper use of credit cards and for ensuring compliance with the policies and procedures described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-325. - Verbal quotes. 
Purchase of supplies or services in excess of $500.00, but no greater than $5,000.00, shall comply with all applicable provisions of this article in addition to the following: 
(1)  Solicitation. The user desiring to make such purchase shall solicit a minimum of three verbal quotes from qualified vendors. Nothing shall prohibit the user from receiving written, facsimile, or email quotes. User shall document all quotes received including no response from vendor. 
(2)  Public notice. Public advertisement for such solicitation shall not be required. 
(3)  Review of quotes. The user shall review the quotes and select the quote which provides the city with its best value and meets all other purchasing guidelines as set forth by this article. The user may also elect to deny all quotes and re-solicit quotes. 
(4)  [Submit requisition prior to purchase.] The user shall submit a requisition with the quotes attached, per section 2-260, for processing and approval prior to the purchase. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-326. - Formal quotes. 
(a)  Equipment, supplies or services. Purchase of equipment, supplies or services in excess of $5,000.00, but no greater than $25,000.00, shall comply with all applicable provisions of this section in addition to the following: 
(1)  Solicitation. The user, after obtaining authorization from the city manager, shall develop minimum specifications for such purchase and solicit a minimum of three written quotes from qualified vendors. User shall document all quotes received including no response from vendor. 
(2)  Public notice. Public advertisement for such solicitation shall not be required. 
(3)  Review of quotes. The user shall review the quotes and select the quote which provides the city with its best value, meets specifications along with all other purchase guidelines as set forth in this section. The user may elect to deny all quotes and re-solicit quotes. 
(4)  [Submit requisition prior to purchase.] The user shall submit a requisition with the quotes attached, per section 2-260, for processing and approval prior to purchase. 
(b)  Equipment or vehicle purchases. Purchase of equipment or vehicles in excess of $25,000.00, but no greater than $65,000.00, shall comply with all applicable provisions of this section in addition to the following: 
(1)  Solicitation. The user, after obtaining authorization from the city manager, shall develop minimum specifications for such purchase and solicit a minimum of three formal written quotes from qualified vendors. User shall document all quotes received including no response from vendor. 
(2)  Public notice. Public advertisement for such solicitation shall not be required. 
(3)  Receipt of quotes. No formal quote under section 2-326(b) shall be eligible for consideration by the city unless it is placed in a sealed envelope or package and received by the city by the date and time specified in the solicitation for formal quotes under this section. All received quotes shall be stamped with the date and time of receipt and secured until the designated opening time. Any quote delivered or received late shall not, under any circumstances, be eligible for consideration and shall be returned unopened to the vendor. 
(4)  Opening of quotes. Quotes shall be opened publicly in the presence of the city manager, or his/her designee, at the time and place designated in the solicitation. The amount of each quote, together with the name of each vendor, shall be recorded. This record and each quote shall be open to public inspection once an award is made by the city. 
(5)  Evaluation of formal quotes. Formal quotes shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the solicitation of the formal quotes for capital equipment and vehicles, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. No criteria may be used in the evaluation that is not specifically set forth in the solicitation of the formal quotes for capital equipment and vehicles. 
(6)  Recommendation. The user shall submit a written recommendation to the city manager for award of the quote to the most qualified, responsive vendor whose quote meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the solicitation. The recommendation shall also contain the budgeted funding source. 
(7)  [Submit requisition prior to purchase.] Upon approval by the city manager, the user shall submit a requisition with the quotes attached, per section 2-260 for processing prior to the purchase. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 17-12, § I, 7-18-17 ) 
Sec. 2-327. - Invitation to bid (ITB). 
Under this method of procuring supplies, services or contracts, the city shall issue an "invitation to bid" establishing the requirements necessary to award a contract. Bidders shall submit bids to perform the project for a specified price. The final award shall be made to the most qualified bidder with the lowest price who meets all of the requirements set forth in the invitation to bid. Under this bid method, price is typically the deciding factor in choosing a contractor, once it has been determined which bidders are "responsive" and "responsible". Purchases utilizing this method shall comply with all applicable provisions of this article in addition to the following: 
(1)  Threshold. The requirements of this purchase method shall apply to all purchases in excess of $25,000.00. 
(2)  Solicitation. The user, after obtaining authorization from the city manager, shall develop minimum specifications for such purchase and prepare an invitation to bid soliciting bids from qualified vendors. The ITB shall include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions necessary for the purchase and shall be in compliance with state law. 
(3)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation to bid shall be given in accordance with section 2-304 of this article. 
(4)  Receipt of bids. No bid shall be eligible for consideration by the city unless it is placed in a sealed envelope or package and received by the city by the date and time specified in the invitation to bid. All received bids shall be stamped with the date and time of receipt and secured until the designated opening time. Any bid delivered or received late shall not, under any circumstances, be eligible for consideration and shall be returned unopened to the bidder. 
(5)  Opening of bids. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of two council members at the time and place designated in the invitation to bid. The amount of each bid, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded. This record and each bid shall be open to public inspection once an award is made by the city. 
(6)  Evaluation of bids. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the ITB, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that is not specifically set forth in the invitation. 
(7)  Recommendation. At the next available city council meeting, the city manager, or his/her designee, shall make a recommendation for award of the bid to the most qualified, responsive vendor whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the ITB. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-328. - Request for proposals (RFP). 
Under this method of procuring services or contracts, the city shall issue a "request for proposal" describing the project and establishing the factors, as well as their relative importance, which will be used to evaluate the proposals. Vendors shall submit proposals to perform such services as described within the RFP. While price shall be a factor in the city's award decision, it may not be the sole determining factor. In many instances, there may not be specific and/or final specifications for the project; therefore, the city is soliciting firms to provide proposals which require creativity, expertise and experience. Purchases of this type shall comply with all applicable provisions of this article in addition to the following procedures: 
(1)  Threshold. The requirements of this purchase method shall apply to purchases in excess of $25,000.00. 
(2)  Solicitation. The user, after obtaining authorization from the city manager, shall develop a request for proposal for such service and solicit proposals from qualified service providers. All requests for proposals shall include detailed information regarding the scope of service, minimum professional qualifications, contractual terms and conditions necessary for the purchase, and any other information as required by law. 
(3)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in accordance with section 2-304 of this article. 
(4)  Receipt of proposals. No proposal shall be eligible for consideration by the city unless it is placed in a sealed envelope or package and received by the date and time as specified in the request for proposals. All received proposals shall be stamped with the date and time of receipt and secured until the designated opening time. A proposal delivered or received late shall not, under any circumstances, be eligible for consideration and shall be returned unopened to the bidder. 
(5)  Opening of proposal. Proposals shall be opened publicly in the presence of two councilmen at the time and place designated in the request for proposals. The dollar amount of each proposal, together with the name of each vendor, shall be recorded; the record and each proposal shall be open to public inspection once an award is made by the city. 
(6)  Evaluation of proposals. Proposals shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the request for proposals, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as project related experience, vendor qualifications, prior business experience in municipal contracting, bonding and insurance capacity, proposed project schedule, and suitability for a particular purpose. No criteria may be used in proposal evaluation that is not specifically set forth in the request for proposal. 
(7)  Recommendation. At the next available city council meeting, the city manager, or his/her designee, shall make a recommendation as to which proposal should be selected based on the requirements and criteria set forth in the RFP. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-329. - Request for qualifications (RFQ). 
This purchase method is typically utilized to obtain the services of a professional firm, where the scope of work is very complex and it is determined that the qualifications of potential service providers is of the highest priority and in the best interests of the city to insure proper execution of the project deliverables. Purchases of this form shall comply with all applicable provisions of this article in addition to the following procedures: 
(1)  Solicitation. The user, after obtaining authorization from the city manager, shall develop a "request for qualifications" for such service and solicit proposals from qualified vendors. All requests for qualifications shall include detailed information regarding the scope of service, desired professional qualifications, preferred delivery method, contractual terms and conditions necessary for the purchase, and any other information required by law. 
(2)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for qualifications shall be given in accordance with section 2-304 of this article. 
(3)  Receipt of qualifications. No proposal shall be eligible for consideration by the city unless it is placed in a sealed envelope or package and received by the date and time as specified in the request for qualifications. All received qualifications shall be stamped with the date and time of receipt and secured until the designated opening time. A proposal delivered or received late shall not, under any circumstances, be eligible for consideration. Such proposal shall be returned unopened to the bidder. 
(4)  Opening of qualifications. Qualifications shall be opened publicly in the presence of the user and city manager at the time and place designated in the RFQ. Only the name of each vendor shall be recorded; the qualification statement shall be open to public inspection once an award is made by the city. 
(5)  Evaluation of qualifications. Qualifications shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the RFQ, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as project related experience, vendor qualifications, prior business experience in municipal contracting, bonding and insurance capacity, project scheduling, delivery methods, and suitability for a particular purpose. No criteria may be used in proposal evaluation that is not specifically set forth in the request for proposal. 
(6)  Selection method. The initial request for qualifications shall establish the selection method. Selection methods may include the following: 
a.  Pre-qualification method. This method shall allow the city to select only those vendors who are qualified per the specifications listed in the RFQ to submit sealed bids, which shall be opened in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable state law. 
b.  Negotiated price method. This method shall allow the city to negotiate a price with the vendor who is deemed to have the qualifications which best comply with the needs of the city and the specifications as established in the request for qualifications. If an agreement cannot be reached with the initial vendor, the city may select to negotiate with next highest qualified vendor; or the city may elect to re-advertise the request for qualifications. Subsequent ratification of the selected vendor must be obtained at the earliest possible city council meeting for those agreements exceeding $25,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-330. - Grants and donations. 
Periodically, the city may be awarded or provided private or public grants and donations from sources such as state and federal government and private corporations which are typically designated for specific purposes. These types of funds may be more restrictive and may dictate the procurement process the city is to follow. If there are no such restrictions on the funds, the user shall follow the purchasing guidelines set forth in this article when purchasing goods and services utilizing grants or donated funds. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Secs. 2-331—2-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONTRACTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2-336. - Written contracts required. 
All service and construction projects in which the total cost will exceed $25,000.00 shall require the selected vendor to enter into a written contract with the city. The form of the contract shall be approved by the city attorney. The mayor is required to execute all such written contracts. For all other supplies and services, a city issued purchase order shall constitute a legal, binding agreement between the city and the vendor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from requiring written contracts for any acquisition of supplies or services when it is deemed to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-337. - Bid bonds. 
Bids submitted to the city shall include a bid bond, or bid security, as set forth below: 
(1)  Requirement for bid bonds. Bid bonds shall be required for all bids for public works or construction contracts when the price is estimated to exceed $50,000.00 and for any other bid, or bid amount, in which a bid bond is deemed to be necessary in order to protect the best interests of the city. Bid bonds shall be of the forfeiture type. All sureties must be licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and listed in the Department of the Treasury's publication of companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable reinsuring companies. In lieu of the bid bond described above, vendors may submit a cashier's check payable to the city. To the extent permitted by Georgia law, a guaranteed letter of credit will act as a bid bond, provided that the form of such letter of credit and the lending institution has been approved by the city. 
(2)  Amount of bid bond. Bid bonds shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid. 
(3)  Withdrawal of bids. If a vendor is permitted to withdraw its bid before award, as provided in this article, no action shall be had against the bidder or the bid security. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-338. - Performance and payment bonds. 
Prior to execution of a contract for public works or construction projects, performance and payment bonds shall be delivered to the city as set forth below: 
(1)  When required. Performance and payment bonds shall be required for all public works and construction projects when the contract award exceeds $50,000.00. Performance bonds shall be conditioned upon the bidder's faithful performance of the terms of the bid or proposal and the contract executed in connection therewith. Payment bonds shall be executed for the benefit of all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery and equipment in the prosecution of the work provided for in the contract. All sureties must be licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and listed in the Department of the Treasury's publication of companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable reinsuring companies, Circular 570. 
(2)  Amount of performance and payment bonds. Both performance and payment bonds shall be in an amount equal to at least 100 percent of the total contract price. 
(3)  Authority to require additional bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds, or in circumstances other than specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-339. - Insurance requirements. 
The city manager, upon review by the city attorney, shall have the authority to determine what types and amounts of insurance coverage are reasonably necessary for the protection of the city's interest for all acquisitions covered by this article. All sureties must be licensed to do business in the State of Georgia. Whenever possible, specific insurance requirements shall be stated within the invitation to bid or request for proposal; however, failure to do so shall not eliminate the authority of the city to require insurance coverage from the successful bidder prior to the commencement of work. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-340. - Immigration compliance. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A § 13-10-91, any vendor entering into a written contract with the city shall complete an affidavit affirming their compliance with the Georgia Security and Immigration Compliance Act of 2006. Such Act requires that all contractors and subcontractors comply with Rule 300-10-01-.02 as a condition of awarding the contract. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-341. - Multi-year contracts. 
To the extent authorized by law, a contract for supplies or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the city, provided that the term of the contract and renewal provisions are included in the original solicitation process. Adequate funds must be available to fulfill the first fiscal year's obligation at the time of contract execution. Subsequent year appropriations are subject to authorization by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-342. - Change orders. 
Except as herein provided, any change order or other contract modification shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  Amounts specified. The city manager shall have the authority to approve all change orders to up to 20 percent of original contract price, provided the total change order does not exceed $25,000.00. All other change orders shall be approved by the city council. 
(2)  Field required change orders. Where time is of the essence or emergency circumstances exist which do not allow delay of a project, the user shall request approval from the city manager before proceeding to authorize such work. Subsequent ratification by the city council must be obtained by the user at the earliest possible meeting if the change order exceeds 20 percent of the original contract price, or more than $25,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 2-343. - Intergovernmental contracts. 
Not withstanding any other provision of this article, the city may participate in a cooperative agreement for the acquisition of real property, personal property, commodities, supplies, equipment or services with any other governmental entity or agency, whether federal, state or local or purchasing cooperative. Where cost of such commodities or service has been approved in the current year budget, the city manager shall have the authority to enter into such intergovernmental contracts when deemed in the best interests of the city. Documentation to substantiate this decision shall be maintained in the contract file. 
(Ord. No. 12-7, § I, 6-12-12) 
Secs. 2-344—2-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONNEL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-461. - Personnel policies. 
(a)  A document outlining the personnel policies of the city shall be prepared by the city manager and adopted by resolution of the council. 
(b)  In addition to this policy document, the city manager shall develop and maintain an administrative procedures manual which describes how personnel policies shall be implemented. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, § 17-6, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-462. - Responsibility of city council. 
The city council shall make all appointments to the municipal service coming within its statutory jurisdiction. The city council shall also authorize and approve by ordinance the pay plan for municipal service. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, § 17-1, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-463. - Designation and duties of director of personnel. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designated representative, shall serve as the director of personnel. He shall be responsible for the administration of the personnel program. The city manager shall appoint, suspend, and remove all city officers and employees except those elected by the citizens or those whose appointment is otherwise provided for by law. The city manager shall make appointments, dismissals, and suspensions in accordance with the city charter, the city Code and other policies adopted by council. 
(b)  The city manager shall: 
(1)  Make all appointments to the classified service and those temporary and parttime positions authorized by city council. 
(2)  Maintain such personnel records necessary to demonstrate compliance with federal, state and local regulations and to meet the needs of personnel administration under this article. 
(3)  Recommend changes in personnel policy to the city council. 
(4)  Recommend revisions to the position classification plan to the city council. 
(5)  Recommend revisions to the pay plan to the city council. 
(6)  Develop and administer recruiting programs to assure an adequate supply of competent applicants to meet the city's needs. 
(7)  Develop and coordinate training and educational programs for city employees to develop skills and enhance job performance. 
(8)  Maintain a personnel policy and procedures manual specifically stating the processes for administration of personnel policies. 
(9)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city council not inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, § 17-2, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-464. - Composition of classified service. 
The classified service shall comprise all positions in the municipal service, now existing or hereafter created, which fall under the appointive authority of the city manager. The following are not included in the classified service: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  The assistant city manager, however, this position is appointed by the city manager; 
(3)  The city attorney; 
(4)  The municipal judge; 
(5)  The associate judge; and 
(6)  Employees who are not employed on a fulltime, permanent basis. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, § 17-3, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-465. - Merit principle. 
All appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, § 17-4, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-466. - Equal employment opportunity. 
It is the policy of the city to foster, maintain and promote equal employment opportunity. The city shall select employees on the basis of applicant's qualifications without regard to age, sex, race, color, creed, religion, political affiliation, or national origin, except where specific age, sex, or physical requirements constitute a bona fide occupational qualification necessary for job performance. Applicants with physical handicaps shall be given equal consideration for positions in which their physical handicaps do not represent an unreasonable barrier to satisfy performance of duties. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, § 17-5, 12-9-91) 
Secs. 2-467—2-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BONDS OF CITY OFFICERS 

Sec. 2-481. - Surety. 
All officers of the city who are required to give bond shall make the same in some solvent surety company, and no bond of any officer as aforesaid shall be accepted with only personal sureties thereon. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-482. - Attestation and approval. 
Such official bonds may be attested by any officer of the city council, by the city clerk, or by any officer of this state authorized to attest deeds, and they shall be approved by such board. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-483. - Conditions; joint and several liability. 
The condition of such official bonds shall be for the faithful performance of the duties of the office, and such other conditions as may be specifically prescribed. Liability thereon shall be joint and several. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-484. - To whom payable. 
The bonds of all officers of the city, when no other provision is made, shall be payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-485. - Obligations. 
The obligation of official bonds furnished as provided in section 2-484 shall be obligatory on the principal and sureties thereon: 
(1)  For any breach of the condition during the time the officer continues in office or discharges any of the duties thereof. 
(2)  For the faithful discharge of any duties which may be required of such officers by any law or ordinance passed subsequently to the execution of such bond, although no such conditions are expressed therein. 
(3)  For the use and benefit of every person who is injured, as well as by wrongful act committed under color of his office, as by his failure to perform, or by the improper or neglectful performance of those duties imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-486. - Not discharged by single recovery. 
The official bonds furnished as provided in section 2-485 shall not be discharged by a single recovery, but proceedings may be had from time to time until the whole penalty is exhausted against the officer and his sureties, or either. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-487. - Validity of nonconforming bond. 
When an officer acts under a bond which is not in the penalty payable and conditioned, or approved and filed, as required by law, such bond shall stand the same as if it were made in conformity to law. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-488. - Relief of surety. 
On good cause shown and on notice to the principal, the city council may, in its discretion, relieve the sureties on any official bond furnished as provided in section 2-484, and cause such officer to give other security; and any such officer failing to give such other security shall be dismissed from his office. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-489. - Blanket bond coverage to be furnished. 
Blanket bond coverage shall be furnished to all city employees. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. III, 12-9-91) 
Secs. 2-490—2-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY RETIREMENT SYSTEM[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— City retirement plan, § 7.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-501. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend to employees and officials not excluded by law or by this article the benefits of the system of old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, the state enabling act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. IV, 12-9-91) 
State Law reference— General authority to establish retirement system and insurance plans, § 69-310(b), Ga. Code Ann.; social security for employees of state and its political subdivisions, Ch. 99-21, Ga. Code Ann. 
Sec. 2-502. - Execution of agreements by mayor. 
The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, and officials as provided for in section 2-501 to include any employees that are in positions covered by the city retirement plan, in the manner by such law provided. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. IV, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-503. - Withholding from salaries and wages. 
Withholding from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 2-501 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. IV, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-504. - Appropriations from general funds. 
There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 2-502. Such funds shall be paid over to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with the regulations established by such agency. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. IV, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-505. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. IV, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-506. - Exclusions from article. 
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. IV, 12-9-91) 
Sec. 2-507. - Pledge of state grant funds in lieu of escrow deposits. 
(a)  Execution of agreement. The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement amending the original plan and agreement with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit A, providing for the release of social security escrow deposits. 
(b)  Regulations regarding collections, reports and payments. The city agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, hereinafter called the state agency, in regard to collections from city employees and in making reports and payments to the state agency. 
(c)  Pledge of funds by city. The city hereby pledges an amount which it would receive in state grant funds as security for assurance that it will make collections from its employees, submit required reports, and remit payments to the state agency as agreed to in its plan of coverage of employees for social security benefits. the city further agrees that if the amount of state grant funds which it is entitled to receive in a calendar year is less than its annual payment to the state agency, as may be determined by the state agency, then the city shall deposit in escrow, when so notified in writing by the state agency and in accordance with its rules and regulations, an amount which, when added to the city's state grant funds, would total an amount sufficient to meet its obligations of reporting and remitting collections to the state agency. 
(Ord. No. 14-91, Art. IV, 12-9-91) 
Editor's note— The exhibit referred to in subsection (a) above is not included herein, but is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-508—2-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING 

Sec. 2-521. - Drug and alcohol use prohibited. 
Substance and alcohol abuse by city employees during assigned working hours, in government buildings or on government grounds, or otherwise while on city business is prohibited. This shall include the use of illegal substances, the abuse of prescription medications, and the use or abuse of alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-42), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-522. - Preemployment testing. 
All job applicants being considered for employment shall be required to pass a drug and alcohol screening test prior to being hired. All job applicants shall be informed in advance that such testing shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-43), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-523. - Random and periodic drug testing. 
(a)  Employees in safety sensitive positions or employees whose primary job duties require maintenance or operation of a motor vehicle or motorized equipment shall be required to submit to a drug and alcohol screening test at random or on a periodic basis from time to time as determined by the department head and the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  The following positions are considered to be safety sensitive positions: 
(1)  City police department: 
a.  All sworn personnel. 
b.  School crossing guards. 
(2)  City fire department: 
All certified employees. 
(c)  Employees in safety sensitive positions or whose primary job duties require operation of motor vehicles may expect to be tested on an annual basis. 
(d)  The city manager, with the approval of the mayor and council, may designate additional positions which are deemed to be safety sensitive and subject to testing on a random or periodic basis. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-44), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-524. - Drug and/or alcohol screening test based on reasonable suspicion. 
(a)  Reasonable suspicion means a reasonable belief based on specific objective facts and inferences drawn from those facts. Situations that may give rise to a conclusion that an employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  An employee is involved in a physical or verbal alteration on the job. 
(2)  An employee has an excessive number of incidents or accidents on the job. 
(3)  An employee exhibits unusual behavior such as slurred speech or unsteady walking or movement on the job. 
(4)  An employee has an odor of alcohol on their person on the job. 
(5)  An employee is in possession of alcohol or drugs on the job. 
(b)  An employee shall be required to submit to drug and/or alcohol testing when there is reasonable suspicion to believe that such employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol during assigned working hours or while otherwise on city duty or in control of city property. 
(c)  Supervisors who suspect an employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol shall immediately report the incident to their immediate supervisor or department head. 
(d)  The determination of whether reasonable suspicion exists shall be made by the department head or by the highest ranking supervisory staff on-duty at the time. The facts underlying the determination of reasonable suspicion shall be disclosed to the employee at the time the demand to submit to testing is made. 
(e)  Following the determination that reasonable suspicion exists, the employee shall be transported to and from the testing site by the employee's supervisor or a designee. Following the testing procedure, the person transporting the employee shall make appropriate arrangements to transport the employee home. 
(f)  Supervisors shall be required to document in writing, within the next working day, the specific facts, symptoms or observations that formed the basis for their determination that reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing of an employee. All documents created in connection with the determination of reasonable suspicion shall be forwarded to the city manager. 
(g)  The city shall develop a program of training to assist supervisory personnel in identifying drug and alcohol use among employees. Such training shall be directed toward helping supervisors to recognize the conduct and behavior giving rise to a reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-45), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-525. - Testing after accidents or injury. 
All employees involved in a work-related incident causing personal injury or property damage may be tested promptly for drug and/or alcohol use in accordance with department policies. Any employee involved in a motor vehicle accident while driving a city vehicle on a public roadway and who is determined to have been at fault in the accident by the investigating police officer shall be tested for drugs and alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-46), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-526. - Drugs to be tested for. 
The selection of drugs to be tested for includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Marijuana. 
(2)  Sedatives. 
(3)  Methaqualone. 
(4)  Opiates/narcotics. 
(5)  Stimulants. 
(6)  Amphetamines. 
(7)  Benzadiazipines. 
(8)  Hallucinogens. 
(9)  Alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-47), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-527. - Prescription drug use. 
(a)  Employees using prescription medication while on the job shall do so in strict accordance with medical directions. It is the employee's responsibility to notify the prescribing physician of the duties required by the employee's position and to ensure that the physician approves the use of the prescription medication while the employee is performing their duties. 
(b)  The abuse and/or inappropriate use of legally prescribed drugs shall be prohibited. Job performance or attendance deficiencies resulting from abuse and/or inappropriate use shall be cause for a disciplinary action. If an employee's behavior or job performance gives rise to a reasonable suspicion that the employee is abusing or inappropriately using prescription medication, the employee may be required to submit to drug testing and to take leave until such time as the employee is cleared to return to work by the employee's physician, the medical review officer, and the personnel director. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-48), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-528. - List of medications. 
Employees and job applicants shall at the time of testing provide a list of those prescriptions and over-the-counter medications that he has recently used. The list of medications shall be kept confidential until there has been a test result. The list of medications shall be disclosed only to the medical review officials who will determine whether the positive result was due to the lawful use of any of the listed medications. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-49), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-529. - Consent. 
Before a drug and alcohol test is administered, employees and job applicants will be asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting release of test results to the employer and the medical officer. The consent form shall provide a space for employees and job applicants to acknowledge that they have been notified of the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-50), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-530. - Refusal to consent. 
(a)  Job applicants. Any applicant for a job with the city who refuses to consent to a drug and alcohol test shall be denied employment. 
(b)  Employees. Any employee who refuses to sign the consent form or to submit to a drug and alcohol test as required in this division shall be subject to termination. Employees who fail to appear at the designated collection site to take the test when so directed shall be subject to termination. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-51), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-531. - Testing laboratory guidelines. 
(a)  All testing procedures shall be administered and accounted for by an approved laboratory and/or medical facility that is operating in compliance with the National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA) guidelines. These procedures and guidelines shall be available for inspection by contacting the city manager's office. 
(b)  Urine samples shall be provided in a private restroom stall or similar enclosure so that employees and applicants may not be viewed while providing the sample. Outer garments, bags, briefcases, purses, or other containers will not be permitted into the test area. The water in the commode shall be colored with dye to protect against dilution of test samples. 
(c)  Whenever an initial test for drugs and alcohol is found to be positive, the laboratory will then carry out additional tests pursuant to laboratory testing guidelines to confirm that the initial positive indication was correct. If the second procedure also indicates the presence of drugs or alcohol, the test result is considered a confirmed positive result. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-52), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-532. - Confidentiality of test results. 
All information from an employee's or job applicant's drug and alcohol test shall be confidential and only available to the department head, city manager and those with a need to know. Disclosure of test results to any other person, agency, or organization shall be prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee or job applicant. The results of a positive drug or alcohol test shall not be released until the results are confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-53), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-533. - Disciplinary and termination policy. 
(a)  First positive test. Except as otherwise stated in this section, on the first instance where an employee has a confirmed positive test for drugs and/or alcohol, the employee shall be suspended without pay and must participate in a drug or alcohol rehabilitation program. If the incident or occurrence which resulted in the employee's being tested involved violation of rules or policies other than the drug and alcohol ordinance, the employee may be subjected to disciplinary action, including termination, as deemed appropriate for the conduct. 
(1)  Employees who test positive will be removed from their job and may not return to work until they pass a drug and/or alcohol test, are recommended for a return to duty by the medical reviewing officer, and consent to unannounced drug and/or alcohol testing for a period of one year. 
(2)  Following a first confirmed positive drug test where an employee is referred for mandatory rehabilitation, the employee shall be subject to random testing for a period of one year. 
(3)  If an employee is unable to return to work because of treatment, and has exhausted all his leave time—sick, vacation, compensatory—the existing personnel leave system policy will apply. 
(b)  Second positive test. An employee who tests positive for a second time will be suspended without pay pending an immediate termination. 
(c)  Immediate termination. The following reasons shall be grounds to recommend immediate termination of an employee: 
(1)  Distributing controlled substances while on the job. 
(2)  Operating a city vehicle or motorized equipment while illegally under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol. 
(3)  Felony conviction for violation of drug laws. 
(4)  Testing positive for drugs or alcohol while on probation under the provisions of this division. 
(d)  Additional factors to be considered. Additional factors may be reviewed to determine appropriate disciplinary action for violations of this division. The factors include: 
(1)  Public safety personnel shall be held to a higher standard. 
(2)  Specific positions of leadership within the city shall be held to a higher standard: manager, assistant manager and department heads. 
(3)  Prior violation of drug or alcohol laws and regulations. 
(4)  Any other occurrence or circumstance which indicates need to impose enhanced disciplinary sanctions. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-54), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-534. - Voluntary employee assistance program. 
Voluntary participation in an employee assistance program prior to an employee being requested to submit to a test is encouraged and such participation shall be kept confidential. No disciplinary action shall be implemented because an employee volunteers to participate in such a program. Employees who, prior to being requested to take a drug or alcohol test, voluntarily identify themselves as a drug user or alcohol abuser and obtain counseling and rehabilitation through the city's employee assistance program shall not be disciplined for their drug use and/or alcohol abuse if they thereafter refrain from violating the prohibitions of this division. Except as described above, all employees can be disciplined for violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-55), 8-24-92) 
Sec. 2-535. - Mandatory employee assistance program referral. 
As provided in section 2-533, upon the first positive test or determination that an employee has been under the influence of drugs or alcohol, the city shall refer the employee to an employee assistance program (EAP) for assessment, counseling and rehabilitation. Referral to and compliance with the EAP is mandatory. Any employee who has been referred as a mandatory participant and who refuses counseling or rehabilitation shall be subject to suspension pending immediate termination. 
(Ord. No. 17-92, § 1(17-56), 8-24-92) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-8, § I, adopted April 9, 1996, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-7, 3-31—3-40, and 3-56—3-66, and adding a new Ch. 3 as herein set out. Former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1972, §§ 3-2—3-26; Ord. No. 7-93, adopted February 22, 1993; Ord. No. 8-93, adopted February 22, 1993; Ord. No. 19-94, adopted December 27, 1994; Ord. No. 95-5, adopted March 15, 1995; Ord. No. 95-7, adopted March 15, 1995. 
Charter reference— Licenses, permits and fees, § 6.4. 
Cross reference— Businesses, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under twenty-one years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Purpose and authority to regulate alcoholic beverages in city. 
(a)  This chapter has been enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the city and in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages, to protect and preserve schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhood and property values, and to protect against the evils of concentration of ownership or control of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages or to prevent undesirable persons from controlling the retail alcoholic beverage industry. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are ordained under and by virtue of the authority granted by the laws of the State of Georgia, O.C.G.A. Chapter 3; Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages Generally. To adopt all reasonable rules and regulations as may fall within the police powers of the municipality to regulate any such business; O.C.G.A. section 3-4-90, authorizing each municipality to issue licenses, through ordinance, to sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink, the sales to be for consumption only on the premises; O.C.G.A. section 3-4-110, granting such municipality the full power to adopt all reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of any such licensee including, but not limited to, the regulation of hours of business, types of employees, and other matters which may fall within the police powers of such municipality; O.C.G.A. section 3-5-40 and 3-5-42, authorizing municipal licenses for the business of manufacturing, distributing and selling malt beverages at wholesale and retail; and O.C.G.A. section 3-6-40, authorizing municipal licenses for the manufacturing, distributing and selling wine at wholesale and retail. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and nudity on the premises are ordained by virtue of the authority granted by the constitution and laws of the United States and State of Georgia, as most recently delineated by the Supreme Court of Georgia in its decisions of Gravely vs. Bacon and S.J.T., Inc. vs. Richmond County in order to avoid the effects of criminal interests and negative effects on the community by the decreased safety and welfare of the city's citizens, the hindering of commercial growth in the city, and the deterioration of the city's economic base. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Alcoholic: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage: All alcoholic, distilled spirits, beer, spirituous liquors, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Brewpub: A restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form except that up to 5,000 barrels annually may be sold to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36(2)(c). 
Brown bagging: The act of patrons entering any restaurant, private club, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business and bringing in and consuming the patrons' own alcoholic beverage. 
Brown bag establishment: Any restaurant, private club or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
Caterer means any person who prepares food and furnishes beverages, but not alcoholic beverages, for consumption off the premises of a food service facility or restaurant for a special event. 
Close corporation: A domestic corporation which does not: 
(1)  Have more than five stockholders; 
(2)  Have a corporation as a shareholder; or 
(3)  Have more than one class of stock. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquors: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines, whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila and all other alcoholic beverages of a similar nature and with similar alcoholic content. 
Family: Any person related to the holder of a license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to civil law. 
Fortified wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Golf club means a corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city prior to submitting an application for a license hereunder, having an 18 hole golf course of regulation size, a restaurant used exclusively for the purpose of preparing and serving meals with a seating capacity of at least 60 patrons, a golf club membership and has at least 100 paid-up members who have paid a membership fee for family or individual membership, and a full-time management staff for the social activities of the club, including the management of the premises where food and drink are sold. Food shall be served at least seven days a week, with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacation and periods of renovation. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. 
Growler: A bottle, container or vessel, with a capacity of at least 12 ounces and not exceeding 64 ounces that is designed for and especially intended to be filled with beer from a keg by a licensee or employee of a licensee in compliance with the terms and conditions set forth in section 3-67 of this chapter. 
Hotel: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential. To meet the definition of "hotel" under this chapter the facility must have 50 or more rooms used for sleeping accommodations of such guests and one or more public dining rooms, with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 25 persons, where meals are regularly served to such guests. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. All sleeping accommodations and dining rooms must be conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a restaurant in their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be eligible for a license under the "hotel" classification. At least 55 percent of the receipts of the dining room or rooms shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring in the dining room, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called in the dining room from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 3-84. Receipts for room rentals shall not be included in the calculations. 
Individual: A natural person not a corporation or a partnership. 
Interest in license: An individual is deemed to have an interest in a license if: 
(1)  He is the owner of the license. 
(2)  He is the co-owner of the license. 
(3)  He is a partner in any partnership that owns an interest in a license. 
(4)  He is a stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in any corporation and/or is a stockholder in any corporation which has fewer than 25 stockholders which owns an interest in a license. 
(5)  He shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund having any interest in a license to sell at retail. 
Licensee: The licensee for all businesses shall be: 
(1)  The licensee shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the licensee shall be that individual. 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the licensee shall be an individual who is a partner; or, if all partners are non-individuals, then the licensee shall be an individual who is an officer of any corporation which is a partner, or, an individual who is an officer, manager or agent of any unincorporated entity which is a partner. 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation, the licensee shall be an officer of the corporation. 
(5)  If the licensee is a resident of Coweta County and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis, the licensee may also be the license representative of the business. If not, a license representative shall be named in accordance with this chapter. 
License representative: If a license representative is required, the license representative shall be a resident of Coweta County and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis. 
Lounge/bar: A separate room connected with, a part of, and adjacent to, a restaurant or a room located in hotels as defined herein, and which serves no food. Lounges/bars shall not be permitted to sell or serve alcoholic beverages. 
Malt beverage: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including, but not limited to, ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, malt liquor, small beer and strong beer. 
Meal, regular meal: A meal which is prepared on the premises according to the order of the patron or customer given to a waiter or waitress at the table, booth or counter area where the customer is seated and served by the-waiter or waitress at said table, booth or counter area. The term meal or regular meal does not include food served in a specialty shop; nor food served over the counter; nor "short order meals" such as sandwiches, hot dogs or hamburgers; nor pre-packaged, individual meals. 
Minor: Any person under the age of 21 years. 
Package: A bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation, association, partnership, or other legal entity. 
Permitted location means a building, premises or location for which a permit is required pursuant to this chapter and shall include a premises and a licensed premises as defined herein. 
Premises/outlet: A definite enclosed area or other outside area with controlled ingress and egress wherein spirituous liquors, alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine be sold and consumed, or sold therein by the package to be consumed elsewhere. 
Private club: A corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 50 members regularly paying dues, for at least six years prior to application for license, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purpose, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable sanitary kitchen and dining room seating of at least 25 persons and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of distilled spirits, wines, champagnes or malt beverages beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at an annual meeting, or by its governing body, out of the general revenue of the club. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. For the purpose of this subsection, tips which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits hereunder. In addition, at least 55 percent of the receipts from the operation of the kitchen and dining room and serving of meals shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 3-84. A private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall not be licensed under this chapter, nor permitted to sell or serve such beverages at all. All distance requirements as set forth in this chapter shall apply. 
Private residence: A house, dwelling or structure wherein not less than one, nor more than two families reside and shall not include a mobile home court, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, nor a boarding or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers. Any building occupied as a residence located within an area zoned for business shall not be construed as a private residence. 
Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, but not including short order or quick or fast food shops, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room seating of at least 25 persons, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. Meals shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacations and periods of renovation, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wines to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. As used in this section, "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. As used in this section, "principal business" shall mean that at least 55 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 3-84. 
Retail consumption dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail. 
Retail package dealer: Any person who sell malt beverages or wines in unbroken packages for consumption off the premises at retail. Such sales must be in connection with sales of other products. 
Sales by the drink: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Special event or private function shall mean any organized activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival, party, reception, celebration or assembly which occurs of takes place on private or public property. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail package dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, grapes, or other natural products by natural fermentation. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, sake, natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 1, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 03-39, § VIII, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 11-8, § I, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 13-15, § I, 7-23-13; Ord. No. 13-18, § 1, 8-13-13) 
Sec. 3-3. - Sale of packaged distilled spirits prohibited. 
The wholesale and retail package sale of distilled spirits, except as provided herein, is hereby prohibited and made unlawful within the limits of this city. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-4. - Sale, possession, etc., of alcoholic beverages on which state tax or license fee not paid prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city, possess, conceal, store or convey any wine, malt beverage, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverages on which any tax or license fee imposed by the laws of the state or this chapter have not been paid, and any such beverages as above described that are found without a state tax stamp shall be seized as contraband and immediately delivered to the state revenue commissioner as provided by law. Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-5. - Purchase, possession, etc., by underage persons. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity to use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (a)(1), (2) and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  In the home with parental consent provided that such person is over 18 years of age. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. sections 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(d)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 3-3-24, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
(3)  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(e)  Notwithstanding, no person shall allow or require a person under 18 years of age nor shall a person under 18 years of age take an order for alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption or accept alcoholic beverages for check-out for off-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-6. - Consumption prohibited; open containers. 
(a)  As used in this section, "open container" means any container, containing alcoholic beverages, which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle in this city or while occupying a motor vehicle as a passenger. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger. This provision shall not apply if the alcoholic beverage is located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle. This provision is intended to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages by the operator and passengers in motor vehicles. 
(c)  No person shall possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while walking, standing or otherwise occupying any public street, road, or highway, sidewalk adjacent thereto, public park, or public parking lot. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in or on other publicly-owned properties of the city is prohibited except as to such properties which have a fully operational commercial kitchen located on the premises. 
(d)  Except for those package retailers as provided in section 3-67, no person shall possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage on the premises of any retail package licensee, including parking lots located adjacent thereto. 
(e)  No person shall enter or leave the premises of an establishment licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises with an open container of any alcoholic beverage except that any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 08-19, §§ IX, XI, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 13-18, § 2, 8-13-13) 
Sec. 3-7. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, when such condition of intoxication is made manifest by boisterousness, or by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-8. - Quantity possesses restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found in possession or control of more than one standard case of 1.75 liter, liter or 750 milliliter size containers of distilled spirits but not more than eight individual containers of distilled spirits of a size of 200 milliliters or four individual containers of distilled spirits of a size of 500 milliliters. Any distilled spirits found in the possession of any person shall have been purchased by the person for use and consumption from a lawful and authorized retailer and property stamped. This prohibition shall not apply to possession of distilled spirits in a properly licensed premise for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises only by the licensee, its representative or employees or by a properly licensed wholesaler or its employees making deliveries to a properly licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-9. - Sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine by the drink for consumption only on the premises; combining retail package and retail consumption licenses prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to sell, distribute, or give away distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine by the drink for consumption only on the premises except as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  No business licensed for the retail package sale of alcoholic beverages shall hold a license for, or allow the retail consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(c)  No retail package license shall be issued for, or in connection with any restaurant, cafe, eating place or location permitted as a permitted location at which special events or private functions are held. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 03-39, § IX, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 3-10. - Establishments to be kept in orderly manner. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all business establishments serving food, licensed to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only pursuant to this chapter, licensee, license representative or employee of such establishment. to keep the licensed premises clear at all times of all persons who are rowdy and noisy, who are intoxicated, or who are becoming intoxicated, who fail to keep the peace, or who do anything tending to breach peace and cause a public disturbance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for all business establishments serving food, licensed to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only pursuant to this chapter, licensee, license representative or employee of such establishment to permit any activity in the licensed premises, including musical or other entertainment, whether live, recorded, mechanical or digital, that creates a noise which is audible more than 100 feet from the licensed premises after 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 08-19, § VII, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 3-11. - Times for sales. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any beer, malt beverage or wine package dealer in the city to sell, dispense or deliver any beer, malt beverages or wine except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday morning, and except between the hours of 7:00 a.m., Saturday morning through 12:00 midnight Saturday night and except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. Sunday afternoon and 11:30 p.m. Sunday night provided, no beer, malt beverages or wine shall be sold, dispensed, or delivered by a beer, malt beverage or wine package dealer from 12:00 midnight Saturday night through 12:30 p.m. Sunday afternoon and from 11:30 p.m. Sunday night through 7:00 a.m., Monday morning. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any business establishments serving food, licensed to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only pursuant to this chapter to sell, dispense or deliver alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. Saturday morning through 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning, and except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. Sunday afternoon and 2:00 a.m. Monday morning. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the prohibition set forth in paragraph (b) hereinabove, business establishments serving food, licensed to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption only on the premises may permit alcoholic beverages purchased prior to 2:00 a.m. an additional 30 minutes to be consumed on the premises. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages on election days is permitted within the city; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or if the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established during the hours the polls are open. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 08-19, § III, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 11-11, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Sec. 3-12. - Signs to be posted. 
(a)  Each outlet for the retail sale of packaged malt beverages and/or wines shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet a sign with letters at least two inches high reading: "Sale of malt beverages or wine to persons under 21 years of age is prohibited." 
(b)  Each outlet for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet, a sign with letters at least two inches high reading: "Sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits to persons under 21 years of age is prohibited." 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-13. - Possession to give away in order to induce trade. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on hand for the purpose of giving the same away to induce trade, any fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverages, wine or distilled spirits that contain more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-14. - Deliveries prohibited off premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler or distributor to make deliveries of alcoholic beverages except to a location licensed for the retail sale of such beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any retail package dealer or person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only to make deliveries of any malt beverages and/or wine or distilled spirits to any location off the licensed premises. 
(c)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (b) shall not apply to hotel in-room service which shall be regulated as set forth in section 3-85. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-15. - Sales on licensed premises. 
Only those individuals who are agents, clerks, or employees of the licensee shall handle, sell or serve alcoholic beverages on a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-16. - Sale to intoxicated person forbidden. 
Alcoholic beverage licensees and their agents, clerks and employees are prohibited from selling, bartering, exchanging, giving, providing, or furnishing any alcoholic beverage to any person who is in a noticeable state of intoxication. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-17. - Alcoholic beverage sales for cash only. 
All sales of alcoholic beverages shall be for cash upon sale. Sales on credit are specifically prohibited except that the use of a credit card for the purchase of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine shall not be prohibited provided such retail credit card represents an unqualified obligation to pay without recourse on the part of the person, institution or agency issuing such card. The running of a "tab" at a licensed consumption premises shall not be prohibited provided the consumer pays all charges prior to departing the premises. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-18. - Persons prohibited from interest in license. 
No elected or appointed official or employee of the city may hold an interest in a license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-19. - Sale of alcoholic beverage without city license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, or possess, for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage where such person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale such alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-20. - Permitted location for special events at which alcoholic beverages are served. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, dispensed, distributed, poured or served at any location, premises, or building in the city except as set out in this chapter unless otherwise provided for under this chapter; 
(b)  The owner or lessee of a location at which alcoholic beverages are to be furnished and served at a private function or special event by a person at a location not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter shall first obtain a qualifying location permit designating such location as a "permitted location." Such qualifying location permit shall be good for the calendar year in which it is issued and may be renewed annually as set forth in this chapter. Thereafter, the person organizing the private function or special event to be held at a permitted location must apply for and obtain a "special event permit" as set forth in section 3-21 of this chapter. The cost of such permits shall be as set forth in section 3-31 of this chapter. The requirements of sections 3-32 and 3-33 herein shall be met by an applicant for a permitted location license. 
(c)  To qualify as a "permitted location," the location, premises or building shall not be located nearer to an alcoholic treatment center and therefore be considered to be a "prohibited location" as set out in section 3-39 herein, or shall not fail to meet all requirements of the building inspector, the fire marshal, the traffic engineer, and the planning and zoning coordinator for an on-premises pouring outlet as required by section 3-37(a) herein, and shall possess a permit as a "permitted location" pursuant to this chapter. The applicant for a qualifying location permit shall submit a plat of survey prepared by a state registered land surveyor showing the distances set forth in this chapter with the application for the qualifying location permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish and serve alcoholic beverages at a private function or special event at a permitted location unless food is also served at the private function or special event. 
(e)  Alcoholic beverages furnished and served at a private function or special event may be consumed only on the premises; and may not be removed from the premises in an open container. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be sold at a private function or special event i.e. "no cash bar" sales will be permitted unless the permitted location also holds an on premises consumption license for alcoholic beverages. 
(g)  Locations, premises or buildings for which an on-premises consumption license has been issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a "permitted location" under this section without further application; however, alcoholic beverages may not be sold or dispensed from the area or premises licensed for the sale and dispensing of alcoholic beverages on Sundays in violation of this chapter; provided, however, that if an on premises consumption licensee provides a separate room, not accessible to the regular public or customers of the licensed establishment, where the alcohol is purchased, furnished and served not by the on premises consumption licensee but by the person holding the private function or special event may qualify as a permitted location for the serving of alcoholic beverages in accordance with this section. 
(h)  The "permitted location" licensee shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter which occurs at the "permitted location" whether by the licensee's employees or agents, a caterer or their employees or agents, or a lessee or invitee of the licensee, their lessee or invitees or any of their employees or agents. 
(i)  The person holding the private function or special event, and not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter must purchase and furnish the alcoholic beverages. 
(j)  The serving without sale of alcoholic beverages at a special event at a permitted location for a special event not otherwised required to be licensed or licensed hereunder for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be only permitted during the times for sales of alcoholic beverages as set forth in section 3-11 of this chapter for premises licensed for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. No. 03-39, § II, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 08-19, § XIII, 12-16-08) 
Sec. 3-21. - Special event permits. 
(a)  In order to serve wine, and/or beer and malt beverages, and/or distilled spirits at a private function or special event, at a permitted location, the person organizing the private function or special event shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply to the city for a "special event permit." The application shall include the name and business address of any caterer providing food service for the private function or special event, the date, time and location of the event, which location must be a permitted location as set forth in this chapter or otherwise exempt as set forth under this chapter; 
(2)  Pay the cost of such permit as set forth in section 3-31 of this chapter. 
If the application meets all of the requirements of this chapter, the city clerk shall issue the special event permit. If the city clerk finds that the application does not meet the requirements of this chapter and denies the special event permit, the applicant may appeal to the city council within five days of the date of the denial. 
(b)  The "special event permit" shall be maintained at the site of the private function or special event during the hours alcoholic beverages are served. 
(c)  The person holding the private function or special event, and not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter, must purchase the alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  The "special event permit" licensee shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter which occurs at the event whether by the licensee's employees or agents, invitee of the licensee or invitee of the invitee of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 03-39, § III, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 3-22. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to an event held for business development purposes or charitable purposes at which alcoholic beverages are served by a person or organization not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter to members and invited guests of such persons or organization holding the event at a permitted location or at a location not otherwise required to be permitted pursuant to this chapter, provided that the person or organization purchased and served the alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to an event held at a private residence at which alcoholic beverages are purchased and served by a person not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter to invited guests of such person, provided that the person holding the event purchases the alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the times for sales of alcoholic beverages set forth in section 3-11, herein, shall apply to the exceptions set forth in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section 3-22, except that serving without sale of alcoholic beverages at an event described in paragraph (a) or (b) at a location not otherwise required to be licensed or licensed hereunder for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only shall be permitted on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(Ord. No. 03-39, § IV, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 3-23. - Regulation of sales and consumption of alcoholic beverages at the Newnan Centre. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages and consumption on the premises at the Newnan Centre in the City of Newnan shall be allowed. 
(b)  The consumption on the premises license provided for herein is exempted from the food sale requirements provided for in section 3-81 of this chapter. 
(c)  The city, through the Newnan Convention Center Authority (the "authority") shall offer for bid an alcoholic beverage license, except as provided in subsection (e) below, as follows: 
(1)  The authority shall take bids for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises at the Newnan Centre; 
(2)  Each bid shall be according to the terms and provisions set forth in the invitation to bid by the authority. 
(3)  The right to sell alcoholic beverages under this bid system shall go to the highest and best bidder which is deemed in the overall best interest of the city, and shall entitle each license holder to the exclusive sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at the Newnan Centre; 
(4)  All sales of alcoholic beverages under this license shall be competitive and be of sufficient quality as is required by the franchise agreement that will be entered into between the authority and the grantee of the franchise. 
(5)  The bidder must provide sufficient proof that he would be entitled to operate a business in the city and an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises under this chapter. If the bidder currently holds a City of Newnan pouring license for on premises consumption of distilled spirits, the additional license fee shall be $1,000.00, otherwise the license fee shall be as set forth in this chapter for a pouring license for on premises consumption of distilled spirits. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed on the premises of the Newnan Centre unless the alcoholic beverages are delivered by or sold by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license provided for in this section. 
(e)  The Director of the Newnan Centre, or his designee, may hold an alcoholic beverage license for the Newnan Centre so that the orderly operation of the Newnan Centre will not be interrupted in the event the person or entity holding the alcoholic beverage license for the facility is unable to serve alcoholic beverages for any reason. There shall be no city license fee paid by the Director of the Newnan Centre, or his designee. 
(f)  The hours of sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the Newnan Centre shall be the same as provided in section 3-11 of this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 13-6, § I, 3-26-13) 
Sec. 3-24. - Regulation of microbreweries. 
(a)  Microbreweries must comply with all applicable city, state and federal license requirements. 
(b)  Microbreweries may manufacture no more than 15,000 barrels of malt beverages in a calendar year solely for wholesale off the premises. 
(c)  Microbreweries must pay all applicable state, city and county taxes. 
(d)  Microbreweries may offer free tastings, educational and promotional tours during normal business house in accordance with state law. 
(e)  Microbreweries may only be located as a permitted use, brewers malt manufacturing, in the ILT and IHV zoning districts and as a special exception use, brewers malt manufacturing, in the CHV zoning district. 
(f)  The restrictions set out in section 3-39, no licenses issued within prohibited distances as for package malt beverage sales shall apply to microbreweries. 
( Ord. No. 14-5, § 1, 4-22-14 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-5, § 1, adopted April 22, 2014 , set out provisions intended for use as § 3-23. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as § 3-24. 
Sec. 3-25. - Consumption and sales on public property. 
(a)  As provided for in section 3-6(c), (d) and (e) of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages or any other intoxicating beverage at any public place including streets, sidewalks, alleys or public parks within the city, or for any person to have in his possession any unsealed or opened container with such intoxicating beverage in it at any public place including streets, sidewalks, alleys or public parks within the city, except as provided under the terms and conditions as outlined in section 3-26, section 3-27 and as outlined on other sections of this chapter. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 3-25, section 3-26 and section 3-27 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises structure. 
( Ord. No. 17-4, § I, 3-28-17 ) 
Sec. 3-26. - Sidewalk sales. 
(a)  No consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on tables on the city's sidewalks in the Central Business District in front of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages unless such sales are approved by the city. The city shall review and inspect such sites to ensure adherence to the orderly operation of the sidewalk service of alcoholic beverages including but not limited to, regulations pertaining to sidewalk placement of furniture pieces, tables, benches and chairs sidewalk clearance from permanent objects, maximum capacity, service and the protection of public health as set forth hereinafter. 
(1)  Alcohol beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment on the city's sidewalks to persons sitting around furniture pieces or tables or benches or chairs within the boundaries of the city's Central Business District subject to the regulations set out in section 3-26(a)(2)—(5) and (b). 
(2)  An area of not less than 36 inches of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all times between any sidewalk furniture pieces, tables, benches and chairs and the nearest curb, tree, pole or other permanent object situated in the right-of-way. 
(3)  The sidewalk furniture pieces, tables, benches and chairs shall be placed only within the extended boundaries of the licensed premises into the sidewalk area in front of the licensed premises. 
(4)  Service in the sidewalk area shall be only by waiter or waitress employed by the licensed consumption on premises establishment and shall not be served to any person who is not seated at a table or on a bench or in a chair and there shall be no outside bar or service window. 
(5)  It is prohibited for an establishment to allow any noise to be created in the sidewalk area in violation of the city's noise ordinance, section 10-36 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  One drink per customer on-sidewalk limit. Any establishment licensed to sell alcohol beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises and served at the sidewalk tables; provided, however, that no establishment shall serve to any person more than one such alcoholic beverage at a time for consumption outside the premises, and only an employee of the licensed premises may remove the alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises and serve the alcoholic beverage at the sidewalk table. 
(1)  Size limited to a maximum of 16 ounces. No metal, paper or plastic container in which an alcohol beverage is dispensed and served from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined sidewalk area any open alcoholic beverage metal, paper or plastic container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(2)  Drinking from glass bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcohol beverage from a glass bottle, or glass, or to possess in a glass bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private which alcoholic beverage, if possessed, must be in a metal, paper or plastic container. 
(3)  Consumption limited to lawful hours of operation. No alcohol beverage purchased pursuant to this provision shall be consumed except within the authorized hours of sale of the establishment where purchased. 
( Ord. No. 17-4, § I, 3-28-17 ) 
Sec. 3-27. - City sponsored special events. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provision of section 3-6(c), (d) and (e) of this chapter, events sponsored by the city's Downtown Development Authority/Main Street Program in which alcoholic beverages are provided to merchants participating in the event by the DDA/Main Street Program for tasting by patrons participating in the event may, during the posted hours for the event, possesses and drink the alcoholic beverages on the streets and sidewalk located within the boundaries of the Downtown Development Authority of the city provided that the alcoholic beverage is in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a glass bottle or glass, containing no more than four ounces of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provision of section 3-6(c), (d) and (e) of this chapter, patrons attending events sponsored by the city's Downtown Development Authority/Main Street Program in the city's Greenville Street Park or in a defined location as may be approved by the city council may possess and consume malt beverages and/or wine beginning 30 minutes prior to the beginning of the event, during the event, and up to 30 minutes after the end of the event provided that the malt beverages and/or wine is contained in a metal, paper or plastic container other than a container of glass bottle or glass, containing no more than 16 ounces of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3-6(c), (d) and (e) and section 3-94(a) and (b) of this chapter, patrons attending events sponsored by the city's Downtown Development Authority/Main Street may exit a licensed premises and a licensed premises may permit patrons to exit the licensed premises with an alcoholic beverage during the posted hours of the event and drink the alcoholic beverages on the streets and sidewalk located within the boundaries of the Downtown Development Authority district of the city provided that the alcoholic beverage is in a metal, paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a glass bottle or glass, containing no more than 16 ounces of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 17-4, § I, 3-28-17 ) 
Secs. 3-28—3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 3-31. - License required to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued by the city clerk at an annual license fee as established herein: 
(1)  Retail consumption dealer (distilled spirits, malt beverage and wine) ..... $5,000.00 
(2)  Retail consumption dealer (malt beverage only) ..... 250.00 
(3)  Retail package dealer (malt beverage only) ..... 250.00 
(4)  Retail consumption dealer (wine only) ..... 250.00 
(5)  Retail package dealer (wine only) ..... 250.00 
(6)  Wholesale dealer (distilled spirits) ..... 100.00 
(7)  Wholesale dealer (malt beverage) ..... 100.00 
(8)  Wholesale dealer (wine) ..... 100.00 
(9)  Brewpub license, for beer only, shall only issue in conjunction with on-premises consumption license for a restaurant and shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter pertaining to on-premises consumption license and the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 et seq. ..... 1,000.00 
(10)  Growler license ..... 1,500.00 
(11)  Microbrewery license (in addition to any other license fees referenced herein above for wholesale malt beverage sales and the city's occupational tax ordinance) ..... 1,000.00 
(b)  All licenses issued herein shall constitute a mere grant of a privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter, the charter, related ordinances, of the Code of the City of Newnan, and the Constitution, laws and regulations of the state and the United States of America applicable to such business. 
(c)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the face the following words: 
"THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE AND IS SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NEWNAN AND IS SUBJECT TO LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS HEREAFTER ADOPTED." 
(d)  Both the licensee or license representative shall be the authorized and duly constituted agent for service of all notices and processes required to be served on or given hereunder for any action or proceeding or uses of any nature whatsoever permitted under the provisions of the chapter or under any other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 03-39, § VII, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 08-19, § I, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 11-8, § II, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 13-15, § II, 7-23-13; Ord. No. 13-18, § 3, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 14-5, § 2, 4-22-14 ) 
Sec. 3-32. - Contents of application for license. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall apply to the city council upon forms to be prepared and provided by the city clerk, and shall be considered only at the first regular monthly meeting of the city council. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The location of the proposed business; 
(2)  The nature and character of the proposed business; 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the name and address of that individual; 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the names and addresses of all general partners, the licensee and the license representative; 
(5)  If the business is to be operated by a close corporation, the names and addresses of all officers, directors, stockholders, licensee and license representative; 
(6)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation other than a close corporation, the name of the corporation, the address of the corporate office, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process for the corporation, and the name and address of the licensee and license representative; 
(7)  If the business is to be operated by a limited liability corporation (LLC), the name of the managing partner or partners, the address of the principal place of business of the LLC, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process for the LLC, and the name and address of the licensee or license representative; and 
(8)  Such other appropriate information as may be required by the governing body. 
(b)  The truth of the contents of an application for a license shall be sworn to by the licensee and the license representative. 
(c)  The licensee shall also file with the clerk completed State of Georgia Department of Revenue Alcohol Tax and Control Unit Form ATT-17, which has been filed with the state. 
(d)  The application, when filed with the city clerk, shall be accompanied by a processing fee of $100.00. This processing fee is separate from and shall not be credited to the license fee. Said processing fee will not be refunded if the requested license is not granted. 
(e)  When the license is approved, the license fee must be paid by certified check or cash within 30 days and prior to the issuance of the license. 
(f)  If the person applying fails to receive a license from the State of Georgia, any license fees paid to the city shall be refunded. 
(g)  Only one application form and accompanying documents must be filed for each business premises. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 3, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 3-33. - Supporting documents to be filed with application. 
Those applying for a license shall submit in support of the application for license the following documents; 
(1)  A certificate from a Georgia registered land surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the shortest straight line distance from the closest point of the licensed premises to the nearest property line of any residence, church building, alcoholic treatment center building, school building, educational building, school, college building or college campus located within a radius of 100 feet, 200 feet, and 300 feet of the premises. 
(2)  The affidavit of each person whose name appears on an application for a license, pursuant to section 3-32 of this chapter, swearing that said person has not, within five years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of nor entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or other charge relating to the sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability, possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs including the offense of driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or drugs; has not entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality. Provided, however, that a person designated as a registered agent of a close corporation or a limited liability corporation on an application shall not be required to submit the affidavit required by this subsection unless such person is also designated as the licensee or license representative on such application. 
(3)  A copy of a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the license is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the business for which the license is sought. 
(4)  A certificate from the chief of police of the city certifying that each person named in an application pursuant to section 3-32 of this chapter has been investigated and found not to have been convicted of not have entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or other charge relating to the sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability, possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs within five years prior to the date of the application for the license; has not entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality. For those applicants who, within the last five year period, have resided or do reside in a state other than Georgia, the applicant must furnish a certified copy of a driver history and criminal background history from the state or states in which he or she has resided or resides to the chief of police of the city. A person designated as a registered agent of a close corporation or a limited liability corporation on an application, however, shall not be required to submit a certificate from the chief of police of the city unless such person is also designated as the licensee or license representative on such application. 
(5)  If the same person is serving as the licensee and the license representative, he/she shall submit an affidavit certifying that he/she is at least 21 years of age, a resident of Coweta County and a manager of the business. 
(6)  If the licensee is not the license representative, an affidavit from the license representative certifying that he/she is at least 21 years of age, a resident of Coweta County and a manager of the business. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, §§ 4, 5, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 3-34. - Required citizenship. 
No license under this article shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-35. - Required residency, license representative. 
If the licensee for a pouring license for alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, only, is not a resident of Coweta County, the licensee must designate a license representative who shall be a resident of Coweta County and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-36. - Misleading or omitted information. 
Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original application for a license under this article shall be cause for the denial thereof. If any license has been granted under these circumstances, there shall be cause for revocation of same. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-37. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
(a)  No license under this chapter shall be issued unless the location meets currently applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances of the city as amended; further, except as provided in subsection (b), no license shall be issued unless the location is within the OI-1, OI-2, CBD, CGN, CCS, CHV, CUN, PDO, or PDC commercial districts. 
(b)  A license under this chapter may be issued to golf clubs located within the PD district provided the planned development: 
(1)  Has not less than 500 acres of contiguous land area; 
(2)  Has at least 200 residential sites, platted and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Coweta County; 
(3)  Has a social club with: 
a.  An 18 hole golf course of regulation size; 
b.  A restaurant or eatery used exclusively for the purpose of preparing and serving meals, with a seating capacity of at least 60 patrons; 
c.  A golf or social club membership that has at least 100 paid-up members who have paid a membership fee for family or individual membership 
d.  A membership policy whereby membership is not denied or limited by an applicant's race, color, creed, sex, religion, or national origin; and 
e.  A full-time management staff for the social activities of the club, including the management of the premises where food and drink are sold. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid retail package license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine on the date of adoption of this chapter provided that such license remains current and does not become and remain inactive for a period exceeding 12 months from the date last issued. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 6, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 01-25, §§ I, II, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 02-02, § I, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 03-39, § V, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 3-38. - Payment of taxes and other debts to city. 
The city clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes, special assessments, unpaid utilities or any other monies owed to the city. No license shall be issued, renewed or considered for issuance to an applicant which has any outstanding payments to the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-39. - No licenses issued within prohibited distances. 
(a)  No license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for the sale of any alcoholic beverages on premises located: 
(1)  Distilled spirits, malt beverages, or win by the drink. Only the location restriction with regard to an alcoholic treatment center building shall apply to a location for the issuance of a license to a person to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Wine. No license shall be issued to any package wine retailer hereunder where the place of business is located within 300 feet of any school building, educational building or school grounds or college campus grounds. 
(3)  Malt beverages. No license shall be issued to any package malt beverage retailer where the place of business of the licensee is located within 300 feet of any school building, educational building or school grounds or college campus grounds. 
(4)  Alcoholic treatment center. No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of any alcoholic treatment center building owned and operated by the state, Coweta County, or the City of Newnan. 
(5)  Schools applicable. As used in this subsection (a) the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690 and shall not include private schools or colleges wherein only specialized subjects, such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(6)  [Housing authority property.] No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 300 feet of any housing authority property. As used in this subsection (6), the term "housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by Article 1 of Chapter 3 of Title 8, the "Housing Authorities Law." 
(7)  Method of measuring. The distances set out in subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4), shall be measured from the closest point of the licensed premises to the closest point of the school building, educational building or school grounds or college campus grounds or treatment center building by the shortest straight line. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid retail package license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine on the date of adoption of this chapter provided that such license remains current and does not become and remain inactive for a period exceeding 12 months from the date last issued. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid pouring or on-premises consumption license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine on the date of adoption of this chapter provided that such license remains current and does not become and remain inactive for a period exceeding 12 months from the date last issued. The provisions of this section shall apply to such business establishments seeking a license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises, only. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to those golf clubs holding a valid pouring or on-premises consumption license, provided that sales of alcoholic beverages will not occur within 100 feet of any school building, educational building or school grounds or college campus grounds or alcoholic treatment center building, said distance to be measured from an area designated as a golf cart path to the school building, educational building or school grounds or college campus grounds, or alcoholic treatment center building. 
(d)  Nothing in subparagraphs (a)(2) and (3) hereinabove shall prohibit a grocery store licensed for the retail sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises from selling wine or malt beverages within 300 feet of any college campus. As used in this subparagraph, the term "grocery store" means a retail establishment which has at least 85 percent of its total retail floor space reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items, conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space, and meets with other criteria or packaged sales of malt beverages or wine as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 7, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 03-39, § VI, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 13-18, § 4, 8-13-13) 
Sec. 3-40. - Notice of application advertisement. 
(a)  All persons applying for a license under the terms of this chapter shall give notice of that application by placing a notice in the city legal organ for two consecutive weeks prior to the week when the application shall be heard by the city council. An affidavit from the publisher of said legal organ shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the hearing. 
Said notice shall contain the location of the proposed business, names of all persons as they appear on the application as required by section 3-32 of this chapter, and the date and time the city council will hear the application. The advertisement shall be the type used for legal ads in the legal organ of the city, and the notice referred to shall be in the following form: 
"NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR RETAIL LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
____________ has/have made application to the council of the City of Newnan for a retail license to sell alcoholic beverages at the following location: ____________ . The application will be heard by city council at a public hearing to be held at ____________ o'clock ____________ m. on the ____________ day of ____________ 19 ____________ . 
Signed ____________ 
Licensee" 
Note: Names of the individual, general partners, corporation, licensee and license representative must be shown. 
(b)  Those applying for a license shall place signs upon the location of the proposed business. Said signs shall read as follows: 
"Alcohol beverage license applied for. Hearing before city council of the City of Newnan, Georgia on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ ." 
The signs described above shall be posted on the location of the proposed business for two weeks prior to the week of the hearing by the city council. Each sign shall be not less than 24 inches high and 36 inches wide, and shall face toward all public or private property adjoining the proposed location. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen from all public or private property adjoining the proposed location. An affidavit from the applicant certifying posting shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the hearing. 
This subsection shall not apply when application is made for a license transfer pursuant to section 3-46 of this chapter at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 01-50, § I, 12-18-01) 
Sec. 3-41. - Issuance of license by city clerk. 
Upon approval of the application for license by the city council, the timely payment of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue the appropriate license for the year in which said approval was granted. 
If issued to a corporation, said license shall be issued in the name of said corporation, the licensee and the license representative. 
If issued to a partnership, said license shall be issued in the name of all the general partners, the licensee and the license representative. 
If issued to an individual, said license shall be issued to that individual as licensee and the license representative. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-42. - Payment of license fee, pro-rated. 
(a)  For any new license granted hereunder for pouring distilled spirits for consumption on the premises only between the effective date of this ordinance and July 1, 1996, the licensee fee shall be pro-rated. After July 1, 1996, the license fee shall be reduced by one-half for the remainder of the year 1996. 
(b)  For any new license granted hereunder prior to June 30 of each year, the licensee shall pay the full annual license fee. 
(c)  For any new license granted hereunder subsequent to July 1 of each year, the license fee shall be reduced by one-half. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-43. - Renewal of licenses by city clerk. 
All licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall be renewable as herein set forth: 
(1)  The city clerk shall send a letter to all license holders on or before the first day of October of each year to remind said license holders of renewal deadline for the subsequent year. 
(2)  The licensee shall file a renewal application form with the city clerk on or before November 1, of each year. 
(3)  The application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(4)  If the chief reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made by the city clerk. "Due cause" shall consist of any violation as set forth in section 3-110 of this chapter. 
(5)  Written notice of the reason or reasons for such non-renewal shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee at the licensed premises or mailed to the address shown on the renewal application. Licensee shall have ten days from the date of the written notice to request a public hearing before the city council, as provided for in section 3-110 of this chapter. 
(6)  Provided that "due cause" does not exist for not renewing the license, the city clerk shall issue the renewal license upon payment of the annual license fee by the licensee on or before the last business day in November preceding the year for which the license is sought. 
(7)  Any change in the name of the licensee or license representative shall require the filing of the application and payment of the fee set forth in section 3-46(b) herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-44. - Completion of proposed licensed premises; additions to licensed premises. 
(a)  Prior to the construction, renovation or completion of a licensed premises, the city council may allow a license to be issued only if plans for the proposed premises comply with applicable provisions of this chapter; however, no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed upon said premises until they are completed according to the plans submitted and unless all other provisions of this chapter are compiled with. 
(b)  Prior to the beginning of construction of any addition to a licensed premises, the licensee shall submit to the city clerk, a new survey and plans showing the location and dimensions of the addition to the licensed premises. Following completion of the addition, the licensee shall furnish a certificate from the surveyor stating that the completed addition to the licensed premises is as shown on the plat previously submitted. If any addition to the licensed premises violates any provisions of this chapter, the license granted hereunder shall be automatically canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-45. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses hereunder must within six months after the issuance of said license open the establishment referred to in said license. If said license holder fails to open the licensed establishment or receive a time extension from the city council within said six-month period the license shall be canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(b)  Any holder of a license who, after beginning operation, ceases to operate the business for a three-month period automatically forfeits his license, and said license shall be automatically canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-46. - License transfers, change licensee, or license representative or relocation of business. 
(a)  Retail alcoholic beverage licenses may be transferred from one owner to another with the approval of the city council provided; 
(1)  The business has existed at the same location and licenses have not been transferred for more than one year. 
(2)  All existing alcoholic beverage licenses issued to the existing owner for that location shall be transferred; 
(3)  All provisions of section 3-33 of this chapter shall be completed by the new owner except for subparagraph (1) provided such information was previously supplied by the previous owner or previous owners and has not changed. 
(4)  A transfer fee in the amount of $100.00 is paid to the city clerk upon filing of the request. 
(b)  (1) All requests for a change in licensee or license representative must be approved by the city council and shall provide all appropriate information or supporting documents required under sections 3-32 and 3-33 of this chapter as outlined in an approved form to be supplied by the city clerk for that purpose. 
(2)  A fee in the amount of $100.00 is to be paid to the city clerk upon the filing of the request. 
(c)  So long as there is no change in ownership, a temporary license representative may be appointed by the licensee for a period not to exceed 30 days, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  That temporary license representative makes application by providing all appropriate information or supporting documents required under sections 3-32 and 3-33 of this chapter as outlined in an approved form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose; 
(2)  That application is approved by the city clerk prior to the issuance of an amended license; 
(3)  There shall be no residence requirement for a temporary license representative; and 
(4)  There shall be no extension of the 30-day period of operation for any temporary license representative, without approval of council. 
(5)  No fee shall be required at the time of filing the application for a temporary license representative provided that within ten calendar days a request for a change in the license representative is filed in accordance with section 3-46(b) herein. 
(d)  All business relocations must be approved by city council and the licensee and license representative shall provide all appropriate information and supporting documents as required under sections 3-32 and 3-33 of this chapter. Requirements of section 3-40 relating to advertising and posting must be met. Additional license fees shall not be required provided there is no change in the named licensee or license representative. 
(e)  Any violation of this section shall constitute due cause for probation, suspension or revocation of the license or licenses granted by the council. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 01-50, §§ II, IV, 12-18-01) 
Sec. 3-47. - Standards to be applied by city council in granting licenses; failure of applicant to attend public hearing. 
(a)  The standards to be applied by the city council, acting in its judicial capacity to grant or deny a license, shall include whether, in the best judgment of the council, the applicant, based on all information obtained in the application process, possesses the qualities of sound judgment and discretion necessary for one who dispenses alcoholic beverages to the public generally. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing standards, should any applicant, an official or representative of the applicant fail to attend a public hearing before the mayor and council regarding a new license, a request to transfer a license, a request to change a license or a license representative, or a request to relocate the business of a licensee, the mayor and council may consider such application or request to have been withdrawn by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 8, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 01-50, § III, 12-18-01) 
Sec. 3-48. - Applicants meeting standards will be granted license; reason for denial to be given in writing. 
All applicants for a license meeting the ascertainable standards of this chapter will be granted the license or licenses requested, upon the hearing; and the council in applying the facts to the licensing criteria will act in a judicial capacity. Whenever an application for license is denied by the council the reasons for such denial shall be stated in writing and entered upon the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-49. - Persons who are not entitled to a license. 
It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(2)  A person who has entered a plea of nolo contendere within a five-year period prior to the date of application for a license, entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a felony, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality; or who has entered a plea of nolo contendere within a five-year period prior to the date of application for a license, entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the city relating to the use, sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability or possession of beer, wine or liquor or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation, use, or sale of beer, wine or intoxicating liquors, or taxability thereof. 
(3)  A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this chapter revoked for cause. 
(4)  A person whose place or business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent qualifies as the license representative. 
(5)  Any person who is under the age of 21 years or a person who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(6)  Any law enforcement officer and officer or employee of the city or county. 
(7)  Any person who is not eligible for a state alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Secs. 3-50—3-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 3-60. - Sale of package malt beverages, wine conducted in conjunction with other business. 
No person shall be allowed to sell at retail package malt beverages, or foreign and domestic wines unless the same be sold in conjunction with some other kind of business. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-61. - Physical requirements of applicant's premises. 
(a)  No license shall be granted to a retailer under the provision of this chapter, unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee has a location in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(b)  Where a building in which a retailer intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  No sales shall be made from such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-62. - Sanitary regulations, immoral conduct, etc.; inspection and report by fire department. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, or public indecency on the premises. 
(b)  The fire department shall, upon request of the city clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-63. - Interior visibility required. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or opening of any door of any retail package alcoholic beverage store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-64. - Lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishments. 
No licensee operating premises wherein package wine or malt beverages are sold shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising such beverages except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-65. - Slot machines, etc., prohibited on premises. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted in this section, no retail licensee shall permit on such licensee's premises any slot machines, video games, mechanical music boxes, pinball machines or coin-operated amusement machines of any kind or character. 
(b)  Convenience stores, the primary purpose of which is the sale of food items, may utilize coin-operated amusement devices as provided by the section of this Code regarding the regulation and licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, provided all such machines shall be located in a separate room from the room in which package alcoholic beverages are stored or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-66. - Sale in poolrooms and billiard parlors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to sell package beer, malt, beverages and wine in poolrooms or billiard parlors. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-67. - Growlers. 
(a)  The sale of growlers in compliance with this chapter is authorized for licensed establishments defined in section 3-2 of this chapter, retail package dealers, who are authorized to sell malt beverages by the package and are located within the city's CBD zoning district. The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this chapter. The term "growler" as defined in section 3-2 of this chapter means a bottle that is designed for and especially intended to be filled by a licensee or employee of the licensed establishment with beer from a keg. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited. However, samples of tap beers may be made available, but shall not exceed one ounce nor shall any one individual be offered more than three samples within a 24-hour period. 
(b)  As referenced in subsection (a) hereinabove, it shall be unlawful to sell or dispense beer in a growler within the city except within the city's CBD zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 13-18, § 5, 8-13-13) 
Sec. 3-68—3-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF SALES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 3-80. - Licenses. 
Any type consumption on the premises license may be granted only to: A restaurant, a private club, or a hotel/motel as defined under section 3-2. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-81. - Sale of food. 
(a)  In order for an establishment to qualify for a pouring license for alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, only, as a restaurant, private club, golf club, or restaurant in a hotel such establishment must have at least 55 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other non-food or non-alcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
(b)  The requirements of subsection (a) hereof shall not apply to those business establishments holding licenses under and as required by House Bill No. 709, an act extending the city limits approved December 7, 1953, cited as Georgia Laws, 1953, November—December Session, page 2040, for consumption of malt beverages and wine on the premises only; provided that all requirements of subsection (a) hereof and this chapter shall apply to such business establishments applying for a pouring license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 9, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 3-82. - Standards to determine sleeping or seating capacity; inspections; compliance with fire requirements. 
Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed in this chapter, the same shall be judged by existing ordinances of the city, county or state regulations or by reasonable standards. The fire department, shall, upon request of the city clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings to the city clerk. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times to all fire regulations of the city, county, and state. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-83. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any sale of alcoholic beverages to be made outside of the premises licensed for such sale. 
(b)  For golf club facilities, "licensed premises" includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served, but shall also include the entire building where the room is located and the entire boundary of the golf course except parking lots, alleyways, streets (private and public), and lakes. Golf clubs are authorized to sell and serve malt beverages only in the manufacturer's original containerized receptacle outside the room and building on the licensed premises as defined above. Patrons may consume the same on the licensed premises as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 10, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 3-84. - Pricing. 
(a)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on each licensed establishment or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one day. 
(b)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons at any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day. 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed establishment any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(8)  Issue to any customer any coupon, receipt, ticket or other item purporting to authorize the receipt of any free or reduced-price alcoholic beverage. 
(9)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any patron any alcoholic beverage if said patron has in such patron's possession or control any unconsumed alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licenses establishment, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (b). 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time provided all patrons or customers are allowed equal access to such free food or entertainment. No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests. No provision of this section shall prohibit a licensee from offering packages in which alcoholic beverages and food or lodging are offered as a unit; provided the value of the alcoholic beverage is established at a uniform level for each package so offered, and the alcoholic beverage delivered as part of the package does not exceed the package allowance, and the tax due on the package allowance is remitted in full to the city for each package sold. 
No hotel or motel maintaining more than one licensed establishment upon its premises shall allow the promotion of one of its licensed establishments over another on the basis of prices for alcoholic beverages. 
For the purposes of this section, "business day" shall mean that period running from 7:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. on the following day or 12:00 midnight on Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-85. - Hotel in-room service. 
Licenses obtained by hotels shall include the right to serve alcoholic beverages by the drink to registered guests in their hotel rooms as well as to deliver alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to registered guests' rooms when such beverages have been ordered by such guests and/or to provide a cabinet or other facility in a hotel guest's room which contains alcoholic beverages for which licensed, and which is provided upon written request of the guest, and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest, and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested, except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused and unopened portion. All alcoholic beverages sold or distributed under this section shall be obtained by the hotel directly from a licensed wholesaler or distributor and shall be stored on the premises of the hotel until sold or served. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-86. - Maintenance of premises; improper conduct; nudity prohibited. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with provisions and regulations of the city, county and state governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(1)  For purposes of this section: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage establishment shall mean any restaurant holding a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
b.  Substantially nude shall mean dressed or undressed in a manner so as to plainly expose to view any portion of a male's or female's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals, or any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola. 
c.  Simulate shall mean to counterfeit, feign, imitate, or pretend in such a manner that a reasonable observer could be led to believe that the actual act is or may be occurring. 
(2)  a.  No person shall appear substantially nude in any alcoholic beverage establishment, and no owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to appear substantially nude on the licensed premises. 
b.  No owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to perform acts of, or acts which constitute or simulate: 
1.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
2.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; provided that random acts of patrons or employees, whose actions do not constitute actions taken pursuant to encouragement or acquiescence of the management of the establishment and are not for the purposes of entertainment, promotion, publicity, or notoriety shall not constitute violations of this section. 
(3)  The restrictions of subsection (2) shall apply only to persons physically present on the licensed premises, and shall apply regardless of whether such persons are categorized as owners, agents, employees, patrons, independent contractors or otherwise. 
(4)  In addition to prosecution of any person for violation of this section, the alcoholic beverage license of any premises upon which a violation of this section occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation. Any such revocation or suspension action shall follow the procedures outlined in section 3-110 of this chapter. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the municipal court to a charge of violation of this section shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(5)  Should any phrase, clause, or sentence of this section be found to be unconstitutional or otherwise illegal and unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the remaining provisions of this section, which provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-87. - Reports of sales to be made quarterly, suspension, revocation. 
(a)  Licensees shall, within 30 days following the end of each quarter, file with the city clerk a report sworn to by the licensee, setting forth gross sales of licensee for the quarter, sales of food and non-alcoholic beverages, and sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Should the total sales from food and non-alcoholic beverages reported by any licensee for consumption on the premises not exceed those from the sale of all alcoholic beverages as required by this chapter for any two consecutive reporting periods, the license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and council after a hearing as provided for in section 3-110. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-88. - Additional certification. 
In addition to the reporting requirements detailed in section 3-87, the city clerk may require that licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total sales derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages sold on the premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on the premises in the licensee's most recent reporting period. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-89. - Areas of sales. 
All restaurants, private clubs, and golf clubs eating areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms, provided a properly licensed restaurant or supper club is located on the premises; 
(3)  Private clubs; and 
(4)  Golf clubs. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 11, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 3-90. - Employment. 
No licensee shall knowingly employ on any licensed premises, in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, dancers, entertainers, and musicians, any person who has been convicted within the preceding ten years of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-91. - Employee prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a restaurant, or private club to engage in the following: 
(1)  Dance or sit with customers on the premises while on duty status, including "breaks;" 
(2)  Allow any customer to purchase food or drink, alcoholic or non-alcoholic, for an employee while on duty status, including "break periods;" 
(3)  For an employee to consume or simulate the consumption of any alcoholic beverage while on duty status at the premises of his or her employer, including "breaks;" 
(4)  Require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit at the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic; or money with which to purchase same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself, or for any other, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the term employee shall also apply to performers, dancers, entertainers, musicians engaged in temporary work, as well as regular employees. 
(c)  For purposes of this section breaks or break periods is defined as that period of time that the employee is off duty but remains upon the premises of the licensed establishment awaiting to go back on duty. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-92. - Size of containers. 
Licensees under this chapter shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of one liter or larger unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the nearest size to such containers. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-93. - Dancing on the premises. 
Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; 
(3)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the chief of fire department has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-94. - Consumption on the premises, only. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the licensee's premises shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  Each consumption on the premises licensee shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: "It is a violation of city ordinance to take any type alcoholic beverage from this outlet". Such sign shall be uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-95. - Prohibited advertising. 
No advertising of alcoholic beverages shall be published or disseminated in the city which: 
(1)  Contains any statement, design, or pictorial representation which falsely implies that the product has been endorsed, made, or used by, or produced for, or under the supervision of or in association with the specification of any religious organization, the city, or any other local governmental entity. 
(2)  Contains any reference, directly or indirectly, which falsely implies an endorsement by, or relationship with, any school, college or university. 
(3)  Is directed to, or promotes in any way the sale of alcoholic beverages to, persons under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 98-19, § 12, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 3-96. - Lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishments. 
No licensee operating premises wherein wine or malt beverages are sold by the drink shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising such beverages except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-97. - Sale in poolrooms and billiard parlors; minors prohibited if sold. 
It shall be lawful to sell beer, malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises, only, in poolrooms or billiard parlors provided such poolrooms or billiard parlors also meet the requirements of a restaurant as defined in this chapter; however, in any poolroom or billiard parlor where beer, wine or malt beverages are sold it shall be unlawful for the proprietor or operator to allow anyone under the age of 18 to patronize such business establishment unless accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-98. - Brown bagging, brown bag establishments. 
"Brown bagging" and "brown bag establishments" as defined in this chapter shall be prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-99. - Lounges, bars prohibited. 
"Lounges" or "bars" as defined in this ordinance shall be prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-100. - Smoking on premises prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for business establishments serving food, licensed to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only pursuant to this chapter, any licensee, license representative or employee of such establishment, to permit smoking, inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco or other plant material product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco or other plant material within the licensed premises unless the establishment provides a private room within the restaurant if such room is enclosed and has an air handling system independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the private room is exhausted directly to the outside by any exhaust fan of sufficient size and such room otherwise meets the requirements of section 3-89 of this chapter, except that no alcoholic beverages may be served, dispensed, delivered or possessed within such private room. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-6(9), it shall be unlawful for business establishments serving food, licensed to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only pursuant to this chapter, licensee, license representative or employee of such establishment, to restrict or deny entry or access to anyone under the age of 18 into the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 08-19, § V, 12-16-08) 
Editor's note— Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 08-19, Ord. No. 04-5, § I, adopted Feb. 24, 2004, repealed § 3-100, which pertained to employee identification card and derived from Ord. No. 03-39, § I, adopted Oct. 28, 2003. 
Secs. 3-101—3-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND PROBATION OF LICENSES; DUE PROCESS; HEARING 

Sec. 3-110. - Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice; hearing; bond for reinstatement. 
(a)  Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city may be suspended or revoked for due cause as hereinafter defined. "Due cause," for purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Arrest or conviction (to include a plea of nolo contendere) by local, state or federal authorities of the licensee, license representative or any employees of the licensee for any felony, or any misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or any law, regulation or ordinance involving beverage alcohol, gambling, or tax law violations; 
(2)  Citations issued by local, state or federal authorities the licensee, license representative or any employees of the licensee for violations of any part of this chapter or any regulation pertaining to state or federal licensing of the possession, sale or distribution of beverage alcohol; 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as condition for the possession, sale or distribution of beverage alcohol; 
(4)  Material falsification of any fact given in application for a license issued under this article or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor; any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualification for a license under this article shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
(5)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit or pay any renewal license fee imposed, sales taxes, or excise taxes required under the city ordinances. 
(6)  Any other factors known to the licensing authority whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, by reason of business experience, financial standing, trade association, personal association, record of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is licensed in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aide in such occurrence or prevented such activity. 
(b)  Action to place on probation, suspend, revoke and/or fine a license shall be commenced by the city clerk making written recommendation to the city council, and giving written notice to the licensee, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service upon licensee or his agent at the licensed location stating the grounds therefor, and the date, time and place such matter will be heard by the city council. Notice shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Included in the notice shall be an advertisement of the licensee's right to be heard before the council. Any licensee requiring subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses or documents at the hearing shall file a written request with the city manager at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued for good cause only. 
(c)  All final decisions to place on probation, suspend, revoke and/or fine a license shall be made by the city council, in writing with the reasons therefor stated. Notice of a final decision shall be given the licensee within three business days. 
(d)  Hearings shall only be as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney or his designee shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. The licensee may be represented by legal counsel, may confront and cross-examine witnesses, and shall have the right to call witnesses and present evidence in his behalf. A hearing record shall be maintained by the city; however, either party may arrange for transcription by a court reporter at his sole expense. Hearings shall be presided over by the mayor who shall preserve order and rule upon all matter of evidence. Irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(e)  Upon the second suspension or revocation of a license within any five-year period, as a prerequisite or reinstatement or reissuance of the license, the licensee, in addition to the requisite fees assessed under this article, shall post a surety bond payable to the City of Newnan, the amount of $5,000.00, conditioned upon the licensee maintaining the operation for which he is licensed in conformity with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Upon any subsequent act giving due cause for suspension or revocation of the license, the bond shall be forfeited and license revoked. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the options available to the city council to place on probation, suspend or revoke a license as set forth hereinabove, the city council may, in addition to placing on probation, suspending or revoking, in its discretion levy a fine upon the licensee in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 17-4, § II, 3-28-17 ) 
Secs. 3-111—3-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXATION OF PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 3-120. - Excise tax report; penalty for failure to file; payment. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail license fee required for the sale of alcoholic beverage, there is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.004166 per ounce on malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer except when malt beverages are sold in individual containers with a capacity of 15½ gallons or more, the excise tax shall be $6.00 per 15½-gallon container, or if the container if larger than 15½ gallons, the tax shall be proportioned at the rate of $0.387 per each additional gallon or portion of a gallon capacity of the container. 
(b)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on wine sold within the limits of the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the corporate limits shall file a report by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month, sold within the corporate limits. Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day for the month succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with the section. 
(d)  No decal, stamp or other identifying marking shall be required on malt beverages sold within the corporate limits. 
(e)  The excise tax provided for in this section shall be in addition to any license fee, occupation tax or other charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages or wines at retail or wholesale, within the city. 
(f)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty of ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Secs. 3-121—3-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAXATION OF BEVERAGES BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 3-130. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Agent. The license representative. 
City. The City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Drink. Any alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
Purchase price. The consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser. Any person who orders and gives present or future consideration of any alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Tax. The tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-131. - Tax levied. 
There is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of three percent of the purchase price of every sale of an alcoholic beverage (but not including malt beverages, fermented wines or fortified wines) purchased by the drink in the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-132. - Collection of tax; information to city. 
Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers of alcoholic beverages (but not including malt beverages, fermented wines or fortified wines) by the drink sold within his licensed premises. Such licensee or his agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-133. - Payment of tax by licensee; collection fee. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent hereunder shall be due and payable to the city on or before the tenth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth herein. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the tenth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk of the city, in such form as the city may prescribe, by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(c)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the city clerk, City Hall, 25 Jefferson Street, Newnan, Georgia 30263. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed licensees or agents. Licensees or agents collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the same under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (Ga. Laws, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-134. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the city clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the city clerk may offset overpayments; for a period or periods, against underpayments; for another period or periods, against underpayments; for another period or periods, against penalties; and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (b) hereof. 
(d)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to gross negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency determination has been made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto, in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in subsection (d) hereof. 
(f)  Notice of city clerk's determination; service of. The city clerk, or his designated representative, shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-135. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the city which is subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the city clerk may offset overpayments for a period or periods against the interest, penalties or underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) hereof. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payments. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section (a) hereof. 
(e)  Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making his determination, the city clerk shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-136. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed to the city or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required, shall pay a penalty in the amount of 15 percent of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in subsection 3-134(c) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-137. - Administration; enforcement; rules; records; confidentiality of reports. 
(a)  Authority of the city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the State of Georgia, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to the sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date or dates of such sales, and such information as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Secs. 3-138, 3-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 3-140. - Violations prohibited. 
No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or assist another in evading or avoiding the licensing requirements or in the payment of the taxes and fees imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Sec. 3-141. - Penalties. 
Any person knowingly violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city, punishable upon citation before the municipal court. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 12 months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 96-8, § I, 4-9-96) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-5, § I, adopted Feb. 9, 2010, amended ch. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 4, §§ 4-1—4-13, 4-41—4-49, 4-66—4-78, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1972, §§ 4-1—4-8, 4-10—4-23; Ord. No. 18-89, §§ 4-40—4-51, adopted June 5, 1989; Ord. No. 01-45, §§ I, II, adopted Nov. 13, 2001. 
Charter reference— Power to regulate animals, § 1.4(29). 
Cross reference— Environment, Ch. 10; nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— City's authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases have the following meaning for the purpose of this chapter: 
Abandonment: Deserting or intending to give up absolutely any animal without providing adequate food, water or sanitary shelter for 24 hours or longer. 
Altered animals: Any animal that has been spayed or neutered. 
Animal: Any description of vertebrate, excluding Homo sapiens. 
Animal establishment: Any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
Animal exhibit or show: See performing animal exhibition or act. 
Animal shelter: Any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society, or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
Animal control officer: Designated employees or officers of the city. 
At large: Any animal is at large when it is off the premises of the owner of the animal and is not under the control of a competent person by way of a leash or other restraining device. Voice command or use of audible signals or hand signals is not deemed to be sufficient control. 
Auctions: Any place or facility where animals were regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as herein defined. 
Breeder: Any person owning unaltered animals with the intent of selling the animals' offspring. 
Cruelty: Every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animals as defined in this section. 
Cat: All members of the domestic feline family. 
Dog: All members of the domestic canine family, not to include wild animals. 
Domestic animal: Any normal household pet, such as, but not limited to, dogs, cats, non-native birds, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish, or small, non-venomous reptiles or non-venomous snakes. 
Exotic pet: An animal that is not domesticated and is not native to North America, including but not limited to, pot-bellied pigs, reptiles and arachnids. 
Feral: An animal that was domesticated at one time, but now lives in the wild or that has been born in the wild and has not been domesticated. 
Fowl: Any warm-blooded, feathered, flying or non-flying animals. 
Habitually: Done regularly or frequently. 
Humane manner: Care of an animal, to include but not be limited to safety, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food, and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Impound: To confine humanely while providing adequate food, water, and shelter. 
Injury: Physical damage to the body or part of the body. 
Keeper: Any person who has control of or responsibility for one or more animals. 
Kennel: Any premises wherein any person engaged in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling animals. 
Livestock: Any animal that has hooves. 
Neutered: Incapable of sexual reproduction. 
Nuisance: An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)  Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal), or public property and recreational areas; 
(2)  Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; 
(4)  Molests, attacks, or interferes with a person's public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties whiled confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; or 
(5)  Chases vehicles or attacks other animals. 
Owner: Any person owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
Performing animal exhibition: Any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used. Not to include dogs shows or obedience training not for profit. 
Pet: Any animal kept for pleasure, excluding livestock. 
Pet shop: Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
Proper shelter: Protective covering that provides protection from all forms of weather and consists of at least four sides, a roof, floor and an opening for ingress and egress. It should be appropriately sized for the animal. 
Rescuer: Any individual, partnership, organization or company that takes in animals and arranges placement or adoption of said spayed/neutered animals. 
Responsible person: Any accountable human being. 
Restraint: An animal controlled by means of leash, chain or other like device, or secured inside a vehicle while being driven or parked, or within a secure enclosure. (Voice command, using audible signals or hand signals are not viable means of restraint.) 
Riding school or stable: Any premises having available for hire, boarding or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro. 
Spayed: Incapable of sexual reproduction. 
Stray animal: Any animal running at large with no identifiable owner. 
Under control: Any animal shall be considered under control if it is confined by fence, pen, cage, electronic device, chain, leash or secure enclosure to the premises of its owner, of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from the premises of its owner, or is restrained by leash, chain or lead or confined in an automobile when away from the premises of the owner. 
Veterinary clinic or hospital: A clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious animal: Any animal that: 
(1)  Bites or attempts to bite indiscriminately; 
(2)  Has been involved in more than one biting incident; or 
(3)  Is, in the opinion of an agent of the animal control authority, a potential danger to persons or property. 
This phrase shall not be construed to include dogs that are part of a governmental operation, nor a trained guard dog in performance of its duties while confined to the property of the owner or other responsible person. 
Wild animal: Untamped animal, living in its natural state, including but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, bears, feline family (including mountain lions, pumas, lions, tigers), canine family (including wolves, wolf hybrids, coyotes), non-human primates, and snakes. 
Zoological park: Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of non-domesticated animals, operated by a person, partnership, corporation or governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-2. - Prohibited treatment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either by commission or omission, to do any of the following: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat, any animal. 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal with proper food consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal with access to shelter adequate to protect it from all types of weather, 24 hours daily. 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal access to good and wholesome fresh water at all times. 
(5)  Abandon any animal. 
(6)  Intentionally poison any animal. 
(7)  Allow or promote any fight between animals, or allow or permit any such fight in or upon any premises in such person's possession or under such person's control. 
(8)  Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions. 
(9)  Keep, confine or transport an animal in other than a humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 4-3. - Dangerous or vicious animals running at large generally; permit for exhibition act or parade. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the city. Exhibitions or acts or parades of animals which are ferea naturea in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-4. - Livestock and poultry running at large; picketing livestock in streets. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horse, donkey, mule, ass, swine, sheep, goats, or poultry or any other livestock or grazing type animal to run at large in any public place in the city. Any such animal running at large in any public place in the city shall be impounded in the manner provided in this chapter. It shall further be unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-5. - Nuisance animals; animal control procedures. 
(a)  The actions of an animal constitute a public nuisance when the animal threatens the safety of, or injures a member of the general public, damages property (public or private, including other animals), interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of the property of others in the vicinity of where the animal is kept, or properties affected by its running at large. An animal is considered a nuisance by way of example, but not limited to, the following acts or actions: 
(1)  The animal habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at or attacks pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles; 
(2)  The animal is allowed or permitted to damage the property of anyone other than the owner or keeper or to impede the property's ordinary use even if the property is not damaged; 
(3)  The animal's unsanitary condition cause offensive odors, filth, vermin, or disease or is dangerous to the health and safety of the animal or the community; 
(4)  The animal makes sounds, such as but not limited to, barks, whines, crows, howls, or cackles in a continuous, or unreasonable fashion to result in the serious interference with the use and enjoyment of neighboring premises or in an untimely fashion. 
(b)  Animal control officer involvement and procedure: 
(1)  Upon receipt of the complaint, the animal control officer shall investigate the validity of the complaint. If the officer determines that the complaint is valid, the officer will notify the owner or keeper of the animal in writing to correct the violation; 
(2)  If the owner or keeper is found to be in violation of this section and fails to correct the violation after five business days of the notice, the animal shall be impounded and the owner or keeper shall be subject to the penalties for this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-6. - Animal noise. 
No person shall keep or maintain a dog or any other animal that barks, howls or otherwise makes or causes noise in excessive, continuous or untimely fashion to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or in such a manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Excessive shall mean noise that is discernable and can be heard inside a neighboring residential dwelling by persons of ordinary sensibilities. The court shall consider untimely fashion in individual cases and in general consider hours that persons are normally at rest. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-7. - Killing dangerous animals. 
The animal control officer and members of the police department or any other person in the city are authorized to kill any dangerous animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-8. - Diseased animals generally. 
(a)  No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man, woman, child, or other animal may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision of the animal control officer. 
(b)  It is hereby made the duty of the animal control officer to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-9. - Location of places where animals are kept near residences. 
No person shall locate any stable or place where any animal identified as prohibited but permitted under section 4-18(2) within 150 feet of any residence, other than the residence of the person so keeping or having such animals, anywhere in the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-10. - Standing or parking of vehicles containing livestock. 
It shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle containing livestock or chickens any place in the city for a period of time longer than three minutes, except for loading or unloading. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-11. - Position of animal control officer created; police powers of animal control officer. 
The position of animal control officer is hereby created by the city council for the enforcement of ordinances and laws relating to the control of animals in the city and shall have power to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
The animal control officer under the direction of the chief of police or his designee shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Ensuring that all dogs and cats in the city are inoculated against rabies as required by this chapter. 
(2)  Cooperating with other authorized officers in the enforcement of the laws of the state with regard to animals, the vaccinations of dogs and cats against rabies and the disposition of animals found to be kept in violation of this article and the laws of the state. 
(3)  Investigating all complaints with regard to dogs, cats and other animals. 
(4)  Obtaining a search warrant to enter any premises upon which there is probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter exists, with the search warrant, the animal control officer may enter the premises to examine and take custody of animals whenever the animal control officer determines that the action is appropriate to achieve the purpose of this chapter and in exigent circumstances. 
(5)  Pursuit of animals. In exigent circumstances the animal control officer shall be authorized to follow the animal and enter upon any enclosure or lot, public or private, within the city limits when the animal control officer has probable cause to believe that an animal is rabid, abused, neglected, dangerous, vicious, or an imminent threat to the health, welfare or safety of the general public, and to take custody of the animal, when appropriate, to achieve the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-12. - Interference with animal control officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or molest the animal control officer in the performance of his/her duties or to seek to release any animal in his/her custody without his/her consent or to attempt to assist the animal control officer without his/her consent, or to not provide the animal control officer with proper identification, false identification or false information or to fail to comply with the animal control officer's directions or orders. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, damage, molest, move or remove any traps or restraining devices used by the animal services control officer or any contracted agency that may be used from time to time or to release any animals from any such traps or restraining devices. 
(c)  The owner or keeper of an impounded animal shall pay all fees associated with the impoundment of the animal. 
(d)  It shall be the animal control officer's discretion to return any animal in violation of this section to its owner or keeper, provided that the owner or keeper is present and is able to safely and humanely confine or restrain the animal. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-13. - Fees and charges for impounding, keeping and redemption of animals. 
The fees and charges allocated and fixed by the city for taking up animals, and the fees and charges for impounding and keeping and disposing of impounded animals fixed by Coweta County shall be paid like services at the time and in the manner proscribed. The fee for redemption of impounded animals shall be in the amount set by Coweta County. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-14. - City designated bird sanctuary except birds constituting a nuisance. 
(a)  The territory within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated a bird sanctuary and it shall be unlawful for any person to kill, trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot, willfully injure, or maim any bird or wild fowl or to rob any bird or wild fowl nests of its eggs. 
(b)  Birds constituting a nuisance: 
(1)  Birds congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a public nuisance or endanger the health of the public or damage property in the opinion of the animal control officer of the city, such officer shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Humane Society or any other such clubs that are found to exist in the city after giving at least three days notice of the time and place for the meeting to representatives of such clubs prior to taking any action to abate the nuisance. 
(2)  Feral or wild pigeons are deemed a public nuisance. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to feed wild or feral pigeons on any public property located within the city limits unless as part of an animal control effort to control bird population. 
b.  If no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance within 30 calendar days such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and manner deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the director of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-15. - Riding animals on sidewalks or private property regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse, donkey, mule, swine, sheep, goat or other animal on the paved or unpaved sidewalks or on private property without the owner's permission within the limits of the city. Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalties described in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-16. - Prohibitions and restrictions in regard to animals permitted at special events. 
(a)  No owner or keeper shall permit any animal, restrained or not, to be in an area in which a special event is being held pursuant to a special event permit issued under this Chapter, unless the event specifically authorizes the presence of animals. 
(b)  This section does not apply to guide, hearing, or service dogs or other dogs which have been trained to accompany a person with a physical disability while being accompanied by a disabled person, or to any dog or horse in the custody or control of a law enforcement officer while the officer is in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-17. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  No person shall keep or maintain any wild animal or exotic pet within the city limits. 
(b)  No person shall keep or maintain any cattle, horse, donkey, mule, ass, swine, sheep, goats, or any other livestock or grazing type animal within the city limits. 
(c)  No person shall keep or maintain any domesticated fowl to include but not limited to chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas, pheasant, emus, ostrich or any other domesticated fowl within the city limits. 
(d)  This section does not apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibits or acts, stable, or riding school, providing the same has applied for and was granted a license or permit. 
(e)  This section does not apply to those persons currently keeping or maintaining any domesticated fowl or other animals that were not previously precluded by the ordinance. Any person having such animal must register the animal before July 1, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-18. - Mistreatment of animals. 
(a)  No person shall starve, beat, neglect, ill-treat, torture, overload, overdrive, overwork, cruelly kill, or inflict unnecessary pain upon any animal. 
(b)  No person shall leave an animal unattended in, or tethered to a standing or parked motor vehicle in a manner that endangers the health and safety of the animal or health and safety of any person. 
(c)  If an animal control officer finds a violation of this section, the officer shall seize and impound the animal and leave written notice of impoundment in a conspicuous location about the premises. The animal will remain as evidence at the animal shelter pending the court's decision. If an owner or keeper is not found the animal will irrevocably become the property of the animal shelter after a three day impound period. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-19. - Humane treatment required. 
(a)  No owner or keeper shall fail to provide clean fresh water, good wholesome food, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane treatment. The owner or keeper must maintain a clean living environment free of accumulated waste and debris so that the animal can walk and lay down without coming into contact with any waste or debris. 
(b)  Proper shelter includes a structure appropriately sized for the animal consisting of four sides, a roof, floor and an opening for ingress and egress. The structure must adequately protect the animal from harsh weather. 
(c)  No person shall crop a dog's ears or tail except a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-20. - Abandoning animals. 
(a)  No owner or keeper shall abandon an animal. 
(b)  If an animal is believed to be abandoned, a written notice must be placed in a conspicuous location about the property giving notice that the animal will be impounded if the owner or keeper does not contact the animal control officer by the date and time indicated on the notice. The notice will remain in effect for a full 24-hour period. 
(c)  If the animal has not been removed after 24 hours or if animal control has not been notified that the animal is being cared for, the animal control officer shall impound the animal at the animal shelter for a period of not less than three days. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-21. - Animal waste. 
An owner or keeper walking, exercising or otherwise having his/her animal outside the confines of his/her own property, whether public or private, shall carry and utilize a means to pick up and dispose of excreta deposited by his/her animal by way of, but not limited to, a scoop and a bag. The contents of the bag shall be disposed of on the confines of the owner's or keeper's property or in a proper receptacle designated for such disposal. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-22. - Striking animals with a motor vehicle. 
Any person operating a motor vehicle, who strikes a domesticated animal shall stop and render any assistance as may be possible and immediately report the injury or death to the animal control officer or other law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-23. - Animal fighting and training. 
(a)  No person shall instigate, cause to, attend, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, or any other fighting between animals or between animals and humans. 
(b)  No person shall train, have equipment to, or permit the training of, any animal to attack, fight or cause injury to any domestic animal or human on any property, public or private within the city limits. Examples of training include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Any activity designated to torment, badger or bait any animal, for purpose of encouraging animals to fight; 
(2)  The use of any weights on the animal, on the animal's tethering device, or on any kind of pulling structure; 
(3)  The use of any other animals for blood sport training; 
(4)  Any other activity that the primary purpose is to train animals to be aggressive or vicious. This does not apply to animals of licensed security companies on patrol in a confined area or animals used for law enforcement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-24. - Female dogs and cats in heat. 
Every female dog and cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or in a kennel or under control such that the female cannot come into contact with another animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-25. - Poisoning animals. 
It shall be unlawful to place any substance or article which has in any manner been treated with a poisonous substance in any place accessible to human beings, birds, dogs, cats or other animals with the intent to harm or kill animals. This section, however, does not preclude the use of commercially sold rodent poisons when applied in accordance with the manufacturer's directions for such use or licensed exterminators using poison as a pest control program. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-26. - Disposal of dead animals. 
The bodies of dead animals shall be disposed of by the owner or keeper. The owner or keeper shall not allow under any circumstances, a dead animal to remain outdoors on his/her property for longer than 24 hours unless buried. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-27. - Performing animal exhibits or acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any animal exhibit or act or circus to induce or encourage animals to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devises in a manner that will cause or likely to cause harm to the animal. 
(b)  All equipment used on performing animals shall fit properly and be in good working order. 
(c)  The animal control officer may inspect any animal exhibit or act or circus to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Failure to comply with this chapter may result in the impoundment of the animal(s) and/or the issuance of citations. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VACCINATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-29. - Generally. 
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the city unless such dog or cat is vaccinated as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-30. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats over four months of age within the county shall be vaccinated against rabies once each year by a licensed veterinarian, who will issue to the owner a durable metal tag and a certificate of vaccination approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. Tags must be attached to the collar or harness of a dog and be worn at all times except by show dogs at showtime. Tags need not be worn by cats. Tags are not transferable from one dog or cat to another dog or cat. 
(b)  The city council may adopt such other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-31. - Health regulations incorporated. 
All rules and regulations of the county board of health and the Georgia Department of Human Resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Secs. 4-32—4-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESTRAINT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

Sec. 4-39. - Maintenance of premises. 
An owner or keeper of an animal shall maintain such owner's or keeper's premises in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to an adjoining property owner or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens in which animals are confined or maintained shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors that could disturb any person residing nearby said premises. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-40. - Animal or fowl enclosures. 
Any pastures or enclosures shall at all times be kept and maintained in a proper, clean and sanitary condition, consistent with the needs of the animal involved. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-41. - Confinement of animals generally. 
(a)  An owner of a dog, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, residing within the city limit boundaries of the city shall confine such dog within an adequate fence or enclosure or electronic device or within a house, garage or other building, or on a leash affixed to the dog's collar and held by a competent person and adequate to prevent the dog from running at large. It shall further be the duty of any owner or keeper of any dog regardless of the size of the owner's lot or property, to keep such dog under such control as to: 
(1)  Prevent such dog from becoming a danger to persons or property at any location, or trespassing upon another person's property without that person's permission; and 
(2)  Prevent such dog from running at large upon the streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other public places. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any dog to fail to keep the dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section. 
(c)  Specifically, a dog is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, keeper, or custodian, and ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended; or 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by an invisible containment system. If using an invisible containment system, a sign must be posted on the property indicating that the system is in place; or; 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person; or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the dog any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsection (1) or (2) above while on the owner's property. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to restrain or anchor an animal by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord, unless a competent person is outside with the animal and within the person's line of sight of the animal or unless the tether or other restraint is being held by a competent person. 
(d)  Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary clinic or hospital or in a kennel or under control in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into contact with a male dog, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to allow a dog or any other animal to enter any commercial establishment where food for human consumption is located or sold unless such dog or any other animal is trained to assist physically disabled individuals. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chickens, ducks, horses, cows, goats, pigs or any other type of animal, livestock or other fowl within the city to permit them to run at large or be a menace or nuisance to such person's neighbors or the public in general. 
(g)  Persons having existing tethering or trolley systems in place shall have until July 1, 2010, to discontinue use of such system and become fully compliant with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-42. - Rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  Every veterinarian shall report promptly to the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the animal control authority all cases of rabies in animals treated by such veterinarian, giving the name and address of the owner. Every veterinarian shall also report the names and addresses of the owner of any animals bitten by such rabid animal, so far as known. 
(b)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies, or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report such information, to the extent known, to the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the animal control authority. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals or other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to incarcerate or impound or have the animal incarcerated or impounded in the facility of some competent veterinarian within Coweta County, where the animal shall be held for observation for such period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether the animal is infected with rabies. All costs of this incarceration shall be borne by the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Secs. 4-43—4-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-49. - Compliance with chapter. 
(a)  An animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any animal, dog or cat over four months of age unless the animal, dog or cat has been vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment and all animals and the premises where such animals are kept, at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-50. - Standards for kennels. 
All kennels shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Standards for kennels are as prescribed in this section. 
(1)  Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors, walls and interior runs of buildings shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting. 
(2)  Building temperature shall be maintained at a range between 45º and 80º Fahrenheit. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained. 
(3)  Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down, and turn around without touching the sides or tops of cages. 
(4)  Cages are to be of material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing. 
(5)  Cage floors shall be of an impervious material, unless radiantly heated and shall have a resting board of some type of bedding. 
(6)  Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. 
(7)  All animals quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition. 
(8)  The food shall be free from contamination, and shall be wholesome and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(9)  All animals shall have fresh water available at all times. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-51. - Standards for pet shops. 
All pet shops, including shops operated in conjunction with another facility, shall in addition to the other requirements of this chapter comply with the minimum standards of this section. Standards for pet shops are as prescribed in this section. 
(1)  Water: There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of 160 degrees for washing cages and disinfecting and cold water easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water and food for consumption shall be available to all spaces of animals at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. 
(2)  Room temperature: The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a range between 45º and 80º Fahrenheit. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained. 
(3)  Cages and enclosures: All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and stretch out to the animals full length. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Secs. 4-52—4-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPOUNDMENT; ADOPTION 

Sec. 4-59. - Impoundment. 
Any animal at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be impounded in the Coweta County Animal Shelter in accordance with Coweta County's Animal Control Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-60. - Reclaiming impounded animals. 
(a)  The owner of an animal impounded in the Coweta County Animal Shelter may reclaim the animal, upon presenting evidence satisfactory to the county animal control authority of compliance with all provisions of this chapter, and upon payment of fees and charges as levied by the county, and which fees and charges shall not be in lieu of any fine or penalty otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Fees for reclaiming impounded animals, including per-day board, shall be as determined from time to time by the Board of Commissioners of Coweta County and listed in its schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-61. - Adoption. 
Adoption of animals impounded at the Coweta County Animal Shelter shall be in accordance with Coweta County's Animal Control Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-62. - Acceptance of animals for euthanasia and disposal. 
Acceptance of animals for euthanasia and disposal at the Coweta County Animal Shelter shall be in accordance with Coweta County Animal Control Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Secs. 4-63—4-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES 

Sec. 4-69. - Enforcement responsibility. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control officer and by the city's police department. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-70. - Interference. 
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control officer or any other officer in the performance of his/her duty or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control officer, except as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-71. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The animal control officer, police officers and other enforcement officers of the city are hereby authorized to obtain a search warrant to enter any premises upon which there is probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter exists, with the search warrant, the animal control officer may enter the premises to examine and take custody of animals whenever the animal control officer determines that the action is appropriate to achieve the purpose of this chapter and in exigent circumstances. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall be authorized to follow the animal and enter upon any enclosure or lot, public or private, within the city limits when the animal control officer has probable cause to believe that an animal is rabid, abused, neglected, dangerous, vicious, or an imminent threat to the health, welfare or safety of the general public, and to take custody of the animal, when appropriate, to achieve the purpose of this chapter and exigent circumstances. 
(c)  The animal control officer may take all necessary steps to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle if the animal is subject to danger of injury due to temperature. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the animal control officer or the city's police officers of this action. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-72. - Summons. 
Representatives of the animal control officer and officers of the city's police department are hereby authorized to issue a summons to any person for violation of any provision of this chapter. The summons shall be in a form approved by the city's municipal court, shall designate the offense charged, and shall require the person so charged to appear before the city's municipal court on a date certain to answer the charges therein contained. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-73. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14 of chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-74. - Equipment. 
The animal control officer is authorized to employ any equipment he/she deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but without limitation to making available, humane wire box traps; and the animal control officer may, subject to conditions he/she may determine, loan such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-75. - Records to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into his/her custody. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Secs. 4-76—4-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21 et seq. 

Sec. 4-79. - Dangerous dogs. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., and any ambiguities or conflicts in this article shall be interpreted in light of those provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-80. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means an individual selected by the governing authority or local government to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Dangerous dog means that, according to the records of an appropriate authority the dog: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Governing authority means the City of Newnan. 
Local government means the city of a contracting municipality of the county or the county. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within this state. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog, which, without provocation, bites a human being on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape whether from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records of an animal control officer provided for in this article. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-81. - Exceptions. 
A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this article. A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this article if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort; was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog and had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-82. - Animal control officer. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint an animal control officer who shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous dogs and dangerous dog owners within the city. 
(2)  To classify or reclassify dogs as dangerous dogs or as potentially dangerous dogs. 
(3)  To follow all post-classification procedures as set out in this article and to present evidence at any hearings held pursuant to this article. 
(4)  To issue certificate of registration to owners of dangerous dog and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(5)  To assure that dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs are properly enclosed in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(6)  To confiscate and in certain cases in accordance with this article destroy certain dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(7)  To prosecute violations of this article as provided by law. 
(b)  In lieu of such appointment by the city manager, the city manager shall be able to contract with the county to provide for the appointment of an animal control officer, who shall perform all of the duties set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-83. - Animal control board. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall appoint an animal control board that shall be made up of five members who shall serve two year staggered terms with three members appointed every two years. Members shall receive such compensation, unless otherwise provided, and shall conduct hearings as required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 and section 4-72. 
(b)  In lieu of such an appointment by the mayor and council, the mayor and council shall be able to contract with the county to provide for the appointment of an animal control board; the terms of such appointments and compensation to be as provided by the county ordinance establishing such board; and the board shall conduct hearings as required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 and section 4-72 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-84. - Investigation and classification. 
Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within an animal control officer's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer or county board of health, the animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-85. - Classification; notice and hearing. 
(a)  As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this article against such owners. As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this article. 
(b)  When a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(c)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed in duplicate by first class mail and by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control board. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in this notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the agency. 
(d)  When the animal control board receives a request for a hearing, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and, in addition thereto, the governing authority or board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing authority or board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(e)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-86. - Registration, insurance, notice and enforcement. 
The animal control officer shall issue a certification of registration to the owners of dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs when the owner shows the animal control officer sufficient evidence of the following: 
(1)  For a potentially dangerous dog: 
a.  A proper enclosure sufficient to confine the dog. 
b.  The posting on the premises where the dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a potentially dangerous dog located on the premises and containing a symbol reasonably calculated to inform children of the presence of the potentially dangerous dog. 
(2)  For a dangerous dog: 
a.  A proper enclosure sufficient to confine the dog. 
b.  The posting on the premises where the dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog located on the premises and containing a symbol reasonably calculated to inform children of the presence of the dangerous dog. 
c.  An insurance policy in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, payable to any person or persons injured by a dangerous dog. 
(3)  The annual fee for the certificate of registration shall be $500.00. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-87. - Restrictions on taking out of enclosures. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-88. - Notification of death, escape, sale or donation. 
The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner is moving from the animal control officer's jurisdiction. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog as required in this section within 30 days after becoming a resident. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-89. - Confiscation; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by section 4-86; 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by section 4-86(3); 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 4-86(2). 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by section 4-86(3); 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 4-86(1). 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-90. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  The animal control officer's authority to investigate shall include the power to enter onto public and private property for the purpose of periodic inspection. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall maintain a copy of all state and local laws applicable to dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs which records shall be available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. The animal control officer shall not be authorized to interpret these laws nor to give advice to owners. 
(c)  This article is adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. to implement the duties for which the city is responsible under state law. This article shall not be construed to impose any additional duties or liability on the city or on its officers and employees or to waive any immunity that is currently provided by law. 
(d)  This article shall be null, void and without effect upon repeal of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. by the Georgia Legislature. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Sec. 4-91. - Contracting services. 
The mayor and council, pursuant to the authority granted by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22, shall be able to contract or enter into agreements with the county, and/or other local governments for joint animal control services for the provision of animal control services required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., or this article and for the separate or joint use of personnel, facilities, boards and equipment used in the provision and enforcement of such services. 
(Ord. No. 10-5, § I, 2-9-10) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-08, § I, adopted March 8, 2005, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 5 in its entirety, and adding a new ch. 5, §§ 5-1—5-6, 5-20—5-27, 5-30—5-38, 5-40, 5-50, 5-60, and 5-70. Former ch. 5 consisted of §§ 5-1—5-7, 5-31—5-33, 5-52—5-58, 5-76—5-89, 5-106, 5-186—5-193, 5-211—5-219, 5-236—5-239, 5-256—5-260, and 5-276—5-279, and derived from the Code of 1972, §§ 5-1—5-9, 9-1—9-7, 9-75—9-83, 9-114, 11-1—11-8, 13-1—13-5, 14½-1—14½-4, 20-1—20-3, 20-6—20-10, 24½-1—24½-5; and the following ordinances: 

 
Charter reference— Codes of technical regulations, § 2.15; building department authorized, § 3.8(1). 
Cross reference— Environment, Ch. 10; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 16; solid waste, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; state-wide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - ADOPTION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 5-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the adoption, administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs and as may further be amended herein. Hereinafter, the State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as set forth hereinafter are hereby adopted, as amended, and shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-2. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof — which are public safety, health, and general welfare — through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-3. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electric Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alteration, repair, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water and sewerage system. 
(7)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the CABO Model Energy Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of the building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)  One- and two-family dwelling. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- and two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(10)  Standard Housing Code. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code (Standard Housing Code), as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair or demolition in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
(11)  Swimming pool code. The provisions of the Standard Swimming Pool Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to all indoor or outdoor pools, spas, tubs or jacuzzis, which have a water depth of greater than 24 inches. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Fire districts. 
(1)  The city shall be divided into two fire districts. The fire districts of the city shall be embraced within the following designated territory: Beginning at a point on the right-of-way of the C.S.X. Railroad Company and Madison Street; thence along the center of Madison Street to Jefferson Street; thence in a northerly direction along the center of Jefferson Street to Wesley Street; thence in a westerly direction along the center of Wesley Street to Brown Street; thence south along the center of Brown Street to Spring Street, thence west along the center of Spring Street to First Avenue; thence south along the center of First Avenue to the main track of the Norfolk and Southern Railway Company; thence east along the center the main track of the Central of Georgia Railway Company to a point which crosses the main line of the C.S.X. Railroad Company at the Union Depot; thence north along the center of the right-of-way of the C.S.X. Railroad Company to Madison Street, to the point of beginning. 
(2)  The remainder of the city shall constitute the second fire district. 
Charter reference— Authority to establish, alter fire limits, § 1.4(21). 
(d)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(e)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(f)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed or altered, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-4. - Building department. 
(a)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of a board, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless be is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(b)  Records. The chief building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, an accurate record of the permits issued by the department. The records of the department shall be open, upon request, for public inspection pursuant to the provisions set forth in the state open records act. 
(c)  Liability. Any officer, employee, or board member, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or board member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provisions of this code, shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(d)  Reports. The chief building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. These reports shall be open to public inspection in accordance with the state Open Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-5. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all of the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The chief building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-6. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified or classified by the state or the city as an historic building when such buildings or structures are judged by the chief building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within the fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Secs. 5-7—5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL; UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 5-20. - General. 
(a)  Authority. The chief building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The chief building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)  Deputies. The chief building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, inspectors, plans examiners and other related technical staff. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-21. - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the chief building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe or hazardous, the chief building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same. If such building or premises is occupied, the chief building official shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the chief building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-22. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the chief building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or in an unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the chief building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-23. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The chief building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The chief building official may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes or other applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-24. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
(a)  Unsafe buildings defined. All buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the city, which have any or all of the following defects, shall be deemed to be "unsafe buildings": 
(1)  Those in which the interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the base of such wall. 
(2)  Those buildings which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of a nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those buildings which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs, or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which they are used or intended to be used. 
(4)  Those buildings which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the city. 
(5)  Those buildings which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein, or may live therein. 
(6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those, which have parts thereof, which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those, which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the city. 
(10)  Those buildings which exist in violation of any ordinance of the city, so as to constitute a nuisance, and to be unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the city. 
(b)  Unsafe buildings as nuisances. All unsafe buildings as defined in this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11 and as provided in this section. 
(c)  Duties of the chief building official. 
(1)  The chief building official of the city is specifically charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of this section; and upon finding, within the corporate limits of the city, an unsafe building, he shall cause an inspection to be made of such building and, if the same is found to be unsafe, shall make a written report of the conditions and defects of such building and such evidence as may be available to the city council. 
(2)  The chief building official, at the time such report is filed with the city council, shall specifically point out the defects in such building which should be repaired, shall specify whether the same is unsafe for human habitation and/or shall recommend to the city council such steps which, in his opinion, should be taken to remedy the conditions found to exist so that such building will no longer be unsafe, as defined herein. 
(3)  Upon such report being filed with the city council by the chief building official, such report shall be considered by the city council at its next regular meeting thereafter. If after consideration of the report and evidence filed by the building inspector the city council shall determine that reasonable cause to proceed exists, the city council shall then order that a hearing be held at a regular meeting of the city council within not less than ten days nor more than 60 days to determine whether the building described in the chief building official's report is an unsafe building. 
a.  The owner or tenants, if any, and lienholders of record, if any, of such building shall be served with a copy of such notice of hearing not less than ten days prior to the date fixed for such hearing. 
b.  The owner and/or lienholders of such building shall be served personally with such notice if they reside or can be found within the city limits. 
c.  If such owners and/or lienholders do not reside in the city or cannot be found in the city, they shall be served by publishing a copy of such notice, addressed to them, in the newspaper having general circulation in the county in which sheriff's advertisement appear, once a week for four weeks immediately preceding the date of such hearing. A copy of such notice shall be mailed to such owner and/or lienholder at their last address, as shown by the tax records of the city, at least 15 days prior to such hearing, by registered or certified mail. 
d.  The tenants in such building, if any, shall be served by leaving a copy with an adult residing in such building. 
(4)  After hearing evidence at the hearing, the city council shall, by resolution, issue an order based upon the evidence produced at such hearing; and if by such order they find and determine such building to be an unsafe building, such order shall specify the acts and things to be done to such building or in or about such building, including demolition if necessary, to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the city and the persons who live or may live in or who may inhabit such building. 
(5)  If any interested party is dissatisfied with the finding of the city council as set forth in subsection (4) of this section, they shall have the right to appeal by writ of certoria to the superior court of the county. 
(6)  If the city council, pursuant to the hearing shall determine that the building is an unsafe building and if they also find that the same is unsafe for human habitation, the tenants and/or inhabitants of such building shall be immediately ordered to vacate the same. Such building shall be posted as an unsafe building, and all persons prohibited from entering therein, except for the purpose of restoring, repairing or demolishing the same, pursuant to an order entered hereunder. 
(7)  If the city council shall determine that such building is unsafe and/or that the same should be demolished, the owner of such building shall be given a reasonable period of time within which to repair the same or demolish the same as the case may be; and upon the failure of the owner to comply with such order within the period of time fixed, the city council shall order the building inspector or such other proper official of the city to repair and/or demolish the same, as required by such order, and assess the total cost thereof against the owner. 
(8)  If the repairing and/or demolishing of such building is performed by the chief building official or such other proper official of the city, such official, upon completion of such work, shall file with the clerk of the city an itemization of the cost of such work. The clerk is hereby ordered to immediately issue an execution against the owner of such property for the total cost of such work, which execution shall constitute a lien against such real estate as of the date of the resolution ordering such work to be done, and which execution shall thereafter be enforced and collected in the same manner as an execution or fifa for unpaid taxes for the city. Such execution shall rank in dignity second only to taxes of the city. 
(9)  The chief building official of the city may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the property, issue a citation for violation of the provisions of this article and require the presence of the violator in court. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-25. - Demolition, removal or relocation of structures. 
(a)  Permits to demolish, remove or relocate structures for which construction was completed prior to January 1, 1940 shall be obtained through the following procedures: 
(1)  Applications for such permits shall be filed with the building department. The application shall be accompanied with a permit fee as set out in the city's schedule of fees. 
(2)  Before any such permits shall be issued, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon, official notice of which shall be advertised in the legal organ of the county at least two times, the earliest of which shall not be published more than 15 days prior to the hearing. For those structures located outside of boundaries of any area, which has been designated as a historic district by the city, the public hearing shall be held at least 30 days after the property has been posted as provided in subparagraph (3) below. For those structures located inside of the boundaries of any area which has been designated as a historic district by the city, the public hearing shall be held at least 60 days after said property has been posted as provided in subparagraph (3) below. 
(3)  Upon filing an application, a sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. Such posted sign shall be not less than six square feet in area, and shall contain information as to the name of the applicant, the owner of the property, a statement indicating that a demolition permit has been applied for, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing regarding such application. 
(4)  The applicant shall give personal notice of such application to all persons owning property within 250 feet of the property, which is the subject of the application. Such notice may be accomplished by personal service to the property owners, or by mailing such notice via certified or registered mail, but in no event shall it be effectuated later than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. 
(5)  In deciding whether to grant or deny the demolition, removal or relocation permit, the mayor and council shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the structure; 
b.  The effect of the demolition, removal or relocation and subsequent use of the property, and whether such would result in substantial detriment to neighboring property owners or to the public good; 
c.  Whether reasonable measures can be utilized to preserve the structure, taking into account the value of the structure and the cost to repair the structure; 
d.  The property rights of the applicant; and 
e.  Whether denying the permit application would create great practical difficulty or an unnecessary hardship on the applicant or property owner. 
(6)  The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(b)  Demolition, removal or relocation of any structure shall not proceed until first obtaining a demolition permit from the building department. It shall be the duty of the applicant to furnish evidence that any structure for which an application for a demolition, removal or relocation permit is filed was constructed after January 1, 1940. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-26. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the chief building official. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-27. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided the chief building official has reviewed any such alternate. The chief building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the chief building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The chief building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate, 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Secs. 5-28, 5-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 5-30. - Permit application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the chief building official and obtain the required permit for the work. A permit shall not be issued to an owner, who is neither a licensed contractor nor the occupant of a residential structure being altered. 
(b)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs, valued at $1,000.00 or less, may be made with the approval of the chief building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(c)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the chief building official. The application shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its exact location, a list of subcontractors and their state certification numbers, signature of the owner or his authorized agent, the intended building use and building square footage, and other such information as required by the chief building official. 
(d)  Time limitations. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The chief building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-31. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. Two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. Copies of drawings and specifications which bear the copyright seal or statement of a design professional will not be accepted with the permit application unless specifically authorized by the design professional. 
(b)  Additional data. The chief building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the chief building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings or structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required; however, copies of drawings and specifications which bear the copyright seal or statement of a design professional will not be accepted with the permit application unless specifically authorized by the design professional. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. A boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor shall be required for all building permits if so determined by the chief building official. 
(f)  Foundation survey. Whenever it is proposed to erect or alter a permanent residential structure within the city, the building department shall require that the builder provide the department with a survey of the full and complete foundation for that structure, when both of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The foundation extends to within five feet of a required setback line. 
(2)  The required setback line is less than five feet. 
The building official may also require a foundation survey in any situation where it is felt a structure has encroached into a setback area, regardless of how it is shown in a proposed site plan, commercial or residential. 
If a foundation survey is required for a structure, no work shall be done on that structure beyond the foundation phase of the project until such time as a foundation survey is submitted to the building department and approved. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05; Ord. No. 17-19, § I, 10-24-17 ) 
Sec. 5-32. - Examination of documents. 
The chief building official, or his authorized representative, shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-33. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The chief building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the chief building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, be shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a commercial building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the chief building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The foundation permit will authorize the contractor to build up to the finish floor elevation of the foundation. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(c)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the chief building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley, or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises in conflict with the city zoning ordinance. It shall be the duty of the applicant to locate the property lines and boundaries of the right-of-ways adjacent to the lot for which the proposed exterior wall, bay, balcony, or other appendage or projection is to be built. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-34. - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state rules and regulations concerning licensing. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the building department with a copy of that state license before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-35. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed as a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes. The chief building official may require a correction of errors in plans, construction or any other violations of the construction codes. 
(b)  Expiration of permit. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. One 90-day extension of time may be allowed for each permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated to the satisfaction of the chief building official within the first 180-day period. The chief building official shall issue the extension in writing. 
(c)  Plans. When the chief building official issues a permit, be shall delineate, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." The chief building official shall retain one set of drawings so reviewed and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the chief building official, or by his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-36. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in the adopted schedule of fees have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, etc. systems before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The chief building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and the amount thereof. 
(d)  Building permit valuations. Construction valuation shall be determined by the building size and type and in accordance with the figures located in the building valuation table published by the International Code Council (ICC). If, in the opinion of the chief building official, the valuation appears to be underestimated, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the chief building official. Permit valuations shall include the total cost, such as building, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including material and labor. 
(e)  Reinspection fees. The adopted schedule of fees shall prescribe the amount of the reinspection fee charged. The reinspection fee shall be applied to the project requiring additional visits by the inspector due to a previous corrective order. The fee shall be applied for each reinspection performed. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05; Ord. No. 17-10, § 1, 7-18-17 ) 
Sec. 5-37. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the chief building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for winch an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the chief building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations requiring a correction to comply with the construction codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The chief building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f). In such cases that the city does not retain a qualified inspector on staff, he may accept, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability, reports from other qualified inspectors as defined in O.C.G.A. 8-2-26.1. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. The chief building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for winch a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit card shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the chief building official or his representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position until the chief building official issues the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. 
(f)  Required inspections. The chief building official upon notification from the permit holder shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall state in writing or in person, any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the construction codes: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation and foundation wall inspection: To be made after the trenches are excavated, the reinforcement is in place, and the forms erected, prior to the placing of concrete. 
b.  Slab or floor system: To be made prior to the placing of concrete and/or prior to the floor decking being installed. 
c.  Nail pattern inspection: To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finish materials. 
d.  Framing inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
e.  Insulation: To be made before any of the exterior wall insulation is concealed. The building envelope must be sealed to restrict air passage, with insulation values reflecting energy code requirements. 
f.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for immediate occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after the trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for immediate occupancy. 
(3)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for immediate occupancy. 
(4)  Plumbing and gas. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, gas, water, waste and vent piping is being tested, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected to the appliances, and the structure is ready for immediate occupancy. 
(g)  Written release. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, electrical or work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the chief building official or his representative. 
(h)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder shall notify the chief building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the chief building official or his representative has been received. 
(i)  Fire walls. Walls classified as either for fire barrier or fire separation must be released by the chief building official or his representative before concealing work is to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Charter reference— Regulation of construction of buildings, § 1.4(14). 
Sec. 5-38. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building until after the chief building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required structural, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable codes and other laws and ordinances and released by the chief building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, ordinances, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspections required by ordinance are completed, the chief building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted. 
(3)  Temporary occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a commercial building, when landscaping improvements are not completed and at the discretion of the chief building official. Prior to the issuance of such certificate, the owner, in lieu of installing the required landscaping, shall submit a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount equal to one and one-half (1½) times the amount of the landscaping improvements left to be completed. Such work shall be completed within 90 days from the date of the issuance of the temporary certificate or the bond will be forfeited. If at the end of the 90 days from the issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy all of the landscaping improvements required by ordinance are not completed, the temporary certificate of occupancy shall expire and the commercial building being occupied thereunder shall be vacated. 
(4)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of an addition or renovation including building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may, upon request, be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and released for proper use. 
(b)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a public utility, source of energy, fuel or power supply to any building or system that is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the chief building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The chief building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power supply only for the purpose of testing building service systems. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The chief building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The chief building official shall notify the service provider, and when possible the owner and occupants of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(4)  Connection to city sewerage system. No on-site sewerage management systems are permitted within the city and connection to the city's sewerage system is mandatory, unless otherwise permitted by the rules and regulations adopted by the city's water, sewerage and light commission. 
(5)  Septic tanks, minimum standards. All septic tanks shall be constructed to conform to all requirements of the state board of health. Inspection must be made and same approved before any construction or drainage or disposal bed is covered. 
(6)  Test, specifications for septic tanks. The chief building official, acting as chief plumbing inspector, may delegate his authority pertaining to septic tanks and fields to the county board of health for the purpose of making necessary percolation tests and the specifications for and inspection of septic tanks, grease traps and fields. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TESTS 

Sec. 5-40. - General. 
The chief building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Secs. 5-41—5-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - APPEALS 

Sec. 5-50. - General. 
(a)  Decisions of the chief building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the chief building official to the zoning board of appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to their specific case. 
(2)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations applicable have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(3)  The chief building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of the construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(b)  Notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the chief building official renders the decision. Appeals shall follow the procedures described in the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Secs. 5-51—5-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 5-60. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements of the chief building official, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted by the chief building official, or shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in section 1-14 of this Code of Ordinances. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of a building structure or premises, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or exists, or any person who may have assisted in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in subsection (a) herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Secs. 5-61—5-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 5-70. - Building code amendments. 
Chapter 7, table R 703.4, Footnote (n) of the International Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
(n)  The substrate for vinyl siding must be at a minimum one-half inch wood structural panels or other structural panels of equivalent strength and durability. The use of insulating sheathing and sheathing insulation board, as the sole means of wall sheathing, shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-71. - Electrical code amendments. 
Chapter 3, section 300.1(D) of the National Electric Code is amended to read as follows: 
(D)  Approved surface metal raceway, metal clad cable, rigid metal conduit or electrical metallic tubing shall be required for light, heat or power wiring of all buildings in fire district number one, and in any buildings designed for or used for a commercial or industrial purpose having 5,000 square feet or more floor area in fire district number two. Approved metal raceway, metal clad cable, rigid metal conduit or electrical metallic tubing shall be used in any building where wiring is not concealed in walls or which may be exposed to mechanical damage. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-72. - Plumbing code. 
Appendix J, chapter 9, section 903.1, stack required, of the International Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Every building in which plumbing is installed shall have at least one stack a minimum of 3 inches (75mm) diameter except accessory buildings, which shall have at least one stack a minimum of 1½-inch (37.5mm) diameter. Such stack shall run undiminished in size and as directly as possible from the building drain through to the open air or to vent header that extends to the open air. 
Appendix J, chapter 7, table 710.1(1), footnote (a) of the International Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
A minimum four (4) inch diameter sewer line, with proper cleanouts, shall be installed from the city sewer tap and through the building foundation, to the first branch fitting. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 5-73. - International Residential Code amendments. 
Section R312.1.1.1 to Chapter 3 of the IRC to read as follows: 
R312.1.1.1. When the finish grade surface to a retaining wall attached to a house that has a vertical drop on its opposite side of more than 30 inches (762 mm) below the grade, it shall have a guard (guardrail) not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height. 
Section R403.1.1.1 to Chapter 4 of the IRC to read as follows: 
R403.1.1.1. All exterior walls shall be supported on a continuous concrete footing that contains at least two (2) #4 steel reinforcement bars resting on chairs that are located in the center third of the footing. 
( Ord. No. 17-20, § I, 10-24-17 ) 
Chapter 6 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to license, regulate, control or prohibit occupation, callings and professions, § 1.4(3), (17); licenses, permits and fees, § 6.4. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; planning, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 21; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Authorization of cities to levy and collect taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 6-1. - Occupation tax required. 
(a)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city shall pay an occupation tax each calendar year for said business, trade, profession, or occupation. Upon payment of the occupation tax, the city clerk shall issue a certificate showing that the occupation tax has been paid for the current year, which certificate shall be maintained by each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation and available for inspection by the city clerk or such officer's deputies, or to any police officer of the city so as to aid the city's enforcement of this article and to determine if such tax has been paid. 
(b)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation which does not have a location within the state, which exerts substantial efforts to do business within the city, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax each calendar year for said business, trade, profession, or occupation. Upon payment of the occupational tax, the city clerk shall issue a certificate showing that the occupational tax has been paid for the current year. Said certificate shall be maintained and available for inspection by the city clerk or such officer's deputies, or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the city council to enact an occupational tax ordinance, specifying the rate, terms, and conditions upon which such tax shall be levied upon each person doing business within the city. The occupational tax ordinance may be amended as necessary in accordance with this Code. 
(d)  It shall be the special duty of the chief of police and other police officers of the city to see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced, and, in the performance of this duty, they shall have the right to inspect each person's occupational tax certificate so as to determine whether the occupational tax has been paid in the current year. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-2. - Certificate subject to Charter, ordinance restrictions. 
Certificates issued are to be held and used subject to the restrictions provided by the charter and ordinances of the city. Before a certificate is issued such business shall meet all zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-3. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "City of Newnan" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "Newnan, Georgia;" wherever the term "City" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean "Newnan, Georgia". 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)  (a) Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
(i)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
(ii)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
(iii)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or service; 
(iv)  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
(v)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(b)  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(i)  Sales, use or excise tax; 
(ii)  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
(iii)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities. 
(iv)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
(v)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a non-profit organization, which employs salaried practitioner otherwise covered by this ordinance, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
(vi)  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
(vii)  Sales of product or products which product or products are picked up and delivered from a point located outside the city limits to a final destination point also located outside the city limits, (i.e. said product or products never enter into the city limits). 
(3)  Location of office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
(4)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(5)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by paragraph (8) of O.C.G.A. section 36-71-2 or their costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(6)  Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
(7)  Person wherever used in this ordinance shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization. 
(8)  Practitioner of professions or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(9)  Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 95-4, § I, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 95-44, §§ I—IV, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 04-15, § I, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 6-4. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee of $20.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start up, renewal or re-opening of those accounts. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-5. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city, and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
The tax shall be levied on the gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  To determine basic profitability ratios, each business, practitioner, and occupation is classified according to the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. Table 1 of this chapter contains a listing of two-digit SIC codes, with their corresponding profit ratios and tax classes. Table 2 of this chapter contains a listing of two-digit SIC codes, with their corresponding business descriptions and tax classes. In addition to Tables 1 and 2 which are included with this chapter, an Alphabetical Business Classification (SIC) Index is on file and available for inspection in the clerk's office. 
(c)  Occupation tax schedule: 
The tax classification for each business, trade, profession or occupation is as follows: 

 
(d)  (1) A business or practitioner shall not be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  An occupation tax will not be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's gross receipts. 
(3)  An occupation tax will not be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  No fee is required for the cost of ascertaining whether or not a business or practitioner has paid occupation tax to another local government, but the burden of showing such payment shall be upon the business or practitioner claiming payment to another local government. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 95-44, § V, 12-12-95) 
Sec. 6-6. - Real estate brokers. 
The city shall levy and collect an occupation tax on all real estate brokers who sell property which is located within the corporate limits of the city, which tax shall be based on the occupational tax schedule in section 6-5 of this article with respect to property located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-7. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions listed below shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth herein. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee shall include all persons in the business who qualify as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  Practitioners include: Lawyers; Physicians licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43; Osteopaths licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43; Chiropractors; Podiatrists; Dentists; Optometrists; Psychologists; Veterinarians; Landscape architects; Land surveyors; Practitioners of physiotherapy; Public accountants; Embalmers; Funeral directors; Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; Architects; and Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-8. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
The council requires a registration and the assessment of an occupational tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-9. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated within the city shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. Each business shall register its line of business with the city clerk, and have that line of business noted upon the occupational tax certificate within 90 days of the commencement of such business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 2, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-10. - The number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one store or place, each store or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-11. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the State, a municipality or county of the State, instrumentalities of the United States, the State or a municipality or county of the State, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-12. - Purpose of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-13. - When tax due and payable; delinquency of tax. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specified. Said occupation tax shall be due and payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 1 of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency and shall accrue interest at the rate of one and five-tenths percent per month until said tax, penalties and interest are paid in full. On any new profession, trade, business or occupation begun in the city in 1998 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be due and payable immediately upon beginning business, and shall be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency if not paid within 90 days of the commencement of such business, and interest shall accrue at the rate of one and five-tenths percent per month until said tax, penalties and interest are paid in full. In addition, any person who is delinquent in paying such tax shall, upon conviction by the city judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. Notwithstanding the criminal provisions contained herein, such criminal provisions shall not apply to those professions for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless otherwise specifically allowed for by state law. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the city and its officers may proceed to collect the occupation tax in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 18-94, § I, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 3, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-14. - Gross receipts of businesses with multiple intra or interstate locations. 
For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. In the case where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Provided, however, that no person shall be required to disclose information to the city which is deemed to be a privileged communication pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 24-9-21, 24-9-24, or 24-9-40. Where the business has locations outside the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 4, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-15. - Exemption for state or local authority and nonprofit organizations. 
An occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee will not be required on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 95-44, § VI, 12-12-95) 
Sec. 6-16. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the State license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
Sec. 6-17. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificate of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-18. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to pay. 
All persons subject to the occupational tax levied pursuant to this article shall be required to pay the tax for said business as described in this Article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to pay the tax. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise pay the tax herein provided for within 90 days of commencing the same; and any person who fails the tax prior to the delinquency date for the payment of such tax shall be subject to penalties provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 5, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-18, § 6, adopted June 9, 1998 repealed section 6-19 in its entirety. Former section 6-19 pertained to when registration and tax due and payable and the effect of transacting business when tax delinquent and derived from Ord. No. 13-94, adopted Nov. 8, 1994; and Ord. No. 18-94, § I, adopted Dec. 13, 1994. 
Sec. 6-20. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $200.00. Notwithstanding the criminal provisions contained herein, such criminal provisions shall not apply to those professions for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless otherwise specifically allowed for by state law. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 7, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-21. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(A)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, and the necessity of making numerous returns, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied herein, on or before the times hereinafter set forth, file with the city and its officers the returns hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager, secretary, or other officer of the business subject to said occupation tax for the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before April 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city and its officers, on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the amount of gross receipts for such part year as the full year bears to such part. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 18-94, § I, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 6-22. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year which was not conducted for any period of time in the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for the occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from the commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid as provided in this article. Such tax shall be due upon the commencement of the business, and if not paid within 90 days of the commencement thereby shall be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency and interest shall accrue at the rate of one and five-tenths percent per month until said tax, penalties and interest are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 8, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-23. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and the tax will be calculated at the rate of the dominant line of business conducted by the business identified on a form to be furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-24. - Transfer of certificate. 
Certificates may be transferred upon payment of fee under the following conditions: 
1.  Same ownership, different location. 
2.  Different ownership, same location. 
3.  Any transfer must meet all applicable zoning requirements. The amount of fee shall be $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-25. - Veterans' licenses and certificates of exemption. 
Veterans holding a veteran's license and certificate of exemption shall, before doing business or peddling pursuant to such license and certificate in the city, exhibit such license and certificate and register annually with the city clerk and receive a "no fee veteran's occupation tax certificate" from the city. To be exempt from paying a occupation tax under this chapter, a veteran must qualify under and comply with O.C.G.A. §§ 43-12-1 through 43-12-8. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-26. - Authority to inspect certificates. 
The city taxing authorities, chief of police, all police officers and any authorized agent of the city taxing authorities shall have the right to inspect all certificates and to require the exhibition of the same. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-27. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees". Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia or of the United States, and other local governments. Information provided by a business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupational tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-28. - Inspection of books and records. 
In any case the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which returns are made. The city shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon the demand of the city such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Provided, however, that no person shall be required to disclose information to the city which is deemed to be a privileged communication pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 24-9-21, 24-9-24, or 24-9-40. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for the imposition of a ten percent penalty against such person. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city and its officers at their discretion. If after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional one percent of the deficiency for each month or fraction thereof that the deficiency was due and unpaid shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 9, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-29. - Effect of failure to comply with occupational tax requirements. 
Any person, his manager, agent, or employee who is required to make occupational tax returns, and who fails to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or who refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who makes false returns or who fails to produce the occupation tax certificate when requested to do so by the city; and any person, his manager, agent, or employee who refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge except as provided herein when the officer, agent, employee, or representative of the city requests such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 6-20. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 98-18, § 10, 6-9-98) 
Sec. 6-30. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-31. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-32. - Enforcement of provision. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city and its officers, to inspect all certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-33. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-34. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
(a)  The council may be subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions to locate within the city or a part of a plan to retain or encourage expansion of existing business or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(b)  Notwithstanding, it is apparent to the city that attracting, retaining and encouraging expansion of certain types of manufacturing businesses within the city is vital to the economic well being of the citizens of the city by providing jobs and increasing the property tax base; therefore, as part of an economic plan of development within the city, each manufacturing business classified with an SIC code beginning with section 20 and continuing through and including section 39 shall be given a ten dollar per employee credit as a reduction in the annual occupational tax due by such manufacturing business. 
"Employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. In calculating the number of employees for which credit is to be given, the manufacturer shall use its average daily complement of employees for the preceding year. 
(c)  New vehicle dealerships. Notwithstanding, the city has determined that it is in the best interest of the residents and taxpayers to provide for jobs, increase the property tax base and sales tax receipts and to stimulate economic development, the city shall levy and collect an occupation tax on all new vehicle dealerships located within the city as defined in this section herein. The tax on new vehicle dealerships shall be levied on the total gross income of the new vehicle dealership as reported by said dealership to its automobile manufacturer on the manufacturer's monthly financial statements in combination with the profitability ratio for the new vehicle dealerships as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. Profitability rates for new vehicle dealerships shall be determined in accordance with subsections (c) and (h) of article I, occupational tax of chapter 6, business, City Code of Ordinances. Notwithstanding the language in subsection 6-5(c) of article I, occupational tax of chapter 6, business, City Code of Ordinances, for purposes of this section, the tax rate will be based upon the applicable tax rate per $1,000.00 of gross income. Further, for purposes of this section, "new vehicle dealerships" shall be defined as any new auto dealership located within the city that is licensed, authorized, accepted and approved as a franchisee of an automobile manufacturer that shall: 
(1)  Be required to maintain minimum working capital requirements per manufacturer; 
(2)  Be responsible for market share per trade area as set by the manufacturer on new vehicles; 
(3)  Be responsible for maintaining customer satisfaction indexes per manufacturer's requirements on new vehicles sold and serviced while under the manufacturer's warranty; 
(4)  Be responsible for ongoing training and certification of all employees, especially sales, service, and parts employees as required by the manufacturer on new vehicles; and 
(5)  Be responsible for carrying manufacturer's required level of parts inventory and necessary tools to provide service on new vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 95-3, § I, 3-15-95; Ord. No. 04-11, § I, 5-25-04) 
Sec. 6-35. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-36. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-37. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
Secs. 6-38—6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-52. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
(a)  Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
(d)  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(e)  Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(h)  Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(i)  Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(l)  Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
(m)  Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(n)  Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(o)  Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-53. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March first of each year, an erotic dance establishment permit shall file a verified report with the City clerk showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year and shall pay all occupational taxes then due. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No permittee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment permittee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages or controlled substance upon the premises of the permittee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment permittee shall conspicuously display all permits and certificates required by this article. 
(I)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment permitted hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(o)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-54. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-55. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-56. - Operation of unpermitted premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid permit, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which permit shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-57. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a permitted premises. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-58. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-59. - Location. 
No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-60. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any permitted location for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the permitted location" and "work on any permitted location" shall include work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the permitted locations. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a permitted location, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city clerk requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular City of Newnan or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the permitted location. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after hearing may be appealed to the city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of permit. Violation of the provisions of this code, the ordinances of the City of Newnan, laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or permittee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-61. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee, established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city clerk at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-62. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken with the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license or permit history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license or permit, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name property recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officer or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be permitted; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief of administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-63. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-64. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has ally cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Newnan, State of Georgia or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-65. - Persons prohibited as permittees. 
(a)  No permit provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia or the City of Newnan. 
(B)  Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new permits shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 U.S. 50, 81). 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-66. - Permit; refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-67. - Annual permit fee. 
Adult entertainment establishments may be granted a permit to do business in the city, provided that the permittees meet the requirements set out in this article, upon a payment of a permit fee of $500.00 per year for the period from January 1 to December 31, of each year or any portion thereof, not to be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-68. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners my acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-69. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the city code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-70. - Appeal; procedure. 
The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-71. - Same—Council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-72. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and film city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action taken by city clerk. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-73. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-74. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-75. - Hearing officer report. 
The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city manager and chief of police. 
The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-76. - Same action by council. 
The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-77. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-78. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city, may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-79. - Cleaning of permitted premises. 
Each permitted location shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the permitted premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the permitted location to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire permitted premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-80. - Self-inspection of permitted location. 
The permittee of a permitted location or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the permitted premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city clerk. Each permitted location shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-81. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A permitted location or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city clerk on his finding of violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city clerk shall serve on the permittee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the permitted location, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city clerk may physically seal that portion of the permitted location causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city clerk. The city clerk shall affix to the sealed location a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-82. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A permitted location or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-83. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed entirely, however, nothing contained herein shall act to cancel or invalidate any bonds outstanding on the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Secs. 6-84—6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARDS 

Sec. 6-91. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "automobile salvage yard" shall mean any lot or place which is exposed to the weather upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, are placed. This definition shall include lots used for the actual salvage of motor vehicles or for the temporary storage of vehicles when the storage shall be for a period of more than two days. An automobile salvage yard may be operated or placed in the city only as allowed either as a primary use or as an accessory use pursuant to the City of Newnan Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-92. - Fence required. 
(a)  An automobile salvage yard shall be entirely enclosed by a fence eight feet in height, which shall be kept neatly painted and in good repair at all times, and which shall be constructed of the material which cannot be seen through and built so as to exclude such yard from public view. Failure to construct such fence shall be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Fences enclosing automobile salvage yards shall not be used for bill posting or other advertising purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-93. - Stacking of contents. 
The contents of an automobile salvage yard shall not be placed or deposited to a height greater than the height of the fence surrounding it. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-94. - Cleanliness requirements. 
An automobile salvage yard shall as far as practicable be kept clear and clean of all waste matter. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-95. - Draining of gasoline. 
All tanks and engines of vehicles parked in an automobile salvage yard shall be thoroughly drained of gasoline. 
Secs. 6-96—6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BILLIARD AND POOLROOM 

Sec. 6-101. - Scope of provisions. 
Nothing contained in this article shall apply to billiard or pool table kept for amusement at private residences. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-102. - Windows not to be obscured. 
Windows of pool or billiard parlors shall not be covered or painted to obstruct the view from the street. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-103. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or to permit any person to remain in such billiard room between such prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-104. - Admission of persons under 18 years of age. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to play billiards in, or for any other purpose to enter or remain in, a billiard room or any establishment in which billiard tables are located and in which beer, wine or alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises. This section shall not apply to a person under 18 years of age who is accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal, and the billiard room or the establishment in which the billiard tables are located derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of a billiard room or any establishment in which billiard tables are located in which beer, wine or alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises to permit any person under the age of 18 years to play billiards in, or for any purpose to enter or remain in such room or establishment unless the person under 18 is accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal, and the billiard room or the establishment in which the billiard tables are located derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-105. - Disorderly conduct to be reported. 
It shall be the duty of every person owning or managing a pool or billiard room in the city, to report to the police of the city each and every person guilty of disorderly conduct in the pool or billiard room immediately after the same comes to the knowledge of such owner or manager. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-106. - Miniature pool or billiard tables. 
Miniature pool tables or pocket billiard tables shall be operated subject to all of the provisions governing pool or billiard tables. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Secs. 6-107—6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-14, § I, adopted May 27, 2003, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former art. V, §§ 6-111—6-121, and adding a new art. V. Former art. V, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 13-94, adopted November 8, 1994, and Ord. No. 02-10, adopted May 28, 2002. 

Sec. 6-111. - Scope of provisions. 
Any person soliciting funds, contributions, donations or information or selling items or taking orders door to door, either at businesses or residences, or selling to the public from a non-permanent location shall be deemed to be canvassing, soliciting or peddling and shall register and obtain the permits required by this article. Any person who does not have a permanent place of business in the city, and who displays and/or sells goods, foods, meats, wares or merchandise out of any mobile vehicle or from any temporary location shall be deemed a transient merchant or an itinerant vendor or merchant and shall be subject to obtaining the permit and registering as required by this article; provided, however, a transient or itinerant merchant or vendor shall not include: 
(1)  A person who sells home-raised agricultural products; 
(2)  A traveling salesman representing a business located in the state, taking orders for future delivery; 
(3)  A resident of the city holding a garage, rummage, antique or similar sale; 
(4)  A person operating out of a permanent location in the city; 
(5)  Any officer or employee of any city, county, state or federal government of the school system or any subdivision thereof and on official business nor any local non-profit organization such as boy scouts, civic clubs, school organizations when the membership of the club or organization does the soliciting itself, but it shall apply when the soliciting is done by a paid solicitor or by a solicitor on contract with an individual with only a percentage or portion of any sales or collections to go to the benefit of such nonprofit club or organization. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-112. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser, solicitor, peddler, transient merchants, itinerant merchant or vendor without first having registered at the city hall with the city clerk. Each registrant shall be required to fill out a registration form giving complete identification, signature, name of employer, products sold, name of manufacturer of products, name of organization he is representing, time of operation in the city and proposed method of operation within the city and to provide such other identification of information as may be required. Any person selling or peddling any objects or goods shall, before being issued a permit, file with the police chief proof that the applicant or their business proposed to be conducted pursuant to the license or permit possess a valid state sales tax number issued by the commissioner of revenue of the state and file with the city clerk an occupational tax return and pay such tax as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-113. - Registration fee prescribed; application for identification or registration card. 
Each registrant shall pay to the city clerk of the city a registration fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Each registrant shall then make application with the chief of police for an identification badge, which shall show payment of the registration fee and the days that such applicant has registered to peddle, canvas or solicit within the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-114. - Evidence of good character; issuance of identification card or permit, possession, display. 
(a)  Each applicant for an identification card or permit shall show evidence of good character as required by the chief of police, who is hereby directed to require photographs and fingerprints of each applicant. If, after proper inquiry and investigation, the chief of police shall determine that the applicant is of good character and that the safety of the citizens and property of the city are protected, each applicant shall be issued an identification badge with his photograph thereon indicating that the registration fee has been paid in full, that he has been duly registered, the name of the solicitor, the organization which he represents, and showing thereon the days for which he has registered to peddle, canvas or solicit. 
(b)  Each person, while peddling, canvassing or soliciting within the limits of the city, shall wear and expose such identification badge in a prominent place on his person so as to be visible to the person being solicited or to the police of the city. Possession of this identification badge shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any product or project by the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit without having first registered with the city clerk in accordance with section 6-112, and obtained an identification badge from the chief of police in accordance with section 6-113, and this section or to peddle, solicit or canvass without wearing the identification badge in accordance with this section. Any person violating this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-115. - Applicability of provisions; exceptions. 
Except as set forth in section 6-121 herein, nothing in this article shall apply to officers or employees in the city, county, state or federal governments or the school system, or any subdivisions thereof, when on official business; nor shall it apply to any person holding a regular business license in the city; not to any local nonprofit organization such as boy scouts, civic clubs, school organizations and the like, when the membership of such club or organization does the soliciting itself; but it shall apply when the soliciting is done by a paid solicitor or by a solicitor on contract with an individual with only a percentage or portion of any sales or collections to go to the benefit of such nonprofit club or organization. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-116. - Revocation of card, permit. 
Any identification card or permit may be revoked by the city clerk, the chief of police or his/her designated representative because of, any violation by the registrant (or any one of a group of registrants) of these regulations, or of any ordinance of the city, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and good character required in this article for the original registration. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-117. - Transient merchant; operating on public lands or from vehicle, tax on gross sales. 
(a)  A transient merchant, itinerant merchant or vendor shall not locate and conduct a business from a mobile vehicle or upon the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, walkways, parks, parking lots, right-of-ways, or other public lands of the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each transient merchant, itinerant merchant or vendor after having engaged in business in the city, to report to the city clerk the amount of gross sales made within the city during the period that such transient merchant or itinerant merchant or vendor was licensed and permitted to do business in the city, and to pay to the city clerk such taxes on such gross sales as are required for similar business by the licenses and business regulations of the city. Proof shall further be furnished to the city clerk at such time that all sales taxes due through the commissioner of revenue of the state upon such sales, including the local option sales tax, have been filed and remitted to the commissioner of revenue as required by state law. 
(c)  Any person which shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-118. - Applicability of provisions to farm products and food products. 
The legal right of the local farmer and producer to sell the products of his own farm, orchard, poultry yard, etc., is recognized; but any other person or persons in the city offering for sale such articles as eggs, meat, chickens, butter, milk, cheese, fruits, vegetables, ice cream or frozen treats, or any other food product not specifically covered in this article, shall be deemed a peddler, and every such peddler selling directly to the consumer, even though the delivery may be on orders previously taken, shall be required to obtain a permit from the chief of police, but the restrictions set forth in section 6-121 (c)(1) and (5) shall not apply. No permit shall be required from any bona fide farmer who is selling the products of his own farm, orchard, poultry yard, etc. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-119. - Exemption of disabled or indigent veterans of armed forces. 
(a)  Scope of exemption. It shall be lawful for any disabled or indigent veteran of the armed forces, such veteran is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1, to peddle without obtaining a permit for the privilege of so doing, and a certificate from the probate court of the county stating the fact of his being such disabled or indigent veteran shall be sufficient proof thereof; provided, that this section shall not authorize peddling ardent spirits. The privileges hereby granted shall not be transferred to or used by any other person. 
(b)  Effect of exemption. All such persons are authorized to peddle in the city without first obtaining a license therefore from the city and without being subject to any tax therefore. 
(c)  Affidavit required. Before any such person shall avail himself of the privilege conferred by this section, he shall go before the judge of the probate court of the county and make oath in writing that he served as a soldier and that the business which he proposes to carry on (stating what he proposes to peddle) is his own, and that he will not sell or offer to sell any article for another, directly or indirectly. 
(d)  Issuance of certificate. Upon making and filing the affidavit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the judge of the probate court shall issue certificate stating that such person has taken the oath prescribed, which certificate shall authorize such person making such affidavit and holding such certificate to peddle in the city without procuring a license or being subject to any tax therefore. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-120. - Obstruction of street, highway or sidewalk prohibited. 
No canvasser, solicitor, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or vendor authorized to engage in any business in the city shall, in carrying on such business, obstruct the whole or any part of any sidewalk, street or highway of the city, and any such person peddling in the city or using the streets or sidewalks in the city for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, medicines or merchandise of any kind, shall continually move from place to place in the city, and shall not in the conduct or carrying on of such business obstruct the whole or any part of any sidewalk, street, or highway in the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 6-121. - Regulations for canvassing, soliciting, or peddling. 
Notwithstanding anything else contained herein to the contrary: 
(1)  No person shall be allowed to canvas, solicit, or peddle within the First Fire District of the city except with permission of the city council. 
(2)  No person shall stand on or adjacent to a street, road, or highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(3)  Any transient merchants, as the term is defined in section 6-111 of this article, shall comply with the following: 
a.  No merchandise, goods, or wares shall be sold within fifty feet of any right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any street or sidewalk; 
b.  In the event that a transient merchant attempts to sell on the premises of a business within the city, the transient merchant must furnish written proof of the property owner's consent for the transient merchant to engage in such sales upon the property; 
c.  If a transient merchant is going to sell merchandise, goods, foods, meats, or wares on the premises of a business within the city, the property owner must have sufficient parking on said property to accommodate not only the existing businesses on said property, pursuant to the requirements of the Newnan Zoning Ordinance, but must also demonstrate that it has eight (8) available parking spaces for the sales of the transient merchant; 
d.  Any signs utilized by a transient merchant shall comply with the Newnan Sign Regulations, as set forth in the Newnan Zoning Ordinance; 
e.  The hours of operation for any transient merchant shall be between the hours of 10:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No such sales shall occur on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-27-03) 
Secs. 6-122—6-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 6-126. - Tax. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax upon depository financial institutions located in the City of Newnan at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. The minimum annual amount of such levy upon any depository financial institution shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-127. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, "gross receipts" means the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized in paragraph (l) and (2) of this section during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax is due. Before determining gross receipts there shall be deducted: 
(a)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
(b)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to Article 5A of Chapter 1 of Title 7, the "Domestic International Banking Facility Act;" 
(c)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories, or possessions; 
(d)  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia; and 
(e)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to (b), (c), and (d) of this section, any deductions taken under (a) of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in (b) through (d) of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to (a) through (d) of this section. 
(1)  The items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
(a)  Interest and fees on loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(b)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
(c)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreement to resell; 
(d)  Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations of the State of Georgia or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(e)  Dividends on stock; 
(f)  Income from direct lease financing; 
(g)  Income from fiduciary activities; 
(h)  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
(i)  Other service charges, commissions, and fees; and 
(j)  Other income. 
(2)  The items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
(a)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(b)  Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage-backed securities; 
(c)  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
(d)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
(e)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the State of Georgia or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(f)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
(g)  Loan fees; 
(h)  Loan servicing fees; 
(i)  Other fees and charges; 
(j)  Gross income from real estate-owned operations; 
(k)  Net income from office building operations; 
(l)  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
(m)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
(n)  Miscellaneous operating income; 
(o)  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans, and other assets; and 
(p)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-128. - Filing return; due date. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Secs. 6-129—6-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - INSURERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-7, § I, adopted April 26, 2011, effective Jan. 1, 2012, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 6-136—6-142, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 13-94, adopted Nov. 8, 1994; Ord. No. 95-30, § I, adopted Nov. 28, 1995. 

Sec. 6-136. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Newnan, Georgia, in the amount of $100.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 6-137, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Newnan, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $100.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § I, 4-26-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-137. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $35.00 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § I, 4-26-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-138. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 6-136 hereof in the amount of $100.00 for each such location with the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § I, 4-26-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-139. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by sections 6-136, 6-137 and 6-138 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § I, 4-26-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-140. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by sections 6-136, 6-137 and 6-138 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § I, 4-26-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-141. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 6-136, 6-137 and 6-138 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § I, 4-26-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-142. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Georgia within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § I, 4-26-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-143. - Severability. 
In the event any portion of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia that such adjudication shall in no manner affect other sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally a part of the article. 
(Ord. No. 11-7, § I, 4-26-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Secs. 6-144—6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 6-151. - Scope of provisions. 
Pawnbrokers shall be licensed to engage in business in the city subject to the terms of this article, article I, and other applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-152. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the word "pawnbroker" shall mean a person lending money on person's property, taking possession of such property and holding it as a pledge or pawn, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130, for the security of a loan, or one who purchases property with the right of repurchase or redemption. Any person who purchases jewelry, guns, pistols, household effects or other articles of merchandise or personal property, and at the time thereof gives the seller the privilege of redeeming the same thereafter, shall be held and deemed a pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-153. - Accounts to be kept. 
Pawnbrokers shall keep accounts showing from whom all articles were received and the hour of the day received. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-154. - Records of articles pawned or purchased to be kept. 
Pawnbrokers in the city shall keep accurate books of accounts showing in such books a description of articles pawned or purchased by them, the name of the person by whom deposited or sold and the time when pawned or sold. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to make entries in such books of the information not later than one hour after the same has been taken in. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-155. - Weekly reports required. 
Each person engaging in the business of pawnbroker or conducting a pawnbroker shop in the city shall make a weekly report to the chief of police every Monday of every article or thing pawned to or purchased by him, whether such purchase is unconditional or with the privilege of redeeming on the part of the seller, during the week previous, such report to specify the thing or article giving a full description thereof, such as number, mark, make and all other details as will make identification clear and positive. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-156. - Premises subject to inspection. 
Each person shall hold his shop subject to visitation and inspection by police, and, upon the refusal to submit to such visitation or inspection at any time, the city licensing authorities shall immediately order such business closed. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-157. - Arrangement of goods in stock to facilitate inspection. 
Pawnbrokers shall so arrange their goods in stock as to enable the police of the city to inspect the articles in stock, without unnecessary delay and inconvenience. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-158. - Failure to make reports, keep books; false entries, reports; refusal to permit inspection. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker in the city to fail to keep books or to notify the police department of the city of every article taken in, pawned or bought by the dealer or to fail to enter in the book so kept the name of the person from whom each article is taken in or purchased, or to make a false entry or entries in the book of accounts or to refuse to allow the police to inspect articles acquired. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-159. - Dealing with minors prohibited. 
Pawnbrokers in the city shall not trade with minors and shall not allow minors in their place of business. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Secs. 6-160—6-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-171. - Booth, stall, similar structure obstructing street, highway or sidewalk. 
No person shall be authorized to engage in any business or engage in any business in the city that is conducted wholly or in part from a stand, stall, booth, box or other structure located, situated or placed in or on, or that in any way encroaches upon or extends into any street, highway or sidewalk of the city, or whose business, as conducted or carried on, obstructs in whole or in part any street, highway or sidewalk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-172. - Closing-out and similar sales. 
(a)  Advertising. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to advertise by newspaper, radio, poster signs, or otherwise, and thereby represent that he is operating, offering or maintaining in the city fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, closing-out or going-out-of-business sales, whereby the public or the customers or any such person are led to believe that they are being offered merchandise at reduced rates on account of fire, wreck, bankruptcy, receivership, closing-out or going-out-of-business, when in fact the sales are not bona fide fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, receivership sales, closing-out or going-out-of business sales. It shall be unlawful for any person now or hereafter engaged in business in the city to falsely represent by advertisement, or otherwise, that the goods, wares or merchandise which the person offers for sale be sold at a certain percentage of their cost price or value and then to sell goods, wares or merchandise of a brand or quality inferior to that or those represented or advertised, or to sell such goods, wares or merchandise at a higher percent of their cost value than represented or advertised. 
(b)  Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person represented by advertisement or otherwise that he is conducting in the city a sale of any goods, wares or merchandise, which are or have been, or which are claimed to be or have been, in or damaged by fire, or sold or purchased on account of fire, or which is property of any bankrupt or person who has failed in business, or has made a general assignment, or is or has been in voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of sales, to sell or offer for sale in the city any goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected or damaged, or to add to or replenish any such goods, wares or merchandise with goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-173. - Street sales prohibited within first fire district. 
The streets, sidewalks, and alleys of the city embraced within what is known as the first fire district shall not be used for the sale of any merchandise of any character. The council may from time to time make exception to this rule. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-174. - Trimming trees and shrubs, landscaping, agreement to remove debris prerequisite to certificate. 
(a)  Agreement required. No person shall be issued a permit from the building department to trim trees or shrubs or to perform landscaping in the city unless said person agrees that he will remove the cut limbs and trash from the premises upon which the trees or shrubs are trimmed. 
(b)  Applicability. This section shall not apply to persons who trim trees or shrubs or perform landscaping on such person's own property. 
(c)  Violations. Any person who is issued a permit to trim trees or shrubs within the city, conditioned upon his agreement to remove the debris and trash, and who fails or refuses to remove such debris or trash shall be deemed as violating the terms of this section. 
Sec. 6-175. - Restaurants, fast food establishments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a restaurant, fast food establishment, or other food service establishment in the city without first having obtained a certificate from the Coweta County Health Department, which certificate shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 6-176. - Movie/TV/advertising/production company, use of city streets/sidewalks. 
Use of city streets, sidewalks, parks, or other city owned property by a movie/TV/advertising/production company filming in the city shall be permitted only upon approval by the mayor and council following application setting forth the day(s), time(s), and scope of the intended use. Use of the rental fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Movies/TV/advertising/productions requiring two or more cameras, sound booms, stationary lighting, etc: 
a.  Streets and sidewalks: 
1.  Each production (including the first day's shooting) ..... $200.00 
2.  Each additional day during normal business hours ..... 100.00 
3.  Each additional day after normal business hours ..... 50.00 
b.  Public buildings/spaces (each day): 
1.  Parks ..... $100.00 
2.  Cemeteries ..... 100.00 
3.  Wadsworth Auditorium ..... 200.00 
4.  Wesley Street Gym ..... 100.00 
5.  Any other city-owned property shall be negotiated with the city manager and approved by the mayor and council. 
(2)  Movies/TV/advertising productions requiring a single camera, microphone, or hand held lighting, etc: 
a.  Streets and sidewalks: 
1.  Each production (including the first day's shooting) ..... $50.00 
2.  Each additional day during normal business hours ..... 25.00 
3.  Each additional day after normal business hours ..... 10.00 
b.  Public buildings/spaces (each day): 
1.  Parks ..... $50.00 
2.  Cemeteries ..... 50.00 
3.  Wadsworth Auditorium ..... 100.00 
4.  Wesley Street Gym ..... 50.00 
5.  Any other city-owned property shall be negotiated with the city manager and approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 06-1, § 1, 1-10-06) 
Sec. 6-177. - Carnivals, fairs, circuses. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hold or sponsor any carnival, fair, circus, amusement park, or riding devices, mechanical or animal, in any place within the city limits except at the Coweta County Fairgrounds on Temple Avenue. This restriction shall not apply to singular, coin-operated, mechanical riding devices designed for small children such as a horse, car, boat, rocket ship, or merry-go-around, with not more than three seats for riding at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 13-94, 11-8-94) 
Secs. 6-178—6-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES IN AMUSEMENT CENTERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-94, § I, adopted Nov. 22, 1994, amended ch. 6 by the addition of a new Art. X, §§ 6-221—2-226, pertaining to coin-operated amusement machines in amusement centers. Ord. No. 13-93, adopted May 24, 1993, enacted similar provisions which have been deemed as superseded by provisions of said Ord. No. 14-94. 

Sec. 6-221. - Definitions. 
(a)  Amusement center. An "amusement center" is hereby defined as any establishment where any coin-operated amusement machine is provided for play to the public and more than 50 percent of the total gross revenue of the establishment is generated from coin-operated amusement machines. 
(b)  Amusement center proprietor. An "amusement center proprietor" is hereby defined as any proprietor of an amusement center as both terms are defined herein. 
(c)  Coin-operated amusement machine. "Coin-operated amusement machine" means: Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket or similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to subsections (b) through (f) of Georgia Code section 16-12-35, and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
—Pinball machines; 
—Console machines; 
—Video games; 
—Crane machines; 
—Claw machines; 
—Pusher machines; 
—Bowling machines; 
—Novelty arcade games; 
—Foosball or table soccer machines; 
—Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
—Target or shooting gallery machines; 
—Basketball machines; 
—Shuffleboard machines; 
—Kiddie ride games; 
—Skeeball machines; 
—Air hockey machines; 
—Roll down machines; and 
—Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
(1)  —Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
—Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
—Gas and electric meters; 
—Pay telephones; 
—Pay toilets; 
—Cigarette vending machines; 
—Coin-operated vending machines; 
—Coin-operated scales; 
—Coin-operated gumball machines; 
— Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
—Coin-operated massaged beds; and 
—Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table as defined in paragraph (3) of Georgia Code section 43-8-1; 
—Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
(2)  Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide music whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket or similar object such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
(d)  Operator. The term "operator" as used herein is hereby defined to be any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets up for operation by another and leases or rents for the purpose of operation by another any machine as herein regulated, whether such leasing or renting be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise. 
(e)  Proprietor. A "proprietor" is hereby defined to be any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who, as the owner or lessee, has under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which a coin-operated amusement machine is placed or kept for use or play, or an exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 14-94, § I, 11-22-94) 
Sec. 6-222. - Occupational tax required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an operator or proprietor of coin-operated amusement machines, as the terms are herein defined, without first having paid the required occupational tax as set forth in article I of this chapter and without first having obtained the license required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-94, § I, 11-22-94) 
Sec. 6-223. - Application for tax certificate and license. 
(a)  Application for tax certificate and license hereunder shall be fined in writing with the city clerk, on a form to be provided by the city, and shall specify: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses. 
(2)  Proprietors shall list the address of the premises where the licensed machine(s) are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place. 
(3)  Proprietors shall list the number of machines to be maintained on the premises. 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the machines, if other than the proprietor. This information shall not be released to the general public without the consent of the licensee. 
(5)  Whether or not the person or persons having management of or supervision over the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(b)  The proper tax fee shall accompany such application. Such tax shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and, in the case of a proprietor, shall apply only to the premises for which such tax has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 14-94, § I, 11-22-94) 
Sec. 6-224. - Character qualifications. 
No person shall be permitted to operate an amusement center who has or employs a person who has, within five years of issuance or renewal, been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, any felony involving any federal or state offense or any federal or state misdemeanor involving drug-related offenses or offenses involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 14-94, § I, 11-22-94) 
Sec. 6-225. - Revocation of license. 
In the event that it comes to the attention of the mayor and council that an amusement center has created a nuisance to the surrounding community or the operator or proprietor has violated any provision of this section, the following procedure will be followed: 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the amusement center in question is alleged to be a nuisance or alleged to be in violation of any provision of this section. The city clerk will then notify the proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the mayor and council. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the city clerk. 
(b)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the operator, the proprietor and the city clerk or other witnesses may be heard. Thereafter, the mayor and council shall issue a notice of decision which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this section. 
(c)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decision and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(d)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be binding upon the proprietor and operator of the amusement center under consideration, subject to appeal to the proper court. 
(Ord. No. 14-94, § I, 11-22-94) 
Sec. 6-226. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement center hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(b)  Inspection. The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and shall inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(c)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(d)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licenses to operate an amusement center to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
(3)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(4)  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
(e)  Shirt and shoes required. All proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. 
(f)  Operating hours. Operating hours for the operation of coin-operated amusement machines shall be between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and midnight. 
(g)  License. No separate license fee for such an establishment shall be required except as set forth in article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-94, § I, 11-22-94) 
Secs. 6-227—6-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ELECTRIC SUPPLIERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-6, § I, adopted March 15, 1995, amended ch. 6 by the addition of a new Art. X, §§ 6-221—6-224, pertaining to electric suppliers, which provisions have been redesignated at the discretion of the editor as Art. XI, §§ 6-241—6-244, for the purpose of avoiding the duplication of section numbers. 

Sec. 6-241. - Gross receipts business tax established; verified statement of revenues to be filed. 
Each electric supplier (including specifically Electric Membership Corporations whether or not operated for profit), within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., distributing and selling power within the city which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not said electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the city shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four percent on any and all gross revenue derived from distribution and sale of electric poser to their customers, members, or purchasers within the city, according to the verified statement of said gross revenues which shall be submitted by said electric supplier at the time said taxes are paid. This gross receipts business tax is levied pursuant to authority granted the city in Georgia Laws, 1987, page 5160, at page 5189, sec. 6.3. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § I, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 6-242. - Taxes payable monthly; taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes. 
The taxes hereinbefore set out in this article, shall be due and payable to the city on the 20th day of each month, calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding month; also, the percentage of said gross revenues hereinbefore prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of said electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § I, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 6-243. - Electric service within the city. 
Electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the city, and which do not have a franchise agreement with the city, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax herein levied under this article other than those rights granted under the Georgia Electric Territorial Service Act. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § I, 3-15-95) 
Sec. 6-244. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article, and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms and for the collection of the tax herein levied. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this article. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-6, § I, 3-15-95) 
Secs. 6-245—6-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 6-250. - Franchise fee; monthly charges. 
Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay a franchise fee in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenue served by such company subscribers located within the city. Said franchise fee shall be paid prior to March 1 of each year and shall be based on the gross revenues as herein defined for the previous calendar year. 
Recurring local service revenues" shall mean: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semi-public pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(4)  Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Ord. No. 95-29, § 1, 11-28-95) 
Secs. 6-251—6-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - CABLE OR VIDEO FRANCHISE 

Sec. 6-260. - Franchise fee for local issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video local issued franchise in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 08-2, § 1, 1-22-08) 
Sec. 6-261. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 08-2, § 2, 1-22-08) 
Sec. 6-262. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes city manager, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 08-2, § 3, 1-22-08) 
Secs. 6-263—6-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - EXCISE TAX ON RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 6-270. - Levy of tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-90 through 48-13-96 (as adopted by the General Assembly in March, 1996) authorizing each municipality in the State of Georgia to impose, levy, and collect an excise tax upon certain rental motor vehicles, there is hereby levied an excise tax on the charges to the public for such automotive vehicle rentals from locations within the City of Newnan; provided, however, that the tax shall not be levied upon the fees or charges for vehicle rentals when such charges are excluded as provided in section 6-272 of this article. 
The rental motor vehicle tax shall be levied and the resulting city finances shall be used pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93, subparagraph (a)(2), for the purpose of promoting industry, trade, commerce, and tourism; for the provision of convention, trade, ports, and recreational facilities; and for public safety purposes, as described more particularly in section 6-280 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-271. - Rate. 
The rental motor vehicle tax rate shall be three percent of taxable charges to the public for rental of motor vehicles within the City of Newnan. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-272. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the meanings shown below when used in this article: 
Rental motor vehicle. Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in this state. 
Rental motor vehicle business. A rental motor vehicle business is a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Taxable charges. Taxable charges are the total charges received by a rental motor vehicle business for the rental or lease of a motor vehicle for 31 or fewer consecutive days, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver, but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes and sales taxes. Taxable charges shall not include rental charges associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: (1) the customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside this state and returns it in this state; or (2) the customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in this state and returns it outside this state. 
Taxable event. Rental charges collected by a rental motor vehicle business when such charge constitutes a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under 13 O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 8, Article 1, shall be deemed a taxable event for purposes of this article. The tax levied hereunder shall be imposed only at the time when and place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-273. - Customer liable for payment of tax. 
A customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to a tax levied pursuant to this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle business, and shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle business until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-274. - Return; payment of tax. 
The rental motor vehicle business collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the city finance department, and the tax remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed on the rental motor vehicle business. Every rental motor vehicle business subject to a tax levied pursuant to this article shall be liable for the tax at the applicable rate on the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
Each rental motor vehicle business collecting said tax shall on or before the twentieth day of each month transmit to the city finance department a return showing the total automotive rental charges collected during the preceding calendar month, the amounts of the various exclusions as provided by this article, and the tax amount due. Said rental motor vehicle business shall remit the tax to the City of Newnan with its monthly tax return. Such return shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city finance department. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-275. - Collection fee. 
Each rental motor vehicle business collecting the tax levied by this article shall be allowed a collection fee of three percent of the tax due to the City of Newnan. Such collection free shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction from the tax amount due, provided that the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment, and provided further that no other city taxes, fees, or assessments are delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-276. - Penalties. 
When any person liable hereunder fails to make a return or pay the full amount of the required tax, a penalty shall be added to the tax in the amount of $25.00 or ten percent, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days, plus one percent penalty interest for each additional 30 days or portion thereof during which the failure continues; provided, however, that if such failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city finance director in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is within ten days of the due date, such returns may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent return or the failure to file a return, where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due herein, a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. All penalties and interest imposed herein shall be payable and collectible by the city finance department in the manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-277. - Execution and fifa. 
In any case where a person or firm liable for paying rental motor vehicle taxes as provided herein fails to do so, the city finance director shall be authorized to determine the amount of taxes due using the best information available, either by return filed or by other means, and to execute and record one or more fifa's for such unpaid taxes. Any fifa so executed and recorded shall constitute a lien on the real property of the facility for which the tax is due, and such portion of any other real property owned by said person or firm as may be required to satisfy the total amount due in taxes and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-278. - Condition for doing business. 
Payment of rental motor vehicle taxes as provided by this article is a condition for doing businesses within the city as an automotive rental business, and failure to pay the tax shall be grounds for revocation of business tax certificate and subject to the penalties as provided in section 6-20 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-279. - City examination of records authorized. 
For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return required to be filed by this article, or to determine the amount of taxes due, any authorized representative of the City of Newnan shall have free and complete access to all reasonable times to any books, papers, records, or other information bearing upon said return or taxes due. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-280. - Use of tax proceeds. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93, subparagraph (a)(2), this article levying an excise tax on rental motor vehicles shall specify with particularity the authorized projects or purposes, or both, for which proceeds of the tax are to be expended in each fiscal year during which the tax is collected. Such tax proceeds shall be used for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Promoting industry, trade, commerce, and tourism; 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with capital outlay projects funded pursuant to subparagraph (2) above. Amounts collected pursuant to this article may be expended pursuant to a contract or contracts with a county, municipality, development authority, downtown development authority, urban redevelopment authority, recreation authority, or any combination of two or more of such entitles. 
In accordance with the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93, subparagraph (a)(2) and (a)(3) as set forth above, the City of Newnan will expend the proceeds of this tax to promote trade, commerce and tourism. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-281. - Annual audit requirement. 
As a part of the annual audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the city finances and expenditures pertaining to the tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-282. - Termination of authority to levy the tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93, subparagraph (a)(4), the tax levied by this article shall terminate not late than December 31, 2038, and thereafter the City of Newnan shall not be authorized to levy a rental motor vehicle tax. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 6-283. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. If a court of competent jurisdiction determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision. 
(Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Secs. 6-284—6-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - PREPAID WIRELESS TRANSACTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-18, § 1, adopted Nov. 22, 2011, effective Jan. 1, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XV, §§ 6-281—6-284. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as §§ 6-301—6-603. 

Sec. 6-301. - Charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(Ord. No. 11-18, § 1(6-281), 11-22-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-302. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. No. 11-18, § 1(6-282), 11-22-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-303. - Administrative provisions. 
The Clerk of the City of Newnan, Georgia is hereby directed to file with the State Revenue Commissioner a certified copy of this ordinance and amendments thereto in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), by December 31, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 11-18, § 1(6-283), 11-22-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 6-304. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received from prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges imposed by this ordinance shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by Coweta County, Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(d)(2) and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 11-18, § 1(6-284), 11-22-11, eff. 1-1-12) 

 

 
Alphabetical Business Classification (SIC) Index 
The Alphabetical Business Classification (SIC) Index is not set out herein but available for inspection in the clerk's office. 
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to acquire, operate, etc., cemeteries, § 1.4(12). 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; permit for disturbing burial place in land development, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; preservation and protection of abandoned or unmaintained cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Superintendent of cemeteries—Generally. 
There shall be appointed as provided by the city charter a superintendent of cemeteries who shall give his entire time and service to the proper care of the city cemeteries. He shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 6-1) 
Sec. 7-2. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The superintendent of cemeteries shall be responsible for the care, management and control of all cemeteries which are owned by the city or which have been assigned to the superintendent by the city manager. 
The superintendent shall direct the improvement and embellishment of the walks, drives, avenues and grounds in such cemeteries and shall provide for the protection of all property, public and private, therein and for the maintenance of order therein. 
(Code 1972, § 6-3; Ord. No. 08-3, § I, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 7-3. - Record of lot owners; written authority from lot owner prerequisite to burial. 
The superintendent shall keep a record of the owners of the lots in the cemetery, and shall not allow any corpse to be buried on a private lot without written authority of the owner of such lot. 
(Code 1972, § 6-4) 
Sec. 7-4. - Records of burials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the superintendent of cemeteries to keep a record, in a bound book to be used for that purpose only, of all burials in the city, giving the name, nativity, age and sex of each person. 
(b)  He shall also keep a record of the number of lot in which persons are interred, and if the bodies are removed to any other lot, shall make a record of the fact. This record shall be a large and substantial book and shall at all times be subject to inspection of persons desiring to see such book. 
(Code 1972, § 6-5) 
Sec. 7-5. - Record of deaths. 
The superintendent of cemeteries shall keep a book of records containing the names, ages, places of nativity, and diseases causing death, of all persons interred in the cemetery. 
(Code 1972, § 6-6) 
Sec. 7-6. - Purchase of lots. 
(a)  Installment plan authorized. Lots may be purchased under an installment payment plan with at least one-fourth of the purchase price paid in cash at the time of purchase. The balance is to be paid in 12 equal monthly installments bearing interest at a rate of 12 percent per annum. In no case shall these monthly installments be less than $25.00. The purchaser shall execute to the city an installment promissory note for the unpaid balance. Any deviation from this payment plan must be approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Price. The price of the burial spaces in the various city cemeteries shall be established by the city council and may be altered from time to time by action of the council. A cemetery lot price schedule shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. The price of the cemetery lots shall be based upon the number of burial spaces, and such price shall include perpetual upkeep. Each burial space shall be five feet by ten feet. 
(Code 1972, § 6-7; Ord. No. 3-90, § 6-7, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 7-7. - Lots not to be reserved; sale of lots in unopened section prohibited. 
No cemetery lots shall be reserved in any section of the cemetery. No lots shall be sold in any section that has not been opened by the city. 
(Code 1972, § 6-8) 
Sec. 7-8. - Charges for opening graves. 
The city shall charge for opening graves. These charges shall be established by the city council and may be altered from time to time by action of the council. A schedule of grave opening fees shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. Payment of grave opening fees must be paid in full when the service is performed and may not be paid under an installment payment plan. 
(Code 1972, § 6-10; Ord. No. 4-90, § 6-10, 1-8-90) 
Sec. 7-9. - Sale of lots. 
The cemetery superintendent shall negotiate all sales of cemetery lots and shall give the purchaser a receipt for the cost of the lot and shall forthwith transmit the funds to the city clerk and treasurer's office. 
(Code 1972, § 6-13) 
Sec. 7-10. - Payment of fees prerequisite to doing work in cemetery. 
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of cemeteries to collect in advance all fees before issuing a permit for the digging of a grave or the keeping of lots and all other work done in the cemeteries of the city. All funds so collected shall forthwith be transmitted to the city clerk and treasurer. 
(Code 1972, § 6-14) 
Sec. 7-11. - Permission required for sale or exchange of privately owned lot. 
No privately owned cemetery lot or any portion of a lot can be disposed of or exchanged without the permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 6-15) 
Sec. 7-12. - Fee for recording transfer of lot ownership. 
A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of recognition of any transfer of ownership of a cemetery lot made on his records. 
(Code 1972, § 6-16) 
Sec. 7-13. - Beautification of lots. 
All beautification of a cemetery lot made by the proprietor thereof shall be simple and shall be kept at the expense of the proprietor and shall be in accordance with deed restrictions or other ordinances in effect at the time of purchase. The proprietor shall apprise the superintendent of cemeteries of any work and shall receive a permit for such beautification. 
(Code 1972, § 6-17) 
Sec. 7-14. - Removal of flowers, wreaths, etc., from lots. 
(a)  No florist, firm or individual shall come onto any lot or grave at any time to remove therefrom any flowers, wreaths, arrangements, pots, stands, easels, frames or any item whatsoever except at the written direction of the lot owner and with the knowledge and supervision of the cemetery superintendent. Any violator will be charged with an offense against the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the lot owner or of a member of the family of the deceased to contact the superintendent within four days after any flowers, wreaths, arrangements, or the like, have been placed on any lot or grave and to give the superintendent instructions as to the disposal or disposition of same. Failure to contact the superintendent within the four days will be considered authorization for him to remove any or all of the florals that have become unsightly or disarranged. 
(c)  Florals or artificial materials will be removed by the superintendent when they become faded, weather-beaten, or otherwise unsightly and objectionable to the general appearance of the cemetery. Special occasion artificial arrangements (such as for Easter, Mother's Day, Christmas, etc.) will be removed after 30 days. 
(Code 1972, § 6-18) 
Sec. 7-15. - Maintenance of shrubs and trees on lots. 
(a)  Duty of owner. It shall be the duty of every person owning a burial lot in the public cemetery to keep each and every tree, shrub or bush on his lot well-proportioned, shapely and neat. 
(b)  Duty upon notice from cemetery superintendent. If the owner of any burial lot in the public cemetery shall fail to keep each and every tree, shrub or bush in his lot well-proportioned, shapely and neat, it shall be the duty of the superintendent to notify the owner of any such lot to trim or prune the tree, shrub or bush. It shall be the duty of the owner notified as aforesaid to trim or prune the tree, shrub or bush. 
(c)  Effect of noncompliance with notice. If any owner of any lot in the cemetery notified to trim or prune the tree, shrub or bush fails or refuses to prune or trim the same within five days after notice from the city cemetery superintendent as aforesaid, then the superintendent shall notify the city council, who if they deem it right and proper shall order the superintendent to trim or prune or remove or cause to be removed any such tree, shrub or bush at the expense of the owner of any such lot. 
(Code 1972, § 6-19) 
Sec. 7-16. - Removal of offensive or improper objects from lots. 
If any monument, marker, seat, vase or urn or any structure whatever or any inscription be placed in or upon any cemetery lot which shall be determined by the city council to be offensive or improper, or injurious to the appearance of surrounding lots or grounds, they shall have the right, and it shall be their duty to enter upon such lot and remove the offensive or improper object. 
(Code 1972, § 6-20) 
Sec. 7-17. - Erection, location of monuments, gravestones, markers. 
(a)  Number on lot; dimensions. To prevent the excessive and unsightly crowding of tombstones, not more than one monument, gravestone or marker above the surface of the ground shall be permitted on one lot, and the same shall conform to the following heights: 

 
Bases for stones, monuments, etc., shall not exceed seven feet in length on four grave lots and ten feet in length on eight grave lots or larger, and the stones shall not be in excess of two feet in width, lots of three grave spaces or less will not be permitted to erect monuments; only footstones or headstones shall be allowed. All monuments shall be set in the center of the lot and a permit to erect the monument shall be obtained from the cemetery superintendent. 
A fee for said permit shall be established by the city council in accordance with the type marker, monument or gravestone that is to be erected on the lot. This charge shall be set forth in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Structures to mark grave. Headstones or footstones for graves, or any structure used to mark a grave must not be more than six inches above the surface of the ground, nor more than two feet in width. The footstone or headstone shall be six inches from the property line and centered in front of the grave space. 
(c)  Slabs. Slabs will not be permitted, either erect or reclining, in sections 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, and 43 of the Oak Hill Cemetery. Slabs to be erected in the remaining sections shall be of marble, granite, or bronze and shall not exceed seven feet in length, three feet in width, and shall be not less than four inches in thickness. Slabs shall not extend more than four inches above the ground surface. Slabs shall be set on an adequate foundation of a mixture of cement and sand or granite dust not less than four inches thick that will insure its permanency and shall be erected under supervision of the superintendent of cemeteries. The city shall not be liable for any damages to or breakage of a slab caused by routine maintenance operations. Prior to delivery and installation of a slab, the burial lot owner or person seeking permission to erect a slab must first execute a waiver releasing the city from any liability for damages to the slab. 
(d)  Material; setting. All monument work placed on lots shall be of marble, granite or bronze, shall be set on a solid concrete foundation that will assure its permanency and shall be erected under supervision of the superintendent of cemeteries. In no case shall the concrete foundation be of less than 18 inches deep. 
(e)  Prohibited work. No iron or wire and no seats or grave coverings will be allowed on lots. The reproduction of a photograph on glass, porcelain, plastic or other materials attached to a memorial is prohibited. 
(f)  Corner posts. All corner posts shall be set flush with the surface of the ground. 
(g)  Any monument company who places a monument, footstone or headstone in any city cemetery that is not in compliance with these regulations shall be brought before the city council, and their licenses shall be revoked for a period of not less than six months. 
(Code 1972, § 6-21; Ord. No. 17-94, § I, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 08-3, §§ II, III, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 7-18. - Lot enclosures. 
The city council may approve lot enclosures in sections 17 through 37 inclusive of the Oak Hill Cemetery, so long as those enclosures are designed and constructed in a manner that assures aesthetic harmony with the remainder of the cemetery and are designed and constructed in a manner that does not significantly increase the cost to the city in maintaining the cemetery. 
(Code 1972, § 6-22) 
Sec. 7-19. - Markers to indicate corners of lots. 
Each cemetery lot can be marked with markers set at each corner, the same not to be over four inches square and set flush with the lawn. 
(Code 1972, § 6-23) 
Sec. 7-20. - "For Sale" signs prohibited on cemetery grounds. 
No sign indicating that a lot or vault is "FOR SALE" will be permitted in the cemetery grounds. 
(Code 1972, § 6-24) 
Sec. 7-21. - Use of streets and sidewalks in cemetery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use the streets and sidewalks in and through the cemetery as a means of ingress and egress, either by pedestrian or vehicular means, except for cemetery purposes. 
(b)  Cemetery purposes shall be limited to interment of the deceased in columbarium's, mausoleums, diggings and filling of graves, and the maintenance of the grounds, landscaping, structures, walks and headstones and other grave monuments, visiting the grave sites of deceased family members and friends, and conducting historical research and inventory of graves subject to the provisions of the applicable code sections of this chapter, but specifically shall not include any recreational type activity not related to cemetery purposes, such as internet or cell phone based gaming or geocaching. 
(Code 1972, § 6-25; Ord. No. 16-7, § I, 8-9-16 ) 
Sec. 7-22. - Cemetery to be closed at night. 
The cemetery shall be closed every day from sundown to sunup. 
(Code 1972, § 6-26) 
Sec. 7-23. - Frequenting cemetery after dark. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to visit or frequent the public cemetery after dark, except that any owner, by application to the city cemetery superintendent, may be permitted to visit his lot therein. 
(Code 1972, § 6-27) 
Sec. 7-24. - Leaving waste in cemetery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person entering in or upon the cemetery to leave any waste. It shall also be unlawful for any such person, upon erection of a monument, to leave in the cemetery any material used or waste from the erection thereof, except the dirt removed from the foundation. 
(Code 1972, § 6-28) 
Sec. 7-25. - Defacing, damaging, removing, etc., graves, monuments, trees, and other cemetery property. 
No person shall in any way disturb any grave, deface, pull up or remove anything put or placed to mark a grave, or any paling or wall placed around a grave, or remove any plank, post, timber, brick or stone in the cemetery, or mutilate, destroy, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure placed in the city cemetery, or any fence, railing or other work for the protection or ornamentation of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure aforesaid, or for the ornamentation or protection of the cemetery, or wilfully destroy, cut, break, remove or injure any tree, shrub, or plant that may have been planted, or that may be growing in the cemetery, or commit any other trespass in the limits of the cemetery. 
(Code 1972, § 6-29) 
Sec. 7-26. - Aboveground vault, crypt or mausoleum. 
(a)  Restrictions. No aboveground vault, crypt or mausoleum shall be higher than three feet six inches; and no aboveground vault, crypt or mausoleum shall be permitted in sections 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 38, 41, 42, and 43 of the Oak Hill Cemetery. 
(b)  Lot size; location. No vault, crypt or mausoleum shall be permitted aboveground, except where a lot shall contain at least 400 square feet, and shall not be placed nearer than two feet from any lot line. 
(c)  Material; setting. All parts of aboveground vaults, crypts or mausoleums aboveground shall be of marble, granite or other cut stone and shall be set on a solid concrete foundation that will assure its permanency and shall be erected under supervision of the superintendent of cemeteries. In no case shall concrete foundations be of less than 18 inches deep. 
(Code 1972, § 6-30; Ord. No. 11-90, § I(6-30), 3-12-90; Ord. No. 08-3, § IV, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 7-27. - Oak Hill Cemetery. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all lots in the Oak Hill Cemetery as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-3, § I, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 7-28. - Eastview Cemetery. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all lots in the Eastview Cemetery except as set forth herein: 
(1)  No restrictions on the erection or location of monuments, or gravestones as set forth in section 7-17 of this article. 
(2)  No restrictions on lot enclosures as set forth in section 7-18 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-3, § I, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 7-29. - Eastview Cemetery Annex. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all lots in the Eastview Cemetery Annex except as set forth herein: 
(1)  Erection, location of monuments, gravestones, markers. 
a.  Number on lot; dimensions. To prevent the excessive and unsightly crowding of tombstones, not more than one monument, gravestone or marker above the surface of the ground shall be permitted on one lot, and the same shall have a maximum height of three feet, six inches. 
Bases for stones, monuments, etc., shall not exceed seven feet in length on four grave lots and ten feet in length on eight grave lots or larger, and the stones shall not be in excess of two feet in width, lots of three grave spaces or less will not be permitted to erect monuments; only footstones or headstones shall be allowed. All monuments shall be set in the center of the lot and a permit to erect the monument shall be obtained from the cemetery superintendent. 
A fee for said permit shall be established by the city council in accordance with the type marker, monument or gravestone that is to be erected on the lot. This charge shall be set forth in the city fee schedule. 
b.  Structures to mark grave. Headstones or footstones for graves, or any structure used to mark a grave must not be more than six inches above the surface of the ground, nor more than two feet in width. The footstone or headstone shall be six inches from the property line and centered in front of the grave space. 
c.  Slabs. Slabs will not be permitted, either erect or reclining. 
d.  Material; setting. All monument work placed on lots shall be of marble, granite or bronze, shall be set on a solid concrete foundation that will assure its permanency and shall be erected under supervisor of the superintendent of cemeteries. In no case shall the concrete foundation be of less than 18 inches deep. 
e.  Prohibited work. No iron or wire and no seats or grave coverings will be allowed on lots. The reproduction of a photograph on glass, porcelain, plastic or other materials attached to a memorial is prohibited. 
f.  Corner posts. All corner posts shall be set flush with the surface of the ground. 
g.  Lot enclosures. No lot enclosures shall be permitted. 
h.  Any monument company who places a monument, footstone or headstone in any city cemetery that is not in compliance with these regulations shall be brought before the city council, and their licenses shall be revoked for a period of not less than six months. 
(2)  Aboveground vault, crypt or mausoleum. 
a.  Restrictions. No aboveground vault, crypt or mausoleum shall be higher than three feet, six inches. 
b.  Lot size; location. No vault, crypt or mausoleum shall be permitted aboveground, except where a lot shall contain at least 400 square feet, and shall not be placed nearer than two feet from any lot line. 
c.  Material; setting. All parts of aboveground vaults, crypts or mausoleums aboveground shall be of marble, granite, or other cut stone and shall be set on a solid concrete foundation. 
(Ord. No. 96-3, § I, 2-13-96) 
Secs. 7-30—7-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENTS 

Sec. 7-56. - Personnel to dig graves. 
All graves in the cemeteries must be dug by the superintendent of cemeteries and his assistants. 
(Code 1972, § 6-40) 
Sec. 7-57. - Burials to comply with plan on file. 
All burials in the cemetery shall be made according to the plan on file in the office of the city clerk and treasurer, a copy of which may be obtained by the purchaser of any lot upon request. No deviation from this plan will be permitted. 
(Code 1972, § 6-41) 
Sec. 7-58. - Payment for lot prerequisite to interment. 
No interment shall be made in the cemetery unless the superintendent of cemeteries is furnished with evidence that the burial lot in which the interment is to be made has been purchased of the city and payment therefor has been made. 
(Code 1972, § 6-42) 
Sec. 7-59. - Owner of lot not to charge for interment. 
Proprietors of cemetery lots in any city cemetery shall not allow interments to be made in their lots for a remuneration. 
(Code 1972, § 6-43) 
Sec. 7-60. - Permit to inter. 
(a)  Required. A permit to inter must be obtained from the cemetery superintendent, specifying the name of the person to be interred, the size of the grave and the number of the lot in which the grave is to be opened. 
(b)  Application for permit. It shall be the duty of each person applying for a permit to give the following information: the name of the deceased, the place of nativity, the date of birth, the date of decease, the parents' name, and the lot in which interment is to take place. 
(Code 1972, § 6-44) 
State Law reference— Permits for disposition, disinterment and reinterment, O.C.G.A. § 31-10-20. 
Sec. 7-61. - Certificate of death prerequisite to interment. 
No interment can be made in the city cemetery without a certificate containing the name, age, sex, color, residence, date of death and cause of death of the person to be buried as provided by state statutes. 
(Code 1972, § 6-45) 
State Law reference— Death certificate; filing; medical certification; forwarding death certificate to decedent's county of residence; purging voter registration list, O.C.G.A. § 31-10-15. 
Sec. 7-62. - Notice prerequisite to interment. 
Whenever an interment is to be made in any of the cemeteries in the city, 18 hours' notice thereof must be given to the cemetery superintendent. 
(Code 1972, § 6-46) 
Sec. 7-63. - Interment in vault. 
All interments in any city cemetery shall be in a vault, the style and material to be as approved by the cemetery superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 03-07, § I, 3-11-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-07, § I, adopted March 11, 2003, amended the Code by repealing former § 7-63, and adding a new § 7-63. Former § 7-63 pertained to minimum grave depth, and derived from the Code of 1972, § 6-47; and Ord. No. 11-90, adopted March 12, 1990. 
Sec. 7-64. - Liability of city for breaking vault. 
The city shall not be liable for the breaking of any concrete, steel or other vaults, unless the same is due to the neglect of the city cemetery superintendent. 
(Code 1972, § 6-48) 
Sec. 7-65. - Burial outside cemetery. 
No person shall bury or cause to be buried any dead person in any other place in the city than an approved cemetery. 
(Code 1972, § 6-49) 
Sec. 7-66. - Burial of indigents. 
The superintendent of cemeteries shall not be allowed to bury any person as indigent unless approved by the city manager who shall act in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1972, § 6-50; Ord. No. 08-3, § V, 2-12-08) 
State Law reference— Interment of deceased indigents O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5 et seq. 
Sec. 7-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-3, § VI, adopted Feb. 12, 2008, repealed § 7-67, which pertained to liability of city for fees and derived from Code 1972, § 6-51. 
Sec. 7-68. - Disinterments. 
(a)  Consent required; doing work. No disinterment shall be allowed except upon the written order of the owner of the lot. In every case such disinterment shall be made only by the cemetery superintendent. 
(b)  Notice; time; fee for removal. Notice must be given in advance to the city cemetery superintendent, when a time for removal will be designated. Removal must be made only in the morning and on a weekday. Charges for disinterments shall be established by the city council and may be altered from time to time by action of the city council. A schedule of disinterment fees shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 6-52; Ord. No. 5-90, § 6-52, 1-8-90) 
State Law reference— Permits for disinterment and reinterment, O.C.G.A. § 31-10-20; authority of coroners to disinter bodies, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-45. 
ARTICLE III. - PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF THE FARMER STREET CEMETERY 

Sec. 7-69. - Establishment; purpose. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the City Farmer Street Cemetery Commission and to be referred to in this article as the "commission" for the purposes of planning the protection and preservation of and recommending placement of the improvements and structures within, including, but not limited to, fencing along the perimeter of the above named cemetery, establishing a recommended schedule for the maintenance of the above named cemetery; and to generally protect and preserve the Farmer Street Cemetery. The parcel of land referred to as the Farmer Street Cemetery for the purposes of this article is that parcel of land located on Farmer Street between East Washington Street and Glenn Street within the city further identified as an "Old Abandoned Cemetery" on Tax map N15 Block 5 on the city tax map. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § I, 2-8-00) 
Sec. 7-70. - Composition; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of nine members as follows: one member shall be appointed by each of the seven council members, one member shall be appointed from the tree commission, by its members, and one member shall be appointed from the parks commission by its members. Each member shall be a resident of the county during his or her term of office. The members shall serve until the purpose of the commission as stated in this article is fulfilled or until such time as the purpose of this article is deemed to have been fulfilled by the council or until such time as the commission shall be dissolved as decided by the council, whichever occurs first. Vacancies in office during the term of any appointment shall be filled in the same manner as the person was appointed whose office has become vacant. 
(b)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § I, 2-8-00) 
Sec. 7-71. - Duty; responsibility; authority. 
The commission created in this article shall have the duty, responsibility and authority: 
(1)  To study, develop plans, and establish goals, for the establishment, development, care, preservation, maintenance, and placement of improvements and structures in or around the perimeter of the Farmer Street Cemetery and to present such plans, as a recommendation, to the mayor and council within six (6) months of the commissions' first meeting and thereafter on or before October 1 of each calendar year or as often as may be necessary to insure orderly development of a plan of preservation, care and maintenance of said cemetery. 
(2)  To assist and coordinate its activities with the city tree commission which has the responsibility and duty to provide for and preserve the trees and shrubs within the city and the city parks commission which has the duty of recommending improvements and structures within the city parks, if the commission finds such assistance and coordination to be necessary and appropriate to its activities. 
(3)  To assist the proper authorities and officials of the city in a program to protect, preserve and maintain said cemetery. 
(4)  To assist the proper officials and make available to the general public news and information regarding the protection, preservation, improvement, use and maintenance of said cemetery; to recommend from time to time as necessary ordinances and other programs that will be beneficial to protect, preserve, improve and maintain said cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § I, 2-8-00) 
Sec. 7-72. - Officers' meetings. 
Upon appointment of the initial commission by the mayor and council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedure for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 00-04, § I, 2-8-00) 
Secs. 7-73—7-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES 

Sec. 7-90. - Violations prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or assist another in evading or violating the requirements imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  Any person knowingly violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the city, punishable upon citation before the municipal court. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. 
( Ord. No. 16-7, § II, 8-9-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-7, § II, adopted August 9, 2016 , set out provisions intended for use as Art. III, § 7-70. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as Art. IV, § 7-90. 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections and removal, § 5.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - State law governs. 
The Georgia Municipal Elections Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq., shall govern the conduct of city elections. 
Sec. 8-2. - Date of elections. 
A municipal general election shall be conducted on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. 
Sec. 8-3. - Polling place; times open. 
(a)  The polling place for municipal elections shall be the Newnan City Hall, 25 LaGrange Street, Newnan, Georgia. 
(b)  The polling place shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. on the day of a general or a special election. 
(Ord. No. 01-36, § I, 9-25-01) 
Sec. 8-4. - In person voting equipment to be used. 
In all elections by the people the electors voting in person shall use the Diebold AccuVote-Touchscreen Ballot Station as provided in the Georgia Elections Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § I, 4-15-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-10, § I, adopted April 15, 2003, amended the Code by repealing former § 8-4, and adding a new § 8-4. Former § 8-4 pertained to ballots to be used; and derived from the Code of 1972, § 8-5; and Ord. No. 23-89, adopted August 21, 1989. 
Sec. 8-5. - Absentee voting equipment to be used. 
In all elections by the people the electors voting by absentee ballot shall use the Diebold AccuVote-Optical Scan Tabulator as provided in the Georgia Elections Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § II, 4-15-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-10, § II, adopted April 15, 2003, amended the Code by repealing former § 8-5, and adding a new § 8-5. Former § 8-5 pertained to tabulation of ballot cards; and derived from the Code of 1972, § 8-6; and Ord. No. 23-89, adopted August 21, 1989. 
Sec. 8-6. - Primaries prohibited; all candidates to qualify and be elected at general election. 
No political party shall conduct a primary for the purpose of nominating candidates for the general municipal election of the city. All candidates for any elective municipal office shall qualify and be elected in a general election held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91 et seq. 
(Code 1972, § 8-16) 
State Law reference— Municipalities may provide that no political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-95(b). 
Sec. 8-7. - Registration of electors, county system. 
The city shall use the county voter registration list. Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the county board of registrars shall be eligible to vote in a municipal primary or general election or referendum. For all other purposes, the city clerk is designated as the municipal registrar of the city. 
Sec. 8-8. - Authority to void voting list, to require new registration. 
The city council, at any time they deem advisable, may require new registration as a prerequisite to voting in city elections and may void the voting list as provided by state law. 
(Code 1972, § 8-30) 
State Law reference— Exemption of qualified electors from registration or further qualification, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-132; purging of list of electors by municipalities maintaining their own registration system, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-133; right of board of registrars to reexamine qualifications of electors listed, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-137. 
Sec. 8-9. - Closing date for qualifying and for filing notice of candidacy. 
(a)  The time for qualifying and for filing notice of candidacy for the offices of mayor and members of council of the city shall be in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Elections Code, O.C.G.A section 21-3-91 et seq. 
(b)  Candidates shall file their notice of candidacy in the office of the city clerk for the city. 
(Code 1972, § 8-38; Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 6-24-97) 
State Law reference— Date of municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-51; qualification fees, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-90; filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. 
Sec. 8-10. - County election superintendent to hold elections. 
The election superintendent for Coweta County, Georgia, shall be authorized to perform the duties as superintendent of elections as specified under this chapter, with the exception of the qualification of candidates. 
(Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 6-24-97) 
Chapter 9 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Emergencies, § 2.14. 
Cross reference— Curfew, § 14-12. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide ambulance and emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(3); Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

Sec. 9-1. - County plan adopted. 
The city hereby accepts by reference the emergency management plan adopted by the county on October 2, 1990, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 9-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the City of Newnan. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (c) of this Code section. Upon cessation of the conditions resulting from the event upon which the declaration of the local state of emergency, the mayor shall declare an end to the local emergency. The form of the declaration ending the local emergency shall be similar to that provided in subsection (d) of this Code section. 
(2)  Succession. In the event that the mayor is not available to make a declaration of an emergency, the mayor pro-tem and if the mayor pro-tem is not available, the city manager shall have the authority to exercise these duties set forth in subparagraph (a)(1) hereinabove. 
(b)  Effect of declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
(2)  Individual authorized to implement emergency operation plan. The Coweta County Emergency Management Director and/or his/her designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the county emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
(c)  Declaration of local state of emergency. 
RESOLUTION DECLARING A LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS: In Newnan, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of  (name/type of event)  on the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , and; 
WHEREAS: In the judgment of the Mayor or his designee there exists emergency circumstances in Newnan, Georgia requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Newnan, Georgia, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS: To prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
NOW THEREFORE: Pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
(2)  That the following sections of the Newnan, Georgia Code be implemented: 
□ Overcharging 
□ Registration of Building and Repair Services 
□ Closed or Restricted Areas and curfews during Emergency 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: List other Emergency Management and Response Powers as deemed appropriate. 
____________ O'clock, ____________ M.; this the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 

(d)  Ending a state of emergency. 
RESOLUTION ENDING THE DECLARED LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS: On the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , the City of Newnan declared a local state of emergency due to  (name/type of event)  ; and; 
WHEREAS: Conditions resulting from the event have returned to a manageable, and safe state. 
NOW THEREFORE: The City of Newnan declares that the local state of emergency has ended. 
____________ O'clock, ____________ .M.; this the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 

(Ord. No. 12-14, § 2, 8-28-12) 
Sec. 9-3. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of the City of Newnan may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the City of Newnan, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of city, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the City of Newnan. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the Governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may pursuant with the provisions of section 2-296, Emergency procurement of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Newnan, contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Newnan, or any portion thereof, where: (a) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; (b) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and (c) such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Coweta County Health Department and the City of Newnan Building and Inspections Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(f)  Definitions. 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean-up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the city on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the city pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), is declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months from the date of the State of Emergency declaration issued by the governor is terminated, unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the City of Newnan. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 12-14, § 3, 8-28-12) 
Sec. 9-4. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  Building contractor registration required. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the incorporated areas of the City of Newnan, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto during any state of emergency and during any subsequent recovery period without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the city and having paid fees as provided by this section. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Building contractor. As used in this section the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this section if: (a) he has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the incorporated areas of the city, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the incorporated areas of the city expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or (b) he performs the following activities or services in the incorporated areas of the city expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(c)  Registration; certification. All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the incorporated areas of the City of Newnan during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the building department of the governing authority of the city or such other person designated by the governing authority at the Newnan City Hall or such other place or places designated by the city. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the city governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the city. 
(d)  Registration fees. Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this section at: 
(1)  Contractors with existing City of Newnan Occupational Tax Permit: No Fee. 
(2)  Contractor from within Coweta County, but not City of Newnan Occupational Tax Permit: $50.00. 
(3)  Contractors from outside of Coweta County, but inside the State of Georgia: $100.00. 
(4)  Contractors from outside the State of Georgia: $250.00. 
Registration fees should be paid with a company check or by credit card. 
Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(e)  Penalties. Any building contractor required by this section to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the city as required shall be in violation of this section. Violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the incorporated areas of the city without complying with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Transferability. Each certification issued under this section is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the city or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(g)  Display of registration certification. Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested, to include, but not limited to law enforcement officer, fire fighter, building official, code enforcement officer and others designated by the Newnan City Council. Certified copies of the registration certification will be issued by the City of Newnan, if requested. 
(h)  Revocation; suspension. Each certification granted under this section is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The city governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this section or any other city, state or federal law .If after issuance of a certification, the city desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(i)  Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this section is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not affect the remainder to the section. 
(j)  Effective date; expiration. This section shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted and shall apply to all building contractors doing business in the incorporated areas of the City of Newnan on that date and doing business on any date thereafter. However, this section and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. No. 12-16, § I, 8-28-12) 
Sec. 9-5. - Overcharging for goods, materials, services or housing sold within the city. 
(a)  Overcharging prohibited. In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the City of Newnan has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the City of Newnan to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the city. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the City of Newnan. 
(c)  Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this section upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this section is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not the remainder of the section. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted but shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. No. 12-17, § I, 8-28-12) 
Chapter 10 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to prescribe standards for health and sanitation, § 1.4(19). 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4; adult bookstores and movie houses, § 6-61 et seq.; automotive salvage yards, § 6-91; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 14; littering, § 17-36. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. 
Garbage means wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Occupant means any person living on any premises shall be deemed an occupant, and any person receiving the rent, in whole or in part, of any premises, shall be deemed an agent; on any premises where construction of any kind is in progress, and where employees or workmen eat their dinners or lunches, in or about such premises, or scatter food or lunch in or about such premises the contractor or foreman or other persons in charge of such workmen shall be deemed an occupant; and the person in charge of any market, or stall in any market, shall be deemed an occupant. 
Refuse means combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, bedding; non-combustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral wastes; street rubbish, including but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, contents of litter receptacles, leaves, catchbasin dirt; provided, refuse shall not include earth wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing wastes, boiler-house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings. 
(Code 1972, § 12-1) 
Cross reference— Keeping noisy animals, § 4-4. 
Sec. 10-27. - General authority to compel correction of conditions detrimental to health. 
The city council shall have full power to compel any person within the city to remedy any condition not specifically mentioned in this chapter, or to do any act, or cease to do any act, after due notice, when in their judgment it is necessary to the health of the city, or any neighborhood. 
(Code 1972, § 12-4) 
Charter reference— General health, safety and welfare, § 1.4(41). 
Sec. 10-28. - Failure to abate nuisance; punishment. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who shall erect or continue, after notice to abate, a nuisance which tends to annoy the community, to injure the health of the citizens in general or to corrupt the public morals, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Code 1972, § 12-4.1) 
Sec. 10-29. - Correction of unhealthy, unsanitary, deleterious conditions of property generally. 
(a)  Inspection of property. The superintendent of sanitation of the city shall make or cause to be made inspections of all property lying within the limits of the city at regular intervals, and as often as is deemed necessary, for the purpose of determining and ascertaining if there exists on any property any condition which is unhealthy, unsanitary, infested with insects, rodents or reptiles, or which is a source of annoyance to the property owner's neighbors, the neighborhood or the city. 
(b)  Notice to correct condition. It shall be the duty of the sanitation superintendent to notify any owner, agent in control, or tenant in possession of any property, that is determined by him on account of its condition to be unhealthy, unsanitary, infested with or liable to become infested with insects, rodents or reptiles, or a source of annoyance to the property owner's neighbors or the neighborhood of the city, that such conditions exist on the property. It shall further be the duty of the sanitary superintendent to specify a time, not to exceed 30 days, in such notice, within which such owner, agent in control or tenant in possession of such property shall correct the conditions existing on such property causing it to be as described in this subsection. 
(c)  Service, contents of notice. Such aforementioned notice shall be delivered in person by the superintendent of sanitation or a policeman of the city to the owner, agent in control or tenant in possession of such property. Such notice shall contain a description of such property sufficient to identify it. 
(d)  Duty of owner, occupant. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession of the property to do whatever is necessary within the specified time to remedy the situation and conditions that cause such property to be unhealthy, unsanitary, infested with or liable to become infested with insects, rodents or reptiles, or to be a source of annoyance to such property owner's neighbors, the neighborhood or the city. 
(e)  Effect of noncompliance with notice. If within the time specified in such notice, the situation which existed causing such property to be unhealthy, unsanitary, infested with or liable to become infested with insects, rodents or reptiles, or a source of annoyance to neighbors, the neighborhood or the city, has not been corrected or remedied, and upon refusal or failure of the owner, agent in control or tenant in possession of such property, within such time to correct or remedy such situation, then such owner, agent in control or tenant in possession of such property shall be deemed to have violated the terms of this section. 
(f)  Correction by the city. Upon the refusal or failure of the owner, agent in control or tenant in possession to correct the conditions existing on such property causing it to be as described in this section, the sanitary superintendent shall enter upon the premises and cause the same to be corrected, the cost of which, including administrative costs, shall be chargeable to the owner, and shall be a lien on such property from the date the sanitation superintendent certifies to the city clerk that he has corrected the conditions existing on such property. 
(Code 1972, § 12-5) 
Sec. 10-30. - Accumulated filth; abatement of condition. 
(a)  No person shall allow any filth to accumulate upon his premises, or any matter that causes a stench. Any person may complain to the superintendent of sanitation, or the city council, of such filth or stench, and if such person will make a written complaint of the same, a notice or summons shall be directed to the owner of the premises or the occupant of the premises whereon such filth is accumulated, by the superintendent calling on the owner to show cause before the municipal court, at a time and place to be specified in such summons, why the same should not be adjudged a nuisance and abated. The court shall hear evidence and determine whether the same is a nuisance dangerous to the health of any citizen, and, if that is the judgment, the owner or occupant of the premises shall be directed to abate the same, and on refusal the same may be abated by the sanitary superintendent at the expense of the owner or occupant, as the case may be. 
(b)  Anyone failing to correct nuisances specified in this section 10-30 as directed by municipal court shall be in violation and shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-14 or shall be held in contempt of municipal court. 
(Code 1972, § 12-6) 
Sec. 10-31. - Authority to institute proceedings to abate nuisance on property. 
The superintendent of sanitation is hereby empowered in any case in which complaint may be made to him by any citizen, or where his investigation as health officer shows it to be necessary, to summon before the municipal court, the owner, agent in control or tenant in possession of any premises on which it is claimed a nuisance exists, and to hear evidence and determine the question of the existence of such nuisance. In all such cases if a nuisance is adjudged to exist, the same shall, by order of the court, be abated. 
(Code 1972, § 12-7) 
Sec. 10-32. - Rank growth of plants; accumulations of trash, junked vehicles, etc. 
(a)  Plant growth. It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any real property in the city to permit any weeds, grass or plants other than trees, bushes or flowers or other ornamental plant growth to a height to exceed 12 inches anywhere in the city; and such plants or weeds exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Accumulation of trash, weeds, and junked vehicles. It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any real property in the city to permit or cause the accumulation or presence of any rubbish, trash, refuse, litter, unsightly materials or abandoned vehicles on the aforesaid premises; any such accumulation or presence of the aforesaid materials are hereby declared a nuisance. 
(c)  Duty of chief of police. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow or upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which there is an accumulation or presence of trash, refuse, litter, unsightly waste materials or junked vehicle and violation of the provisions of this chapter and so demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten days or the appropriate department of the city may proceed to abate such nuisance, keep an account of the expenses of the abatement and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner or occupant. 
(d)  Lien upon premises. Charges for such weed growth, trash, refuse, or abandoned vehicle removal shall be a lien upon the premise. Whenever a bill for such charge remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the clerk may file in the clerk's office a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and cost incurred and the date the weed growth, trash, refuse and abandoned vehicle are removed and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known; provided, however, that failure of the clerk to record such a lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for such charges as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Sale of property under execution for nonpayment. Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed growth, rubbish, trash, refuse, or abandoned vehicle, removal shall be sold under execution for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting cost, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be equity in the name of the city. The procedure for sale under execution for the cost or removal shall be the same as set by the law. The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over such matter, against any property which such bill has remained unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered. 
(Code 1972, § 12-8) 
State Law reference— Abandoned automobiles as solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(11); authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
Sec. 10-33. - Uncovered wells. 
All wells not properly covered in enclosed or unenclosed lots in this city are hereby declared nuisances. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or neglect to safely cover and properly protect all persons and animals from the danger of any open well on his premises within four hours, when notified so to do by the police. 
(Code 1972, § 12-8.1) 
State Law reference— Abatement of hazard from abandoned well or hole, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 10-34. - Unsheltered storage of junked personalty. 
(a)  Declared nuisance. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, wrecked, junked and other automobiles and personalty not in good and safe condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, hereinafter referred to as "unusable personalty," for a period of 90 days or more within the city is prohibited and declared to be a public and private nuisance and dangerous to the public safety. 
(b)  Abatement of nuisance by owner. The owner, tenants, lessees, operators, managers and/or occupants of any lot or business establishment within the city upon which storage of such unused personalty is made shall jointly and severally abate such nuisance by the prompt removal of such unused personalty into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, or by removal of such unused personalty from the limits of the city. 
(c)  Logs and records. The owner, tenant, lessee, operator, manager and/or occupant of any such business establishment shall keep and maintain a log and/or records showing when such vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal property were stored. Such person shall furnish such log or record to the police upon request for inspection. 
(d)  Penalty. If the owner, tenant, lessee, operator, manager and occupant allows such nuisance to exist and fails to abate such nuisance or fails to keep the log or record as required by subsection (c) of this section, each of them upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in section 1-14, or may be held in contempt of the municipal court. 
(e)  Abatement by the city. Whenever the owner, tenant, lessee, operator, manager and occupant fails to abate such nuisance after notice from the city, the city shall have the authority to remove such unused personalty to a location of its selection, the expenses therefor to be charged to the owner, tenant, lessee, operator, manager or occupant. If the charges are not paid, the city clerk is hereby authorized to issue fi. fas. to enforce such collection. Such unused personalty may be sold by the city if no claim is made therefor within 60 days after its removal. The proceeds of such sale shall first be used to pay the costs of abatement; and the owner, tenant, lessee, operator, manager and occupant shall be liable to the city for the balance of any costs jointly and severally. If the proceeds are in excess of the costs of abatement, the balance shall be paid to the owner, tenant, lessee, operator, manager or occupant, if identifiable, and, if not, paid into the treasury of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 12-8.2) 
Sec. 10-35. - Outdoor storage of vehicle tires prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stack or store new or used automobile, truck or tractor tires in an outdoor area within the city. The storage of all of such tires shall be in an enclosed and covered area within the city. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or prevent the outdoor display of tires for sale during normal business hours; provided, however, that such tires are stored in an enclosed and covered area after normal operating hours. A violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Code 1972, § 12-8.3) 
Sec. 10-36. - Noises. 
(a)  Prohibited. All loud, excessive or unusual noises, whether made by mechanical devices, vehicles, radios, sirens or horns, are prohibited within the city. 
(b)  Definition. Loud, excessive or unusual noises are defined as noises which disturb the comfort, quiet or repose of any citizen. 
(c)  Restricted uses and activities. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the following standards shall apply to activities or sources of noise set forth below: 
(1)  Construction 1,000 feet from any residential district or section shall not be performed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless such activities are deemed emergency work. 
(2)  Landscaping activities, i.e. lawn mowing, hedge trimming, tree trimming, etc. shall not be performed in any residential district or section between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless such activities are deemed emergency work. 
(3)  Within the City of Newnan's Zoning District Central Business District (CBD), no person shall employ or operate any sustained or amplified sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(d)  Exception. The foregoing shall not apply to advertisements of athletic contests or announcements thereof authorized upon a permit issued by the chief of police or to duly authorized emergency vehicles responding to an emergency call or incident. 
(Code 1972, § 16-13; Ord. No. 17-22, § I, 11-28-17, eff. 12-11-17 ) 
Secs. 10-37—10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-15, adopted Nov. 22, 2016 , repealed the former Art. III, §§ 10-50—10-59, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-14, § I, adopted Sept. 14, 2010. 

Sec. 10-50. - Short title. 
This article will be known as "City of Newnan Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-51. - Findings and intent. 
It is hereby found that soil erosion and sediment deposition are occurring as a result of widespread failure to apply proper soil erosion and sedimentation control practices in land clearing, soil movement, and construction activities, and that such erosion and sediment deposition result in pollution of water and damage to domestic, agricultural, recreational, fish and wildlife, and other resource uses. It is, therefore, declared to be the policy of this city and the intent of this section to provide for the establishment and implementation of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures to conserve and protect land and water resources, in accordance with the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (H.B. No. 174, 1975 Session, General Assembly of Georgia), as amended. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-52. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMP's): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission ("GSWCC"). 
Costal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources ("DNR"), 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 10-54(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscape areas) or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 10-53(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of the City of Newnan, a municipal corporation which is certified by the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources as an local issuing authority, pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation, or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination from provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (i) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (ii) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Road drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown, or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-53. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority. 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 10-54(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section. 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Public water system reservoir: Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-54. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 10-54(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES General Permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMP. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act" for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in (c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site and preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters and waters beyond the levels specified in this section. 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair, or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; of which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as long an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream, crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 10-54(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-55. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirement. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Newnan without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official of the City of Newnan to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be made in the name of the owner of property, holding record title. Any agent making application for an owner shall provide written designation of his authority. The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building official and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan, with supporting date, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the date specified in paragraph (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 10-54 of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by ten copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan prepare or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
(3)  A fee shall be charged for each application, and no application shall be deemed complete unless the requisite fee is paid at time of filing The amount of required fee shall be set forth in a fee schedule, maintained in the office of the building official, as from time to time revised by resolution of the city council. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 10-54 has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 10-55(b)(7), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of a surety bond issued by a company licensed in the State of Georgia and returnable to the City of Newnan, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 10-54 of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 10-54 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 10-55(b)(7) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  A permit issued under this article shall not be valid for work commencing more than six months after its issuance date. Where work is not timely commenced, or work on the project is suspended for more than three months after commencement, the local issuing authority shall automatically suspend the permit, until the applicant provides a statement from a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control, certifying that, based upon diligent investigation, no material changes have occurred since the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan was originally approved. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-56. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city engineer or his designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served immediately upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city engineer or his designee shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-57. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining a required permit, the person shall be subject to the revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that all land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 10-55(b)(7). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, and magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-58. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-59. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the City Council of the City of Newnan within 15 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Coweta County. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Sec. 10-60. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the date of adoption. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, 11-22-16 ) 
Secs. 10-61—10-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREE PRESERVATION AND LANDSCAPING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, adopted June 26, 2003 , repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 10-81—10-86, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-01, § 1, adopted January 11, 2000; Ord. No. 00-36, adopted Nov. 14, 2000. 

Sec. 10-81. - Purpose. 
This tree preservation and landscaping ordinance has been developed to benefit the environmental and aesthetic quality of the City of Newnan. The intent is to create an opportunity and promote preservation of the city's natural resources and grow in a way that will provide a healthy environment for Newnan's future. The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the preservation of trees as part of the land development process; to prevent massive grading of land, both developed and undeveloped, without provision for replacement of trees; and to protect trees during construction whenever possible in order to enhance the quality of life within the City of Newnan. The regulations of this tree preservation and landscaping ordinance shall be the definitive, unless otherwise directed by the Zoning Ordinance or City Code. The benefits derived from this article include: 
(1)  Provide visual buffering and enhance beautification of the city; 
(2)  Moderation of storm water runoff, and improved water quality; 
(3)  Protect and attempt to enhance property values, thus safeguarding private and public investment; 
(4)  Protect the unique identity of Newnan by promoting native plants and the use of the city's signature plant palette; 
(5)  Control soil erosion; 
(6)  Reduction of some air pollutants and interception of airborne particulate matter; 
(7)  Preserve stands of trees and "specimen" trees; and 
(8)  Protect natural vegetation except where its removal is necessary for responsible property development or control of disease and infestation. This article shall serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing of land and its disturbance, so as to preserve, insofar as possible, the natural and existing growth of vegetation, and to replace whenever possible the removed foliage with new vegetation. 
( Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 6-26-03 ) 
Sec. 10-82. - Definition of terms. 
The following definitions are to clarify terms found in this article. Terms in this article that are not defined herewith shall be defined by the definition provided by the American Heritage Dictionary, Second College Edition or comparable dictionary. If the term cannot be found or if there is no logical nexus between the term in this article and a dictionary, the zoning administrator shall seek to provide a suitable definition. 
Adjoining land, lot, or parcel. A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. 
Aesthetic. The perception of artistic elements or elements in the natural or created environment that are pleasing to the eye. 
Amenities. A natural or created feature that enhances the aesthetic quality, visual appeal, or makes more attractive or satisfying a particular property, place, or area. 
Buffer. 
(1)  Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, light, or other environmental nuisance; 
(2)  An area along some natural feature designated to protect and/or preserve the essential character of such feature and allow it to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition; 
(3)  A natural undisturbed portion of a lot, except for approved access and utility crossings, which is set aside to achieve a 100 percent visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and/or uses. A buffer is achieved with natural vegetation, and must be replanted subject to approval of the city landscape architect when sparsely vegetated. Clearing of undergrowth from a buffer is prohibited excepted when accomplished under the supervision of the city landscape architect. Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance, to shield or block noise, light, glare, visual, or other conditions, to block physical passage to non-similar areas, or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. Also "buffer area" or "buffer strip." Graded slopes in a landscape strip shall not be steeper than 4 to 1. 
Caliper. A method of measuring the diameter of a tree trunk for the purpose of size grading or classification. The caliper of the trunk is measured six inches above the ground, up to and including four-inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
City landscape architect. The agent of City of Newnan having the primary responsibilities of administration and enforcement of the tree protection and landscape ordinance. 
Clearing. The selective removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
Clear-cutting. The indiscriminate and broad removal of trees, shrubs, or undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for non-agricultural development purposes. This definition shall not include the selective removal of non-native tree and shrub species when the soil is left relatively undisturbed; removal of dead trees; or normal mowing operations (See also "clearing"). 
Critical root zone. The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone is approximately one foot of radial distance for every inch of tree's DBH, with a minimum of eight feet. 
Cut. 
(1)  A portion of land surface or area from which soil, earth, rock, or other materials has been removed or will be removed by excavation; 
(2)  The height below original ground surface after the material has been or will be removed. 
DBH. Diameter-at-breast-height, which is the tree trunk diameter (in inches) at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Deciduous. Plants that annually lose their leaves. 
Development. All structures and other modifications of the natural landscape above and below ground or water, on a particular site, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations. 
Drip line. A vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree's branch tips to the ground. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Evergreen. Plants that retain foliage throughout the year. 
Existing density factor (EDF). The tree density units awarded for the preservation of existing trees which will remain on site to be protected during construction. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground; the height above original ground surface after the material has been or will be added. 
Grade, existing. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Grade, finished. The final grade or elevation of the ground surface after cutting or filling and conforming to a proposed and approved design. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this shall include stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or a combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Grubbing. The removal of stumps or roots from a site. 
Land clearance. Removal or all trees and/or vegetation from the and surface. 
Land disturbance activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state and local waters or onto lands within the state, including but not limited to clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, or filling of land but not including agricultural practices such as a family vegetable plot. 
Land disturbance permit. Any permit other than a building permit issued by the city that authorizes clearing, grubbing, excavating, filling, or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be clearing, clearing and grubbing, or development permit as defined and authorized under the development regulations of the City of Newnan. 
Landscape plan. A component of a development, site, or other plan required by this article and the landscape ordinance on which is shown those details required by the City of Newnan Landscape Ordinance. 
Landscape strip. Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are allowed. The deposition of storm water runoff into, or drainage swales through, a landscape strip is not permitted. Graded slopes in a landscape strip shall not be steeper than 4 to 1. 
Landscaping. 
(1)  An expanse of natural scenery; or 
(2)  Any combination a natural and man-planted and maintained features including lawns, trees, shrubs, other plants, decorative or natural ground cover, exposed rock, mulch, wood chips, water features, sculpture, paths, etc. 
Natural features. Trees or other living vegetation, and rocks. 
Replacement density factor (RDF). The minimum number of tree density units which must be achieved on a property after calculating tree density units for existing trees (EDF) which will remain on site to be protected during construction. 
Screening. The method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby densely planted vegetation. Screening is designed to reduce the effects of objectionable or potentially objectionable uses and activities between incompatible uses. Breaks in screens shall be permitted to provide adequate ingress and egress as needed. 
Sediment. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity; the product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Shrub. Prostrate or upright woody plants, either evergreen or deciduous with a mature height usually less than ten feet. 
Site. 
(1)  Any tract, lot, or parcel or land in combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land which are in one ownership or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project; 
(2)  All contiguous land and bodies of water in one ownership, graded or proposed for grading or development as a unit, although not necessarily at one time; 
(3)  Regarding historic properties, a site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Site density factor (SDF). The minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property after development. (Fifteen units per acre, exclusive of any acreage within a zoning buffer and any trees required to be preserved or planted in a zoning buffer). 
Site plan. A document or group of documents containing sketches, text, drawings, maps, photographs, and other material intended to present and explain certain elements of a proposed development, including physical design, siting of buildings and structures, interior vehicular and pedestrian access, the provision of improvements, and the interrelationship of these elements. 
Specimen tree. Any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, species or historic relevance. 
Stripping. Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal clearing, grubbing, and storage or removal of topsoil. 
Timber. Harvestable trees; wooded areas. 
Timbering. The act of removing harvestable trees and wooded areas for profit. 
Topography. The configuration of surface features of a region, including its relief and rivers, lakes, and showing relative elevations. 
Tract. An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is subject of a development application. 
Tree. Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which normally obtains a trunk diameter of at least two inches and a height of at least ten feet, and typically has a main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree, canopy. These trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
Tree, understory. Those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of under 40 feet. 
Tree density standard. The minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property after development. 
Tree density unit. A credit assigned to a tree, based on the diameter of the tree, in accordance with tables contained in this article. 
Tree diameter. The cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree has more than one trunk, only the largest trunk shall be used to establish the tree diameter for the tree. 
Tree protection area. Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be retained in order to comply with the requirements of this article. The tree protection area shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the dripline of the tree plus any additional area encompassing the critical root zone of a tree or group of trees collectively. 
Tree protection plan. A plan that identifies tree protection areas, existing trees to e retained and proposed trees to be planted on a property to meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of tree preservation to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree removal. Any act which causes a tree to die within three years after commission of the act, including but not limited to damage inflicted upon the root system or trunk as a result of: 
(1)  The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
(2)  The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
(3)  Soil compaction; 
(4)  Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the tree's root system with more than four inches of soil; 
(5)  Pruning judged to be excessive by city landscape architect or not in accordance with the standards set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA); 
(6)  Paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; and 
(7)  Application of herbicides or defoliates to any trees without first obtaining a permit. 
Tree save area. An area designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving natural trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Tree thinning. Selective cutting or thinning of trees for the clear purpose of good forestry management in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be construed as clear cutting. 
Weeds. Any undesired, uncultivated plant, especially one growing in profusion so as to crowd out a desired crop, disfigure a lawn, etc. For the purposes of this article, weeds shall also include grass and /or underbrush in non-agriculturally used property, which is at least 12 inches tall. 
Weeds, untended. Those plants, shrubs, underbrush, grass and other uncultivated plants which grow sporadically without care or attention. 
Zoning buffer. A buffer, as defined in and required by the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special exception, or variance approval for a specific property. 
( Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 6-26-03 ) 
Sec. 10-83. - Applicability, permitting, and procedures. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all activity which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit on any real property within the City of Newnan. No clearing, grubbing, grading, or other removal of existing vegetation that may effect the health of existing tree coverage may occur until it is determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of this article. Table 1—Summary of Applicability and Exemptions summarizes those activities which are exempt from the provisions of this article and those for which a tree protection plan and a landscape plan must be approved prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit (LDP). 

 
The city landscape architect, as part of the review team, will conduct a preliminary review of all rezoning cases and special use permit applications. Conditions to rezoning will be applied where determined necessary by the preliminary review. These conditions may be either general, or specific in nature, and will reflect the standards or provisions of this article and the zoning ordinance. Compliance to these conditions will be verified by review of a revised site plan prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
Developers and design professionals may meet at any time with the city landscape architect to discuss the tree preservation planning process. The city landscape architect is available for field inspections of site conditions prior to submittal to assist in the design process as it relates to preserving trees. Information can also be disseminated about how to prepare a tree protection and/or landscape plan for submittal in order to minimize plan review time. 
(1)  Permitting process. 
a.  Prior to the submission of any permit drawings, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the city landscape architect to discuss the tree protection/landscape ordinance as it relates to the applicant's property. The purpose of the pre submittal conference is to clarify the provisions and procedures of the ordinance and review applicable standards and guidelines for the submittal of documents, and required tree protection, replacement, and maintenance measures. 
b.  Tree protection plan and a landscape plan, three copies, either as separate or combined drawings, along with other permit drawings, are to be submitted as part of the plan approval and/or land disturbance permit process to the City of Newnan Planning Department. These plans will be reviewed by the city landscape architect for compliance with the City of Newnan Zoning Ordinance and this article in particular and either approved, denied, or returned for revisions. Any comments will be made available to the designer for response or revision to the drawings. The plans shall then be resubmitted (along with previous red line comments), with the necessary changes, following the same procedure as if it were an original application. Issuance of a land disturbance permit is contingent upon approval of the tree protection plan/landscape plan. 
(2)  Procedures. 
a.  All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to any land disturbance, and the city landscape architect shall be contacted for a pre-construction conference prior to any land disturbance. To adequately protect the site, tree save areas shall be delineated in the field with tree protection fencing. Land disturbance may proceed only after a permit is obtained and tree protection measures have been installed and approved by the city landscape architect. The city landscape architect will conduct unscheduled inspections during construction to ensure compliance with the approved tree protection plan. The city landscape architect shall have the authority to stop work on a development if site activities do not comply with the approved tree protection plan and/or this article. 
b.  A tree removal permit is required to remove any tree larger than eight inches in diameter from any property. There will be a fee for obtaining a tree removal permit based on the number of trees to be removed. Some tree removal permits may be granted without a tree removal fee in accordance with section 10-84(9) of this article. If any significant trees are removed from any property without a tree removal permit, the property owner shall pay a fine of three times the tree removal fee calculated. Minimum required site tree densities must be maintained at all times. Failure to maintain the required tree densities may result in re-plantings. 
c.  Any specimen tree which is removed without appropriate review and approval of the city landscape architect will be replaced by trees equaling a two times an inch for inch replacement of the tree removed. The owner of the property shall be required to replace said tree or trees with replacement trees which will be three-inch minimum caliper. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition. Such action may also result in a stop work order issued by the city landscape architect. 
d.  In the event any specimen tree or trees should not survive more than 60 months following completion of development, the owner of the property shall be required to replace said tree or trees with replacement trees (three-inch minimum caliper) having an inch for inch replacement of the specimen tree removed on the site as approved by the city landscape architect. Failure to maintain the required tree density factor at any time during the life of the project shall be a violation of this article. 
e.  An approved tree protection/landscape plan must be implemented prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. When the developer/owner has installed the required landscaping improvements, he shall request an inspection by the city landscape architect. If the city landscape architect approves the installation, the developer will then post a two-year landscape establishment bond. After the landscape establishment bond has been received, the project will then be released for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the city landscape architect does not approve the plan, he shall submit a report stating his reasons for disapproval so that the developer can make the necessary corrections. After the corrections have been made, a re-inspection shall be requested. 
f.  At the end of the two-year landscape establishment period, the city landscape architect shall inspect the site and shall make a determination of whether or not the required trees and landscaping are healthy and have a reasonable chance of surviving to maturity. Upon such finding, the bond shall be released. In absence of such finding, the bond shall not be released and the owner of the property shall be notified to replace the unhealthy trees and landscaping or take other appropriate action as approved by the city landscape architect. Upon failure of the owner to comply with the city landscape architect's decision regarding such trees, the city shall use the bond to the extent necessary to bring the property into compliance. Final inspection shall be scheduled within ten working days' notice. 
g.  Trees, which are used to meet the tree density requirements, shall be fully maintained for an additional five years after the date of final landscape establishment inspection. It is the responsibility of the property owner to water, fertilize and treat trees in order to maintain tree health and vigor. The property owner shall, at all times, maintain the required tree density. Failure to maintain the required tree density factor at any time during the life of the project shall be a violation of this article. Trees which have been used to meet the tree density requirements shall not be removed at any time without approval of the city landscape architect. Removal of such trees will result in replacement of like kind and size. 
h.  It shall be the duty of the city landscape architect to enforce the provisions and requirements of this article. The city landscape architect shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any land disturbance permit and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or a portion thereof. 
i.  Land clearing for clearly agricultural purposes, including legitimate timber harvesting; plant or tree nurseries; orchards, is exempt. However, this exemption shall not be interpreted to include tree harvesting incidental to the development of land, or tree harvesting on land that is anticipated to be developed for non horticultural uses. All legitimate timber harvesting shall be required to provide a 50-foot undisturbed buffer provided and maintained along the entire perimeter of the property, including road frontages, during the land disturbance activity, except for authorized access crossings. Once tree harvesting takes place in conformity with the above regulations, no development of the property shall be permitted that would require the cutting of trees preserved for a period of five years following the timber harvesting. No timber harvesting shall be undertaken on any non residential parcel of land unless the transitional buffer zones required by the zoning regulations of the district in which located, are preserved in a natural and undisturbed state. 
( Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 6-26-03 ) 
Sec. 10-84. - Tree preservation and protection. 
The trees in Newnan are a city resource worth protecting and maintaining. Existing trees shall not be disturbed, except as outlined in this article. No person shall cut carve or otherwise damage any tree. No person shall attach rope, wire, nails, or advertising posters to any tree. No person shall set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. Any large, rare, or historically significant trees on a project site shall be highlighted by the designer (see specimen trees, section 10-84(6)). It is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. (Reasonable effort shall include, but not limited to, alteration of building design, alternate building location, parking area, detention area, drainage system, or relocation of utilities). Careful thought and consideration is expected to be given to saving trees in the development process. 
In the plan review process of a proposed project, the first indicator of how well trees have been incorporated in the design process is how will the proposed development impact specimen trees. These trees are considered on an individual basis and a proposal to remove any of them is carefully scrutinized. Another indicator is how will the proposed development impact smaller, significant trees. These trees are typically considered in mass as they relate to the overall preservation of the natural character of the site. Removals which are not adequately justified may require site plan alterations. 
The following guidelines and standards shall apply to trees proposed to be retained for credit toward meeting the site density factor on a property. 
(1)  Planning considerations. Tree space is the most critical factor in tree protection throughout the site development process. The root system can easily extend beyond the dripline of the tree canopy. The root system within the dripline region is generally considered to be the critical root zone. Disturbance within this zone can directly affect a tree's chances for survival. To protect these critical root zones the following planning considerations should be applied: 
a.  The use of tree save islands and stands is encouraged rather than the protection of individual (non-specimen) trees scattered throughout a site. This will facilitate ease in overall organization as related to tree protection. 
b.  The protective zone of specimen trees or stands of trees or otherwise designated tree save areas shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree(s) canopy as defined by the furthest canopy dripline of the tree(s). 
c.  Tree preservation and grading requirements are two design constraints, which are most often in conflict. A grade change of a few inches can be detrimental to a tree, yet most sites require extensive cut and fill in order to manage drainage. The use of berms or retaining walls, instead of cutting, to provide detention can be used to preserve significant trees. Detention ponds can be designed around significant trees by adding depth to minimize width where possible. Retaining walls can also be used to mitigate cuts and fills. Tree wells and/or aeration systems can also be provided for trees in areas of fill. 
d.  Underground water and wastewater lines, storm sewers, irrigation lines and both underground and overhead electric and telephone lines can have a considerable impact on trees. The layout of the project site utility plans should accommodate the required tree protective zones. Utilities should be placed along corridors between tree protective zones. Developers shall coordinate the location of utility lines, including irrigation and electric lighting, with the utility companies in order to prevent root damage within the critical root zones of protected trees and to minimize damage to trees located in protected zones. 
e.  Construction activities such as parking, material storage, concrete washout, burnhole placement, etc. shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbances within tree protective zones. No disturbance shall occur within the protective zone of specimen trees or stands of trees without prior approval of the city landscape architect. 
f.  Sidewalks often appear innocuous on plans, but can be very detrimental to trees due to grading requirements. Considerations should be given to move sidewalks as far from tree trunks as possible and provide a finished grade above the existing grade for sidewalks required in close proximity to a tree trunk. Drainage can be routed under sidewalks where an elevated grade is required. 
(2)  Protection of existing trees. 
a.  Tree protection devices are necessary to eliminate activities detrimental to trees including, but not limited to: 
1.  Soil compaction in the critical root zone resulting from heavy equipment, vehicular or excessive pedestrian traffic, or storage of equipment or materials; 
2.  Root disturbance due to cuts, fills, or trenching; 
3.  Wounds to exposed roots, trunks, or limbs by mechanical equipment; 
4.  Other activities such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning, fire, etc. 
b.  Trees identified to be preserved and counted as credit towards meeting required site tree density shall have a four foot tree protection fencing installed at the critical root zones. For methods of tree protection, see section 10-84(3)a.—g. All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to the start of any land disturbance and maintained until final landscaping is installed. No construction activities are to occur within tree protection areas. Areas designated for parking, materials and equipment storage or staging areas are to be located outside of the drip line of existing trees. 
c.  The city landscape architect will conduct periodic inspections of the site before work begins and during clearing, construction, and post construction phases of development in order to ensure compliance with these regulations and the intent of this article. Tree protection must remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development. Failure to comply with and/or maintain approved tree protection measures may result in a stop work order issued by the city landscape architect. 
(3)  Methods of tree protection. The root system within the drip line is generally considered to be the critical root zone. Most trees can tolerate only a small percentage of critical root zone loss. To protect these critical root zones, a tree protection area shall be established around each tree or group of trees to be retained. The following section describes ways to help control unnecessary encroachment on existing trees. These methods and guidelines will be followed for tree protection throughout all phases of construction. These guidelines are designed to reduce damage to critical root zones and wounds to exposed roots, trunks, and limbs by chemical, mechanical, and other means. Tree protection areas will be delineated on tree protection plan and methods of protection will be clearly noted and detailed. 
a.  Active protective barriers. Barriers shall be installed along the outer edge of and completely around the critical root zones of all specimen trees or stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones, prior to any land disturbance. Deviations from this must be approved on an individual basis by the city landscape architect. Barriers will be a minimum four feet high, constructed in a post and rail configuration. A two-inch by four-inch post and a one-inch by four-inch rail, with the post no further than six feet apart, is recommended. Chain link fence with the same post spacing, is also acceptable. All tree protection zones should be designated as such with "tree save area" signs posted visibly on all sides of the fenced in area. All tree fencing shall be maintained throughout the land disturbance and building construction, and should not be removed until all construction and landscaping is complete. 
b.  Passive protective barriers. Tree save areas and their critical root zones not within 60 feet of any grading, storage, construction or traffic areas may be protected by four foot orange laminated plastic safety fencing. Passive tree protection fencing is to be used only for areas remote from construction activity. 
c.  Boring. No open trenching will be allowed within the protected zone as defined by the protective barricades. All underground utilities to be installed within this protection zone shall be installed by boring underneath the root zone. Any exceptions must be approved by the city landscape architect. Utilities may be tunneled in the root zone at a 24-inch minimum depth providing that plans are approved showing the location and method. 
d.  Filling/clearing within root zone. Fill dirt no deeper than two inches may be allowed within the drip line of the tree. No grubbing is permitted in the root zone. In the protected root zone, any stumps, dead trees and shrub growth to be removed shall be cut flush or ground out. Stump grinding will be accomplished with equipment and methods acceptable in normal arboriculture operations. All holes will be backfilled completely the same day of the operation. 
e.  Soil compaction. Where compaction might occur due to traffic or materials storage, the tree protection zone must first be mulched with a minimum four-inch layer of shredded hardwood mulch, or a six-inch layer of pine straw. 
f.  Clearing activities. Roots often fuse and tangle amongst trees. The removal of trees adjacent to tree save areas can cause inadvertent damage to the protected trees. Wherever possible, it is advisable to cut minimum two foot trenches (e.g. with a ditch witch) along the limits of land disturbance, so as to cut, rather than tear, the roots. Trenching may be required for the protection of specimen trees. The cutting down and then grinding the stump of the adjacent removed trees, as opposed to bulldozing them and ripping their roots, can also aid the protected trees. 
g.  Tree removal. To minimize potential root loss from soil disturbance in an overlapping root situation. All roots attached to a tree inside a tree save area that extend outside the tree save areas shall be cut by hand if the soil is to be disturbed. The removal of any tree adjacent to a tree within a tree save area shall not be removed by heavy equipment. Cutting the roots by hand or with a ditch witch is acceptable. 
(4)  Tree protection plan. Any proposal for development or improvement of any tract of land shall include a tree protection/landscape plan, including trees to be planted in order to meet the minimum requirements of this section. Such plan shall be submitted, along with other permit drawings, to the City of Newnan Building Department prior to any clearing, grubbing, grading or other removal of the existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage. No tree removal shall occur prior to approval of the tree protection plan. The tree protection plan may be submitted as part of the landscape plan, provided that all required information is legible, or as a separate drawing which includes, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Name, address, and phone number of owner of record and applicant. 
b.  Boundary lines of the tract by lengths and bearings, streets adjoining the property, total area of the tract, land lot, land district, north point, graphic scale, and date. 
c.  Approximate location of all specimen trees and tneir critical root zones. Indicate those specimen trees proposed for removal or for preservation. Removal of specimen trees is subject to city landscape architect's approval. 
d.  Approximate location of all trees or stands of trees proposed to be protected. Only trees that are designated on the tree protection plan will be counted towards density requirements. 
e.  Exact location of specimen trees when their preservation is questionable, or might result in a change of the site design. 
f.  Location of proposed buildings, structures and paved areas. 
g.  Locations of all existing and proposed utility lines. (Utility lines must be placed along corridors between critical root zones of trees which will remain on the site.) 
h.  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
i.  Limits of tree protection areas, showing trees to be maintained and planted, specifying species and size. 
j.  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a tree, which would effect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
k.  Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all tree protection zones, including tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signage, etc. 
l.  Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of all tree protection measures. 
m.  Plan should indicate staging areas for parking, materials storage, concrete washout, and debris burn where these areas might affect tree protection. 
n.  The required site tree density factor must be satisfied. Compliance shall be clearly demonstrated on the tree protection plan. Existing trees or stands of trees used in the density calculation must be clearly indicated on the drawing. A summary table of the number of existing trees to remain and new trees to be planted, by diameter shall be shown along with the calculations showing tree density achieved for the site. 
o.  Additional information as required on a case by case basis. This could include, but is not limited to, a certified arborist's appraisal of the tree's viability and projected life span. 
p.  The following notes shall be indicated on both the tree protection plan and the grading plan in large bold letters. 
1.  CONTACT THE PLANNING DEPARTMENT AT (770) 254-2354 TO ARRANGE A PRE-CONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE WITH THE CITY LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT PRIOR TO ANY LAND DISTURBANCE. 
2.  ALL TREE PROTECTION MEASURES SHALL BE INSTALLED AND INSPECTED PRIOR TO THE START OF ANY LAND DISTURBANCE AND MAINTAINED UNTIL FINAL LANDSCAPING IS INSTALLED. CALL THE PLANNING DEPARTMENT AT (770) 254-2354 FOR AN INSPECTION BY THE CITY LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. 
3.  NO PARKING, STORAGE, OR ANY OTHER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES ARE TO OCCUR WITHIN TREE PROTECTION AREAS. 
4.  A MAINTENANCE INSPECTION OF TREES WILL BE PERFORMED AFTER TWO FULL GROWING SEASONS FROM THE DATE OF THE FINAL CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION. PROJECT OWNERS AT THE TIME OF THE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE. 
(5)  Determination of site density factor. 
a.  All projects within the City of Newnan, with the exception of the construction of individual single family and detached dwellings, shall maintain or exceed a minimum site density factor of 16 units per acre. The term "unit" is not synonymous with "tree". The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this article, or some combination of the two. All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried. The site density requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. Minimum tree site density shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in this section. The trees, both retained and new, where feasible shall be reasonably distributed throughout the site with emphasis on tree groupings to achieve results following professional landscape standards. 
b.  Individual single family lots, within platted residential subdivisions, with less than two units per acre are required to plant four shade/canopy trees that are at least eight feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than two caliper inches. Fifty percent of the required planting shall be placed in the front yard. All residential lots shall require that improvements be located so as to provide minimum disturbance to the natural topography of the site and protection to the maximum number of trees. 
c.  Where the proposed development area is so dense that the minimum site density factor can not reasonably be achieved, the development area shall be reduced by removing parking spaces in excess of the minimum number of spaces required by zoning, placing additional planting islands within the development area, or reducing the area to be occupied by buildings. 
d.  In order to qualify for tree replacement density credit, all canopy/shade replacement trees shall be at least eight feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than two caliper inches. All understory/flowering replacement trees shall be at least six feet tall planted and have a main trunk of not less than one and one-half caliper inches. Multi stemmed canopy trees shall count only the largest trunk for caliper. All multi-stemmed understory/flowering replacement trees shall have a minimum of three canes, each with a minimum one-inch caliper extending clear at least to a height of four feet. All evergreen replacement trees shall be at least a seven-gallon size, six feet tall planted, and have a main trunk of not less than one and one-half caliper inches. All tree formed, multi-stemmed, evergreen replacement trees shall have a minimum of three canes, each with a minimum one-inch caliper extending clear at least to a height of four feet and be pruned as tree form at time of planting. No more than 40 percent of any one genus may be included in any replanting plan. 
The minimum required quantity of trees on a site after development must produce a total site density factor (SDF) of 16 units per acre. The site density factor (SDF) is determined as follows: 
 SDF = (total site area, in acres) × 16 
Credit for existing trees proposed to be retained on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in Table 2—Credit for Existing Trees. Credit shall be given all trees retained on a property having a diameter of ten inches or more, except trees located in a required zoning buffer. Only 50 percent of tree credits may be calculated from areas located in the floodplain or delineated as wetlands. Credit for new trees proposed to be replaced on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in Table 3—Credit for Replacement Trees. Credit shall be given all new trees replaced on the property except for new trees of less than one and one-half inches in diameter and new trees planted in a required zoning buffer. The number of new trees planted is determined as follows: 
Using Table 2—Credit for Existing Trees calculate the existing density factor (EDF) of trees three-inch diameter (DBH) or greater which will remain on the site and be protected during construction. 

 
Note: Where there are not enough ten-inch DBH or greater existing trees, three-inch DBH or greater trees may be counted as table indicates (in lieu of planting new trees), provided they have grown in uncrowded conditions and have developed normal spread or they are part of a specimen tree stand. 
DBH = diameter at breast height (four and one-half feet above ground) 
To calculate the replacement density factor (RDF), subtract the existing density factor (EDF) from the site density factor (SDF). 
 RDF = SDF - EDF 
Example procedure for calculating the required replacement density factor (RDF): 
STEP 1 = Calculate the site density factor (SDF) by multiplying the number of site acres by 16. 
 Example = 1.85 acres × 16 = 29.60 units. 
STEP 2 = Calculate the existing density factor (EDF) of trees that will remain on site to be protected during construction. EDF is determined by converting the tree diameter (DBH) of individual existing trees to density factor units, using Table 2—Credit for Existing Trees. These units are then totaled to determine the EDF for the site. 
 Example = A total of 12 trees will remain on the 1.85 acre site in Step 1. The trees include: 
•  3 - 12" pines 
•  4 - 18" oak 
•  3 - 20" pine 
•  2 - 24" oak 
When converted to density factor units using Table 2, we arrive at the following values: 

 
Adding together the units of all remaining trees, the sum total of units = 22.40 Units. 
Since the existing density factor (EDF) is less than the required site density factor (SDF), then replacement trees are required. The minimum site density factor (SDF) for a 1.85 acre site, established in Step 1 has not yet been met. 
STEP 3 = Calculate the replacement density factor (RDF) by subtracting the existing density factor (EDF) (Step 2) from the site density factor (SDF) (Step 1). 
 RDF = EDF - SDF 
 Example: RDF = 29.60 (EDF) - 22.40 (SDF) 
29.60 - 22.40 = 7.20 (RDF) 
STEP 4 = The replacement density factor (RDF) can be converted back to caliper inches using Table 3—Credit for Replacement Trees. Any number or combination of transplantable size trees can be used so long as their total density factor units will equal or exceed the replacement density factor (RDF). 
  Example = On the 1.85 acre site the following number and size of trees will be planted as replacement trees: 

 
Adding together the units of proposed replacement trees, the sum total of units = 7.20 units. Proposed replacement units of 7.20 is equal to the replacement density factor (RDF) of 7.20 units, thus minimum replacement requirements have been met. 
Use Table 3—Credit for Replacement Trees to determine the number and size of trees that must be planted. Any combination of transplantable size trees can be used, so long as their total density factor units equal or exceed the RDF. Replacement trees must meet the minimum landscaping requirements set forth in section 10-85(2). 

 
Important Note: For the purpose of this article, tree calipers are measured at one and one-half feet above the ground or at any point below that for new trees or multi trunked species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
Existing trees proposed to be retained and new trees proposed to be planted in order to meet the buffer requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval shall not be considered in fulfilling the requirements of this section concerning site tree density factors. Buffer requirements are considered to be in addition to the minimum site tree density requirements. See appropriate zoning district classification for any additional landscaping or buffering requirements. 
(6)  Specimen trees. Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for preservation. These trees are referred to as specimen trees. Trees unique due to age, size, species or historic relevance are to be identified during the survey process and special consideration must be made to work around them. It is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save specimen trees. Reasonable effort shall include, but not limited to, alteration of building design, alternate building location, parking area, detention area, drainage system, or relocation of utilities. These trees are to be identified and highlighted on the tree protection plan. Design of buildings, hardscapes and utilities are to be developed with consideration to preserving and featuring specimen trees. 
Tree density unit credits are given for existing trees that are saved during the site development process, with greater credits given to specimen trees. In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved for such purpose would be two times the assigned unit value in Table 2—Credit for Existing Trees. 
The following criteria are used by the city to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify: 
a.  Size criteria: 
1.  Large hardwoods (oaks, poplars, sweetgums, etc.): 24-inch diameter or larger. 
2.  Large softwoods (pines, deodar cedar, etc.): 30-inch diameter or larger. 
3.  Small trees (dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc.): eight-inch diameter or larger. 
b.  Condition criteria: 
1.  Life expectancy of more than 15 years. 
2.  Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay. 
3.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
4.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
A lesser sized tree can be considered a specimen tree, if in the judgement of the city landscape architect: 
1.  It is a rare or unusual species or of historical significance. 
2.  It is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a project or landscape. 
3.  It is a tree with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
(7)  Replacement of specimen trees. In the event any specimen tree should be removed during the land development process, the applicant shall be required to replace any specimen tree being removed with suitable replacement trees elsewhere on the site. Removed specimen trees shall be replaced by species with potential for comparable size and quality. Tree replacement, in addition to the minimum required tree density, shall be required in recompense for the removal of specimen trees. Specimen trees that are removed must be replaced by trees, minimum three-inch caliper, with a inch for inch replacement of the specimen tree removed. To determine if the replacement is reasonable the city landscape architect shall consider intended use of: 
a.  Existing tree coverage, size, and type. 
b.  Number of trees to be removed on the entire property. 
c.  Number of trees to be saved on the entire property. 
d.  Area to be covered with structures, parking, and driveways. 
e.  Grading and drainage requirements. 
f.  Character of the site and its environs. 
Any tree, designated on the tree protection plan to be saved, which is damaged during construction or as a result of construction, as determined by the city landscape architect, shall be replaced with a tree or trees equal to the unit value of the tree damaged. However, any specimen tree damaged as described above shall be replaced with trees equaling an inch for inch replacement of the tree damaged. 
In the event any specimen tree or trees should not survive more than 60 months following completion of development, the owner of the property shall be required to replace said tree or trees with replacement trees (three-inch minimum caliper) having an inch for inch replacement of the specimen tree removed on the site as approved by the city landscape architect. 
Any specimen tree which is removed without appropriate review and approval of the city landscape architect must be replaced by trees equaling a two times an inch for inch replacement of the tree removed. The owner of the property shall be required to replace said tree or trees with replacement trees which will be three-inch minimum caliper. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is not sufficient evidence of its condition. Such action may also result in a stop work order issued by the city landscape architect. 
(8)  Relocation of trees. 
a.  Trees to be relocated shall be removed with a root ball sized in proportion to their calipers. Root balls shall be 12 inches in diameter for each one-inch of tree caliper. Trees four inches in caliper and smaller are to be measured six inches from the ground. Trees four inches to eight inches caliper are measured 12 inches from the ground, trees eight inches caliper or larger are measured from breast height. 
b.  Trees which are to be relocated in areas which do not require grading are to be placed directly into their new location. Trees to be relocated into the limit of work line shall have tree barriers placed around it in accordance with the plan. 
c.  Trees to be transplanted off site in full leaf shall be covered entirely with a protective cloth covering prior to transporting. Trees transplanted on site require no covering. 
d.  Trees which are to be relocated in areas to be graded are to be stockpiled. Stockpiled trees shall be well heeled in and protected from excessive wind and sun. The Contractor shall provide water to maintain a healthy condition. 
e.  Where a tree is to be removed under the provisions of this article, the city may, with consent of the property owner, relocate the tree at the city's expense to city-owned property for replanting, either for permanent utilization at the new location, or for future use at another city property. 
f.  Credit may be given to the property for each relocated tree as though the tree was proposed to remain on the property, if the tree is relocated to a site designated by the city at the owner/developer's expense. 
(9)  Removal of trees. There will be a fee for obtaining a tree removal permit based on the number of trees to be removed. However, the removal of trees other than specimen trees from an owner owned, single family lot are exempt from provisions of this article, provided that the removal does not reduce the required tree density of the lot below the minimum requirements. Homeowners who remove trees on their own residential property, without cost of a person or company engaged in removing the trees for a fee, shall not pay any fee until they remove more than five trees at a time within a single calendar year. If a contractor is employed to remove trees, a tree removal permit shall be required for removing trees, eight inches or larger in diameter. Tree removal conducted on property, regardless of zoning classification, by any person or company for a fee shall require a tree removal permit. If significant trees are removed from any property without a tree removal permit, the property owner shall pay a fine of three times the tree removal fee calculated. All contractors for tree removal must be licensed, bonded, and insured. 
a.  Safety standards. The contractor shall be solely responsible for pedestrian and vehicular safety and control within the work site and shall provide the necessary warning devices, barricades, and ground personnel needed to give safety, protection, and warning within the area where tree removal or pruning is to occur. Blocking of public streets shall not be permitted unless prior arrangements have been made with the city and is coordinated with appropriate departments. Traffic control is the responsibility of the contractor and shall be accomplished in conformance with state, county and local highway construction codes. 
b.  Tree pruning. Pruning is to be performed by tree workers who, through related training and on the job experience, are familiar with the techniques and hazards of this work including trimming, maintenance, repairing or removal, and equipment used in such operations. The use of climbing spurs or irons is not approved in pruning operations on live trees. This type of work is a potentially hazardous occupation and is to be undertaken only by trained personnel or under the supervision of trained personnel, all of whom are covered with workers compensation, property damage, public liability, and completed operations insurance. 
c.  Tree removal. Trees shall be removed in accordance with accepted industry standards and procedures and in accordance with the following minimum requirements: Extreme care shall be taken so as to prevent limbs, branches and trunks from falling and creating damage to adjacent homes, driveways, sidewalks, trees, shrubs, streets and other property, both public and private. This type of work is a potentially hazardous occupation and is to be undertaken only by trained personnel or under the supervision of trained personnel, all of whom are covered with workers compensation, property damage, public liability, and completed operations insurance. 
d.  Cleanup. Debris and logs shall not be left on the public right-of-way overnight. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to remove and dispose of, in a proper and acceptable manner, all logs, brush and debris resulting from the tree removal operation unless otherwise directed by the city. No person shall be issued a tree removal permit unless said person agrees to remove all cut logs, brush, and debris from the premises. Removal of such debris shall be performed daily so as to not disrupt the work of other contractors on the site. Absolutely no burying on site is allowed. No burning on site is allowed without a permit issued by the City of Newnan Fire Department. 
e.  Trees on private property. It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such a manner that they will not obstruct or shade street lights, obstruct passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct views of any street intersection. Any trees that are diseased or insect infested shall be removed, sprayed, or treated in such a manner that they will not infect or damage nearby public vegetation or cause harm to the community or citizens therein. The city landscape architect may order trees on private land that causes obstructions, present insect or disease problems, or otherwise present a danger to public health or safety be pruned, removed, or treated. 
f.  Fees. Permits shall be obtained by any person or company engaged in the removal of trees for a fee. The city landscape architect will review the tree removal plans and inspect the project site when necessary prior to tree removal of any trees. If significant trees are removed from any property without a tree removal permit, the property owner shall pay a fine of three times the tree removal fee calculated. Minimum site tree densities must be maintained at all times. Permit fees shall be as set forth in the fee schedule for the City of Newnan. 
g.  Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, company, or partnership violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances. Where an offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. The owner of a premises, where anything in violation of this article shall exist, or any person, firm, corporation, company, or partnership who may have assisted in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as herein provided. 
( Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 6-26-03 ) 
Sec. 10-85. - Landscape plan. 
A landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect, registered in the State of Georgia, will be required for any development, with the exception of the construction of individual single family and detached dwellings, in the City of Newnan. A landscape plan shall be prepared for any project wherein buffer areas or other landscaping areas or treatments are required by this article, the zoning ordinance, conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval, or other regulations of the City of Newnan, and shall be approved prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. A landscape plan is required for single-family residential subdivision development plats. The plan shall address common areas including, but not limited to, such areas as parks, active and passive recreation areas, and entrances. These residential common areas shall maintain or exceed the minimum site density factor of 16 units per acre. 
The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this article, or some combination of the two. The site density requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. Individual single family lots, within platted residential subdivisions, with less than two units per acre are required to plant four shade/canopy trees that are at least eight feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than two caliper inches. Fifty percent of the required planting shall be placed in the front yard. Minimum tree site density shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in this section. The trees, both retained and new, where feasible shall be reasonably distributed throughout the site with emphasis on tree groupings to achieve results following professional landscape standards. 
All areas not devoted to structures, site development features, and natural vegetation shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall include trees, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plant sculpture, art and the use of building and paving materials in a manner that respects the natural topographic features and natural resources of the site. 
(1)  Landscape plan requirements: The landscape plan may be submitted as part of the tree protection plan, provided that all required information is legible, or as a separate drawing which includes, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Name, address, and phone number of owner of record and applicant. 
b.  Boundary lines of the tract by lengths and bearings, streets adjoining the property, total area of the tract, land lot, land district, north point, graphic scale, and date. 
c.  Adjacent land uses and zoning classifications. 
d.  Approximate location of all specimen trees or stands of trees. 
e.  Location of proposed buildings, structures and paved areas. 
f.  Location of all existing and proposed storm, sanitary, and utility lines. 
g.  Location of all existing and proposed contours (two-foot minimum). 
h.  General location of all proposed trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, mulching, and other features proposed within the landscaped area. A scale sufficient to clearly show all details shall be used. 
i.  Planting schedules with proposed plant material names (common and botanical), quantity, size, spacing, and any special planting notes. 
j.  Show site calculations: 
1.  Total site area. 
2.  Number of large shade and small flowering trees required and number provided in plan. 
3.  Number of evergreen and deciduous shrubs required and number provided in plan. (Denote evergreens in planting schedule). 
4.  Site density calculations. 
k.  All landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect, registered in the State of Georgia, who shall affix their seal, to the drawing. 
l.  All parking islands must be planted with canopy/shade trees. 
m.  Planting details, especially on steep slopes, if applicable. 
n.  The following notes shall be indicated in bold letters on the landscape plan: 
**WHERE LANDSCAPING AREAS ADJOIN GRASSED RIGHTS-OF WAY, SUCH AREAS SHALL BE CONSIDERED PART OF THE LANDSCAPED AREA FOR PURPOSES OF MAINTENANCE. AS OF COMPLETION OF SITE IMPROVEMENTS, THE PROPERTY OWNER SHALL HAVE AN IMPLIED EASEMENT ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY EXTENDING FROM THE SITE TO THE ROAD PAVEMENT IN ORDER TO COMPLETE THE REQUIRED MAINTENANCE. 
**A MAINTENANCE INSPECTION OF TREES WILL BE PERFORMED AFTER TWO FULL GROWING SEASONS FROM THE DATE OF THE FINAL CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION. PROJECT OWNERS AT THE TIME OF THE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE. 
**IF THE LANDSCAPE DESIGN OR PLANT MATERIAL ARE CHANGED IN ANY WAY FROM THE CITY OF NEWNAN'S APPROVED PLAN, TWO SETS OF REVISED PLANS SHALL BE SUBMITTED TO THE LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT FOR APPROVAL PRIOR TO ANY LANDSCAPE INSTALLATION. FAILURE TO DO SO WILL RESULT IN AN APPROVED AS BUILT BEING SUBMITTED PRIOR TO THE ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. 
(2)  Landscaping requirements: The City of Newnan has devised a plant palette for the City of Newnan. This is a detailed plant list of trees, shrubs, and groundcovers which outline historically relevant and suitable plant material for the City of Newnan. By using this list, focusing primarily on those plants identified as signature plants, we hope to promote the continued development of a regional character, ensure the preservation of Newnan's horticultural heritage, and provide guidance in the decision making for our landscape design efforts. The plant palette is listed at the end of this article. 
a.  General requirements. 
1.  Unless otherwise approved by the city landscape architect, all plant material selected to meet the replanting and/or landscaping requirements shall be selected from the plant palette for the City of Newnan. Plant materials shall be placed appropriately for future growth. 
2.  All projects within the City of Newnan, with the exception of the construction of individual single family and detached dwellings, are required to maintain a minimum site density factor of 16 units per acre and to provide the minimum landscaping requirements. The minimum site density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this article, or some combination of the two. 
3.  Individual single family lots, within platted residential subdivisions, with less than two units per acre are required to plant four shade/canopy trees that are at least eight feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than two caliper inches. Fifty percent of the required planting shall be placed in the front yard. 
4.  The following minimum landscaping requirements, which can be used as replacement units to meet the required site density factor, with the minimum number and size of trees and shrubs, per acre are: 

 
5.  Projects that are zoned industrial are required to provide the following maximum landscaping requirements, with no less than 60 percent of the required landscaping to be placed in the required front yard. The remaining 40 percent shall be evenly distributed throughout the site. For corner lots or lots with more than one street frontage, no less than 70 percent of required landscaping shall be placed in the yards adjacent to the rights of way of said streets. Buffers, screening requirements, and specimen tree replacements are considered to be in addition to these maximum landscape requirements. 

 
6.  All canopy/shade replacement trees shall be at least eight feet tall planted and have a trunk of not less than two caliper inches. All understory/flowering replacement trees shall be at least six feet tall planted and have a main trunk of not less than one and one-half caliper inches. Multi stemmed canopy trees shall count only the largest trunk for caliper. All multi-stemmed understory/flowering replacement trees shall have a minimum of three canes, each with a minimum one-inch caliper extending clear at least to a height of four feet. All evergreen replacement trees shall be at least a seven-gallon size, six feet tall planted, and have a main trunk of not less than one and one-half caliper inches. All tree formed, multi-stemmed, evergreen replacement trees shall have a minimum of three canes, each with a minimum one-inch caliper extending clear at least to a height of four feet and be pruned as tree form at time of planting. 
7.  No more than 40 percent of any one tree species shall be permitted on a landscape and/or tree protection plan. Trees and shrubs shall be evenly distributed on site. 
8.  Landscaping shall not obstruct the view between 24 inches high and 60 inches high on access drives, streets or parking aisles. Indicate clear sight lines at intersections. 
9.  Where landscaping requirements are included as part of the regulations for any zoning district classification, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. See appropriate zoning district classification for any additional landscaping requirements. 
10.  The landscape plan must address all the landscaping requirements of this article, which includes, but is not limited to, site density factor, tree replacement, interior parking lot plantings, peripheral parking lot plantings, landscape strip plantings, landscape screening plantings, and landscape buffer plantings. 
b.  Interior parking lot planting requirements. If any parking lot contains 20 or more parking spaces, interior parking lot landscaping shall be required as follows: 
1.  There shall be a minimum curb radii of three feet required on the corners of all landscape islands and medians to allow for free movement of motor vehicles around planting materials. All islands and medians shall have raised curbs around them to protect parked vehicles, provide visibility, confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways, and provide space for landscaping. Striping of parking islands is not permitted. 
2.  All rows of parking spaces shall be provided a terminal island to protect parked vehicles, confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways, and provide space for landscaping. A terminal island for a single row of parking spaces shall be planted with a least one canopy/shade tree. A terminal island for a double row of parking spaces shall contain not less than two shade/canopy trees. 
3.  All landscape islands within parking lots shall be 100 percent landscaped with deciduous trees, evergreen shrubs (not to exceed three feet high at maturity), ground cover (which does not require mowing) and/or flowers in mulched beds. 
4.  Interior landscape islands shall be provided within parking areas of 20 or more spaces. Parking areas designated to accommodate more than 20 motor vehicles must install interior landscape islands so that no more than 16 adjacent parking spaces exist without a landscaped separation of at least eight feet in width. If significant tree save areas or natural areas exist within a parking area, the city landscape architect may make an exception to this requirement, as appropriate. 
5.  Each island or strip shall contain a minimum of 125 square feet. All landscape islands shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking lot, and shall have a minimum width of eight feet measured from back of curb. There shall be a minimum eight-foot wide (back of curb to back of curb) curbed landscape island at the end of every row of parking, equal in length to the adjoining parking space. A parking island must be located no further apart than every 16 parking spaces. 
6.  Landscaped areas between parking areas and buildings shall not be considered as interior landscaping. 
7.  Areas used principally for storage of vehicles or display areas do not require interior islands if such areas are screened from adjacent properties and public streets. 
c.  Peripheral parking lot planting requirements. If any parking lot contains ten or more parking spaces, peripheral parking lot landscaping shall be required as follows: 
1.  The perimeter of all parking areas shall be landscaped. 
2.  Except where otherwise stated in the City of Newnan's Zoning Ordinance, a landscaping strip ten feet in width measured from the back of curb, shall be located between the parking lot and the abutting property lines, except where driveways or other openings may necessitate other treatment. 
3.  Peripheral plantings shall include one shrub per 20 linear feet of abutting land and one of, or a combination of the following, which need not necessarily be installed on center: 
a)  One understory/flowering tree per 20 linear feet; One shade/canopy tree per 35 linear feet. 
4.  Trees shall be planted at a minimum of three feet from any curb, so as to prevent injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. Where landscaped areas are located adjacent to vehicle overhangs, the trees shall be planted in line with the striping between parking spaces in order to avoid injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. 
d.  Landscape planting strip requirements. Landscape strips shall be used to separate uses, provide vegetation in developed areas, and enhance the appearance of individual properties. The following minimum requirements shall apply to landscape planting strips: 
1.  The width of a landscape strip must be as a minimum, conform with the requirements of the conditions of zoning. Otherwise, the minimum width of landscape strips must conform with the requirements of the zoning ordinance or this article, whichever is greater. 
2.  Landscape plantings shall be provided in a landscape strip of at least ten feet in which adjacent to any street right of way abutting the property and running the length of the entire property frontage; and in areas adjacent or internal to off street parking lots that contain more than five parking spaces; and as required by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
3.  No permanent structures are permitted within landscape strips, with the exception of identification signage and lightposts. This includes pavement, retaining walls, curbing, dumpsters, drainage structures, detention facilities, rip-rap, utility boxes, vacuum/air/water, etc. The deposition of storm water runoff into or drainage swales through a landscape strip is not permitted. Graded slopes within a landscape strip may not be steeper than 4:1. 
4.  Curb stops must be used to prevent vehicle overhang into required landscape strips and parking islands. 
5.  Landscape strips shall contain one tree for each 35 linear feet of strip length. Each tree shall be at least eight feet planted. Clumping is permitted provided that adequate spacing is allowed for future growth there is no gap greater than 50 feet. 
6.  Landscape strips shall contain ten shrubs for each 35 linear feet of strip length. Clumping is permitted provided that adequate spacing is allowed for future growth and there is no gap greater than 50 feet. 
7.  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded, or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species. 
8.  Where landscaping areas adjoin grassed rights-of way, such areas shall be considered part of the landscaped area for purposes of maintenance. As of completion of site improvements, the property owner shall have an implied easement on rights-of-way extending from the site to the road pavement in order to complete the required maintenance. 
e.  Landscape screening planting requirements. Screening shall be used as a buffer between incompatible uses, and to reduce the effects of headlight glare, noise, and other objectionable activities. The following minimum requirements shall apply to screening: 
1.  Screening shall be installed on all lot lines where commercial, industrial, and institutional uses abut residential zoning districts except for entrances and exits. 
2.  Screening may consist of a fence, a wall, a berm, or vegetation and/or a mix of any or all of the foregoing. The outer or public side of fences and walls shall be landscaped enough to soften the structure with a tree or shrub group at least every 50 feet, subject to approval of the city landscape architect. Berms must be a minimum two feet high, two-foot minimum crown width, and side slopes of no greater than three to one. 
3.  Parking areas shall be adequately screened so as to not be visible from contiguous residential areas and shall have limited visibility from adjoining streets. 
4.  Dumpster and trash storage/collection areas shall be adequately screened so as not to be visible from streets and/or adjacent properties regardless of adjacent land use or zoning classification. 
5.  Loading areas shall be adequately screened so as not to be visible form any residential areas or streets. 
6.  Heating and cooling units for developments other than single family shall be adequately screened so as not to be visible from streets and/or adjoining streets. 
7.  All plantings used for screening shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof. All trees planted shall be a minimum five feet planted and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a minimum of two feet planted, and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least ten feet at maturity. 
8.  Plants shall be spaced so as to provide for effective visual screening within three growing seasons. Planting beds required for screening shall be a minimum of six feet in width. 
f.  Landscape buffer planting requirements. Buffers shall be required between uncomplimentary uses in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval. Buffers are a landscaping requirement that is in addition to the minimum landscaping requirements of any site development in the City of Newnan. 
1.  Landscape buffers are intended to separate different land uses and zoning districts from each other and are intended to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking areas. There shall be five different buffers types based on acreage of the project and zoning districts. Each different buffer identifies the width of the buffer, minimum tree spacing standards, minimum shrub spacing standards, and minimum/maximum wall and/or fence standards. The buffers types are listed in the following matrix based on the zoning of the proposed project and the adjacent zoning also. Buffer widths for each buffer type will be based on project acreage. 
•  Area 1 consists of those zoning districts where lots sizes are permitted to be smaller than 20,000 square feet; 
•  Area 2 consists of those zoning districts where lots sizes are permitted to be 20,000 square feet or greater. 

 
BUFFER REQUIREMENTS OF ZONING CLASSIFICATION 

 
2.  Required undisturbed buffers must remain undisturbed and actively protected in perpetuity. Buffers must be replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. Existing vegetation shall be used to meet all or part of the requirements of this section whenever possible, if it provides the same level of obscurity as the planted buffer required below. Required buffer plantings allow for a mix of large canopy trees, small flowering/evergreen trees, and large shrubs. The mix is designed to create a buffer which will give a satisfactory screen within three to five years of planting, under normal maintenance, while allowing room for the various plants to grow. 
3.  Large canopy trees with a minimum height of eight feet planted and a minimum caliper of two inches shall be planted at the following rate: 

 
Small trees are required to fulfill from no less than 20 percent to no more than 30 percent of the required number of trees. Additionally, evergreen trees are required to fulfill at least 50 percent of the required trees planted in buffers greater than 30 feet. Evergreen and small flowering trees, the same required size as the large canopy trees, are to be planted at the same rate as the large trees. Two evergreen or small flowering trees for each required tree, with a minimum height of four feet planted, may be substituted. Trees shall be distributed along the entire length of the buffer. 
4.  Additionally evergreen shrubs, a minimum of 24 inches in height, of a variety that can be expected to reach four or five feet in height within three to five years of planting, shall be provided. Shrubs shall not normally be planted closer than six feet on center. Additionally, shrubs shall not normally be planted closer than six feet to planted trees, nor within the drip line of existing trees. Shrubs shall also be distributed along the entire length of the buffer. Evergreen shrubs shall be provided at the following rate: 

 
Variations in quantities and spacing of buffer shrubs may be approved by the city landscape architect when larger shrubs are provided. 
5.  The number of planting rows for supplemental plantings or replanting of shrubs is determined by the buffer width: 

 
6.  Buffer planting requirements shall be guaranteed for the lifetime of the development. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to ensure that the buffer serves the purpose for which it is intended. 
(3)  Maintenance requirements. Two full growing seasons after the date of the initial inspection of new tree and landscape installations, the city landscape architect will again inspect all trees and landscaping on the project site. Any trees planted to meet the required tree site density factor which are dead or near death must be replaced. 
At the end of the two-year landscape establishment period, the city landscape architect shall re-inspect the site and shall make a determination of whether or not the required trees and landscaping are healthy and have a reasonable chance of surviving to maturity. Upon such finding, the bond shall be released. In absence of such finding, the bond shall not be released and the owner of the property shall be notified to replace the unhealthy trees and landscaping or take other appropriate action as approved by the city landscape architect. Upon failure of the owner to comply with the city landscape architect's decision regarding such trees, the city shall use the bond to the extent necessary to bring the property into compliance. Final inspection shall be scheduled within ten working days' notice. 
Trees, which are used to meet the tree density requirements, shall be fully maintained for an additional five years after the date of final landscape establishment inspection. It is the responsibility of the property owner to water, fertilize, and treat trees in order to maintain tree health and vigor. The property owner shall, at all times, maintain the required tree density. Failure to maintain the required tree density factor at any time during the life of the project shall be a violation of this article. Trees which have been used to meet the tree density requirements shall not be removed at any time without approval of the city landscape architect. Removal of such trees will result in replacement of like kind and size. 
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying property subject to this article to maintain said property in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance. Property shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Planting beds shall be mulched to prevent weed growth and maintain soil moisture. Plant materials shall be pruned as required to maintain good health and character. Turf areas shall be mowed periodically. All roadways, curbs, and sidewalks shall be edged when necessary in order to prevent encroachment from adjacent grassed areas. 
(4)  Irrigation requirements. Irrigation is to be provided for landscaped areas fronting multi-family, commercial and industrial developments. Irrigation is also to be provided along all road frontage for these types of developments. Irrigation systems can be beneficial in efficiently adding water to the landscape. Landscaped areas shall be irrigated by the use of an automatic irrigation system with controllers. The water demand of lawn areas is significantly greater than the water demand of most trees, shrubbery, or ground cover areas. Wherever feasible, sprinkler head irrigating lawns or other head water demand landscape areas shall be circuited so that they are on a separate zone or zones for those irrigating trees, shrubbery or other reduced water requirement areas. Automatically controlled irrigation systems shall be operated by an irrigation controller that is capable of watering high water requirement areas on a different schedule from low water requirement areas. No significant overthrow shall be allowed onto non-pervious areas. Irrigation circuits shall apply water onto lawn areas on a different schedule than those irrigating the planting beds. Low trajectory heads or low volume water distributing devices shall be used. Irrigation controllers shall be capable of irrigating grass and tree-shrub zones on different schedules. 
5.  Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, company, or partnership violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances. Where an offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. Each tree cut, damaged, or poisoned shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of a premises, where anything in violation of this article shall exist, or any person, firm, corporation, company, or partnership who may have assisted in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as herein provided. 
( Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 6-26-03 ; Ord. No. 04-04, § I, 2-24-04) 
SITE DENSITY FACTOR CALCULATION SHEET  Site Density Factor (SDF) = Total Site Area (in acres) × 16 Units Per Acre 
EXISTING TREES ON PROPERTY: 

 
  
Total Units, (Trees to be Saved) = ____________ 
  
TREES TO BE PLANTED: 

 
  
Total Units, (Trees to be Planted) = ____________ 
( Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 6-26-03 ) 
CITY OF NEWNAN'S PLANT PALETTE  (Signature plants in boldface )  (* Denotes Evergreen) 

 
( Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 6-26-03 ) 
Secs. 10-86—10-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STREAM BUFFERS 

Sec. 10-110. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Newnan, Georgia Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-111. - Purposes and findings. 
(a)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and, 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(b)  Findings. Whereas, the city council of the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-112. - Definitions. 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 10-114 below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 10-114 extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-113. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 10-89 of this article. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically exempted above. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the (review and permitting authority) on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within 10 days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the (review and permitting authority) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silviculture or agricultural uses and are riot incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this article, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 10-114(b) below. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-114. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the engineering department finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the zoning board of appeals of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the zoning board of appeals of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the zoning board of appeals. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(3)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this article would create an extreme hardship. 
(4)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(5)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(6)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-115. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-116. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five (5)-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the engineering department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-117. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-118. - Inspection. 
The engineering department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the engineering department in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-119. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the engineering department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the engineering department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the engineering department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the engineering department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(3)  Stop work order. The engineering department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(4)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The engineering department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(5)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The engineering department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the engineering department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(6)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the engineering department shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the engineering department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the engineering department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(7)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the engineering department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-120. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the engineering department, may appeal in writing within 14 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the director of community development and shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of appeals of the city within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the engineering department, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, § I, 3-8-05) 
Secs. 10-121—10-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 10-141. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(2)  These nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into municipal separate storm sewer systems; 
(6)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
Therefore, the city adopts this article to prohibit such nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-142. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate area of the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The community development director, or his/her designee, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-143. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the state Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 10-102 of this article. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b) (14). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coli form and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-144. - Prohibitions 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of city utilities. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-145. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-146. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility are a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-147. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(1)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(2)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(3)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-148. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 14 days of service of notice of violation. 
Such notice of violation may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city. The notice of appeal must be received within 14 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the board of zoning appeals shall take place within 45 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement Measures. If the violation has not been corrected within 14 days of the notice of violation or decision of the board of zoning appeals upholding the decision of the enforcement officer, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 14 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to make the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within 14 days, or such greater period as deemed appropriate, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. 
(j)  Fee recovery. The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, § I, 3-8-05) 
Sec. 10-149—10-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 10-161. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The state greenspace program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
(5)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; 
Therefore, the city has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § I, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 10-162. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (c) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city to be a hotspot land use; or, 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (1) and (2;) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(d)  Designation of article administrator. The city engineer or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(g)  Stormwater design manual. The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the state stormwater management manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § I, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 10-163. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. 
Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. "Stormwater better site design" includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § I, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 10-164. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity including the requirements for designated drainage basins within the city set forth in section 10-169, designated drainage basin policy, of this article VII. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the engineering department for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b); 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (c); 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d), if applicable; 
(4)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (e). 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place prior to the submission of a preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the postdevelopment stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 10-165 below. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 10-165; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 10-165 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 10-165; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Erosion and sedimentation plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the city erosion and sedimentation ordinance or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: The arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in subsection (d) below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d). 
(12)  Evidence of other applicable permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the (local permitting authority) that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Newnan requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Newnan, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site, as follows: 
(1)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(2)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(3)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall he developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(4)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 10-167 of this article. 
(5)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Application procedure. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the engineering department for that purpose. The application procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the engineering department. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(3)  The engineering department shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the engineering department shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the engineering department that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 10-166(b). 
(e)  Application review fee. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(f)  Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 12-12, § I, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 12-21, § I, 10-9-12) 
Sec. 10-165. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the state stormwater management manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to tie specific criteria in the state stormwater management manual; and, 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (2) above is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the state stormwater management manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the state stormwater management manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the state stormwater management manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (a) above. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the state stormwater management manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the state Safe Dams Act and rules for dam safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § I, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 10-166. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as-built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § I, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 10-167. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of storm water facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection arid maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) below. 
Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § I, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 10-168. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, § I, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 10-169. - Designated drainage basin policy. 
(a)  Stillwood Creek Watershed Drainage Policy. 
(1)  Introduction. The City of Newnan (city) has completed a drainage study of the area surrounding an unnamed stream flowing from areas west of Interstate 85 generally easterly under Stillwood Drive, Fairway Drive and Horizon Hill. This stream for the purposes of this policy is hereafter referred to Stillwood Creek. The study was conducted by the city due to drainage complaints upstream of Stillwood Drive and in anticipation of upstream future developments. Based on the analysis of the watershed, a number of properties within the area have been shown to be at potential risk of flooding from large storm events. 
In order to ensure that future developments do not further exacerbate the potential for flooding of downstream properties, the city hereby adopts the following requirements for this basin. These requirements shall only apply to those lands that drain to the roadway culverts under Horizon Hill approximately 440 feet southwest of the intersection of Horizon Hill and Eagle Court, hereinafter the Stillwood Creek Watershed Drainage basin. These requirements shall not apply to those properties within the watershed that would not normally be required to develop stormwater management measures as outlined in the City's Post Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
The purpose of this policy is to supplement the City's Post Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (Chapter 10, Article VII of the Newnan Code of Ordinances). Where a conflict arises between the requirements in this policy and the requirements of the aforementioned ordinance, the stricter requirements shall apply. 
(2)  Pre-design recommendations. The following outlines the process for developing a stormwater management plan as required for issuance and maintenance of a site development permit in Newnan, Georgia within the Stillwood Creek Watershed drainage area. 
Pre-Design Phase 
Step 1. Prepare concept site plan. 
Step 2. Prepare a downstream analysis between the proposed development and the discharge of Stillwood Creek at Horizon Hill. 
Step 3. Submit a site plan, downstream analysis and supporting calculations to the city. 
Step 4. Meet with the city for a pre-design consultation if necessary. 
Design Phase 
Step 5. Prepare stormwater management plan. 
Step 6. Submit stormwater management plan to city for approval. 
Construction Phase 
Step 7. After receiving all approvals from the city begin construction. 
Step 8. Coordinate construction with city inspection staff during construction. 
Post-Construction Phase 
Step 9. After construction prepare as-built survey and as-built design certification. 
Step 10. Adjust stormwater structures if necessary. 
Step 11. Execute stormwater inspection and maintenance agreement for all private on-site stormwater management facilities. 
Step 12. Secure certificate of occupancy/final plat. 
(3)  Downstream analysis. Stormwater runoff discharges for the 1-year, 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year 24-hour storm events must be analyzed at a minimum at the following analysis points. 
•  All points where stormwater runoff will cross the property line of the development. 
•  Downstream confluences of ditches, streams, and other conveyances. 
•  Downstream public and private road crossings. 
This analysis must extend from the proposed development project site to a point immediately downstream of Horizon Hill. Please note that in some cases, this requirement will exceed the ten percent rule as outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The downstream analysis shall consist of both existing conditions (at the time of application for a land disturbance permit) and proposed conditions (existing conditions updated to reflect the proposed development) and compare the discharges to illustrate the impacts from the proposed development. 
(4)  Water quality protection. All requirements as outlined in the Post Development Stormwater Management ordinance apply to development projects within the Stillwood Creek watershed. 
(5)  Downstream channel protection. All requirements as outlined in the Post Development Stormwater Management ordinance apply to development projects within the Stillwood Creek watershed. 
(6)  Flood protection. Given that the city has identified potential flooding issues along Stillwood Creek, the City shall require that all developments provide flood protection from increases in the 1-year, 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year 24-hour storm events. Discharges must be analyzed at a minimum at the following analysis points. 
•  All points where stormwater runoff will cross the property line of the development. 
•  Downstream confluences of ditches, streams, and other conveyances. 
•  Downstream public and private road crossings. 
No increases in discharges at these points from any storm event outlined above will be permitted under this policy. The only exception to this standard will consist of the acquisition of a flood easement from all downstream properties (up to and immediately downstream of Horizon Hill) affected by any proposed increases in stormwater runoff. The city shall have the authority to approve or disapprove such a measure regardless of the acquisition of such easements. 
(Ord. No. 12-21, § II, 10-9-12) 
Sec. 10-170. - Extent of service policy, infrastructure operation, maintenance and repairs. 
(a)  (1)  The purpose of this policy is to supplement and define the rights and responsibilities of the city and property owners in the operation, maintenance, and repair of physical stormwater assets/infrastructure. This policy will additionally define the rights and responsibilities for the private property owner(s) for maintaining the water quantity and quality functions of stormwater best management practices (BMP's), as well as provide for city guidance to ensure their proper functioning. 
(2)  Reference is made to section 10-161 through section 10-169 of Article VII, of Chapter 10, Environment; Post Development Stormwater Management, of the Code of Ordnances for the City of Newnan as set out in this Article VII; and the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD) and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division's (EPD) Phase II National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. 
(b)  A stormwater management system is the entire set of structural and non-structural stormwater management facilities (manmade structures or natural watercourses) and practices that are used to collect, convey, store, treat, and dispose of storm, flood or surface drainage waters in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation, water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote public health, safety, and general welfare. These structural and non-structural stormwater facilities may include detention areas, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, gulches, streams, gullies, flumes, culverts, gutters, inlets, pipes, ditches, catch basins, junction boxes, headwalls, weirs, water quality devices, and outlet control devices. 
(c)  Private stormwater management facilities are privately owned and it shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) to ensure proper maintenance and function of the stormwater management facilities located on their private property. This shall be accomplished through periodic inspections and routine maintenance by the responsible party. There shall be a perpetual, non-exclusive easement that allows access for inspection and emergency maintenance activities. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the city for inspecting and maintaining stormwater management facilities located on municipal property and within the public right-of-way (ROW). This includes stormwater structural controls on properties owned by the city and in the public ROW, and some pipes draining public streets. Pipes draining public streets are maintained in the upstream direction to the nearest stormwater structural control, typically a junction box or headwall, from the public ROW. In the upstream direction, drainage infrastructure beyond the nearest stormwater structural control to the public ROW shall be privately maintained. In the downstream direction, pipes draining public streets are maintained to the downstream headwall or outfall. For drainage infrastructure on private property, beyond the ROW, draining a public street, a recorded easement, accepted by the city, shall convey a right to discharge stormwater and a responsibility for maintenance and repair to the city. Where a public drainage responsibility exists to a downstream headwall or outfall, the city may maintain the area just downstream of the headwall or outfall for an additional ten feet to ensure the unobstructed, free flow of stormwater, and to prevent erosion around the headwall or outfall. 
(e)  Where a permanent maintenance agreement exists between the city and a private property owner, the stated responsibilities in the permanent maintenance agreement shall take precedent to the extent of service policy. This does not apply for maintenance agreements between parties that do not include the city. 
(f)  For subdivisions with an established homeowners association (HOA), the HOA shall be the responsible party for any structural stormwater controls on private property, including detention ponds, retention ponds, underground stormwater storage facilities, and water quality units. 
(g)  For subdivisions without an established HOA, the owner(s) of the property on which any structural stormwater controls are located shall be responsible for said structural stormwater controls, including detention ponds, retention ponds, underground stormwater storage facilities, and water quality units. 
(h)  For commercial and industrial developments, the owner(s) of the property on which any structural stormwater controls are located shall be responsible for said structural stormwater controls, including detention ponds, retention ponds, underground stormwater storage facilities, and water quality units. 
(i)  The maintenance and repair of driveway aprons and pipes associated with driveway aprons shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s). 
(j)  The maintenance of normal unobstructed flow in open channels, including ditches, swales, streams and creeks, shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s). 
(k)  A responsible party shall keep documentation of all inspections and maintenance activities for structural stormwater controls and provide said documentation to the city upon request. The city, in accordance with the city's NPDES permit and stormwater management plan, will conduct routine inspections, random inspections, requested inspections, complaint-based inspections, and interjurisdictional inspections for evaluation of the existing conditions of structural stormwater controls and may include sampling of discharges. 
(l)  The city may conduct emergency maintenance or repairs if a responsible party fails or refuses to maintain or repair structural stormwater controls located on private property, in proper working order, following the issuance of a notice of violation, in accordance with city ordinance. The city may assess the property owner(s) for the cost of the maintenance activity or repair work. Non-payment of such costs shall constitute a lien against the property owner(s) and may be levied and collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes. 
(m)  A permit shall be required for extending a storm pipe by a private property owner, on private property, upstream or downstream from and connecting to a public storm pipe draining the public ROW. The extension shall be designed and stamped by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. A permanent easement shall be accepted by the city, and recorded, permitting the discharge of storm water in the extended storm pipe and to allow for maintenance and repair of the extended storm pipe. 
(n)  Attached Exhibit "A" City of Newnan's Extent of Service graphically depicts the extent of service elements described in this section 10-170. 
Exhibit "A" 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § I, 9-12-17 ) 
Secs. 10-171—10-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 10-181. - Introduction. 
(a)  The mayor and city council have determined that the flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extra ordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  The mayor and city council have determined that flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(c)  The mayor and city council has determined that effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to private property; 
(3)  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(d)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and city council do ordain this article and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 06-5, § I, 5-9-06) 
Sec. 10-182. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
(c)  Designation of article administrator. The building official or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated November 15, 1978, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas annexed into the city either before or after the effective date of this article, the current effective FIS and data for the county, dated August 2, 1982, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city building official or his designee. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authorized by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the city building official or his designee. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the city building department. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 06-5, § I, 5-9-06) 
Sec. 10-183. - Definitions. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in section 10-182(d). All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 12, 1975. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before May 12, 1975. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-condition flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-condition flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 12, 1975 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is or is to be completed on or after May 12, 1975. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the building department to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully complaint with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 06-5, § I, 5-9-06) 
Sec. 10-184. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city building department a permit application on a form provided by the city building department for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 10-186 (b)(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 10-186(a)(5). 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittal requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the building official or his designee a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building official or his designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the building official or his designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the building official or his designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 10-185 and 10-186; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the building official or his designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official or his designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building official or his designee and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 06-5, § I, 5-9-06) 
Sec. 10-185. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city building official or his designee. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city building official or his designee then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city building official or his designee. 
(b)  Definition of floodway boundaries. 
(1)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city building department. If floodway data is not available from the city building department, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city building department. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under (1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 10-185(d); 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city building official or his designee using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposals to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 10-186(d) apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city building official or his designee prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city building official or his designee. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city building official or his designee until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the city building official or his designee. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city building official or his designee may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city building department. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 06-5, § I, 5-9-06) 
Sec. 10-186. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 10-185 (c), (d) and (e) have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and, 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(b)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in section 10-186(a), shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-185(c), (d) and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 10-185(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 10-186(a)(5). 
(b)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 10-186(a)(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-185(c), (d) and (e) have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 10-185(c), (d) and (e) may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the building official or his designee. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the building official or his designee to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the building official or his designee. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 10-186(a)(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (section 10-186(b)(1)b., including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 10-185(c), (d) and (e) have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 10-186(a)(7). 
(c)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(d)  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the building official or his designee shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 10-186(a)(5). 
(e)  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 10-186(a)(5). 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and, 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 10-184(b). 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 06-5, § I, 5-9-06) 
Sec. 10-187. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the city building official or his designee, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the city building official or his designee. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city building official or his designee. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city building official or his designee shall have the right to appeal such decision to the board of zoning appeals as established by the city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the board of zoning appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the city building official or his designee and city board of zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The building official or his designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city building official or his designee and city board of zoning appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city building official or his designee and the city board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 06-5, § I, 5-9-06) 
Sec. 10-188. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city building official or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city building official or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city building official or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city building official or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The city building official or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city building official or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city building official or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city building official or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city building official or his designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city building official or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city building official or his designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city building official or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-11, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 06-5, § I, 5-9-06) 
Chapter 11 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; emergency services, Ch. 9. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(1); state-wide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Rules and regulations of state safety fire commissioner adopted. 
The rules and regulations promulgated for the prevention of destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in this state by the state safety fire commissioner, under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon such commissioner by Acts of 1949, shall be and the same are hereby adopted as the rules and regulations of this city. 
(Code 1972, § 10-1) 
Sec. 11-2. - Fire chief designated local fire marshal. 
The fire chief shall be and is hereby designated local fire marshal for the city. 
(Code 1972, § 10-2) 
Sec. 11-3. - Fires in streets and alleys. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build a fire in the open air of any street or any public alley, unless a permit from the fire department shall first be obtained. 
(Code 1972, § 10-3) 
Sec. 11-4. - Fire on private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build any fire in the open air on any private lot without first having secured a permit from the fire department. The issuance of said permit shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the fire department. 
(Code 1972, § 10-4; Ord. No. 96-27, 12-12-96) 
Sec. 11-5. - Gasoline drums to be emptied and removed. 
It shall be the duty of every person in this city, upon the receipt of gasoline, benzine, naphtha, or the lighter products of petroleum, to immediately store the same in tanks provided therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to empty the products immediately. It shall be the duty of every person who has emptied gasoline, benzine, naphtha, or the lighter products of petroleum, to immediately remove from his premises, or the streets and alleys of the city, the empty tanks, drums or cans in which the same was received. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove the tanks, drums or cans. 
(Code 1972, § 10-5) 
Sec. 11-6. - Inspection and correction of dangerous stovepipes and chimneys. 
The fire marshal shall examine all dangerous stovepipes and chimneys in this city reported to him, order them made safe, and see that the order is complied with. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of such owner to refuse to comply with the order within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1972, § 10-6) 
Sec. 11-7. - Parking of trucks carrying gasoline. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any gasoline truck or any truck upon which there is a container containing or used for carrying gasoline on any street in the city, except that such truck may be parked temporarily for business purposes, and except in cases of emergency. When parked in emergency cases, it shall be the duty of the driver to place a danger signal to protect persons using such streets. 
(Code 1972, § 10-7) 
Sec. 11-8. - Following fire trucks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate an automobile, bicycle, motorcycle or any other vehicle in the city within 100 yards of any fire trucks or similar apparatus when such fire truck or similar apparatus are responding to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1972, § 10-8) 
Sec. 11-9. - Driving near scene of fire; driving over fire hose. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive a vehicle through the streets and alleys in which the fire department is assembled for the purpose of extinguishing a fire; or to ride or drive a vehicle over hose or other apparatus in the street while the fire department is parading or practicing, or while the same is being used to combat a fire. 
(Code 1972, § 10-9) 
Sec. 11-10. - Damaging fire apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly injure or damage, in any way, or by any means whatever, any hose, hook, ladder, reel or vehicle, or any other implement, material or apparatus of any kind belonging to, connected with, or used by the fire department in this city, as a part of their machinery, material or equipment for extinguishing fires. 
(Code 1972, § 10-10) 
Sec. 11-11. - Use of whistles, sirens or signalling devices similar to those of fire department. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use a gong, siren, whistle or signal device similar in kind to the siren, gong, whistle or signal device used by the fire department of the city, to signal the approach of fire apparatus; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to such gongs or devices on any locomotive, engine, police patrol vehicle or ambulance. 
(Code 1972, § 10-11) 
Sec. 11-12. - False fire alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give or cause to be given a false alarm of fire with intent to deceive, or to ring the fire bell except in case of fire. 
(Code 1972, § 10-12) 
Sec. 11-13. - Obstructing fire hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire hydrant in the city without first notifying the fire department in writing and obtaining the consent of the department. 
(Code 1972, § 10-13) 
Sec. 11-14. - Tampering with fire hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open any fire hydrant or remove the nuts from the opening, or to have in his possession any wrench, with the intent or for the purpose of opening any fire hydrant. However, nothing in this section shall be so construed as to interfere with the water superintendent's inspecting and opening them in the discharge of his duties, or any firefighter under the direction of the chief of the fire department at a fire or parade, or at practice. 
(Code 1972, § 10-4) 
Sec. 11-15. - Persons prohibited in vicinity of fire. 
It shall not be lawful for any person except firefighters, the mayor and councilmen, police officers, the owners of property, their agents, and the agents of insurance companies, to go within the immediate vicinity of any fire, without being ordered there by the officer in command of the fire department. 
(Code 1972, § 10-15) 
Sec. 11-16. - Arrest of thieves at fire. 
The officer in command of the fire department at a fire shall arrest or cause to be arrested by the police of the city, any person who shall be caught stealing goods or other articles of value from any store or other house at or in the vicinity of the fire. 
(Code 1972, § 10-16) 
Sec. 11-17. - Fire trucks answering calls outside city. 
City fire trucks shall not answer calls outside the city limits, except calls by churches and schools. 
(Code 1972, § 10-17) 
Sec. 11-18. - Storage of gasoline at stations restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store gasoline at a gas station or service station if the station is unattended for a period of seven days or longer. 
(Code 1972, § 10-18) 
Sec. 11-19. - Hazardous materials; charges for cost of clean-up to responsible party. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  Discharge means leakage, seepage, or other release of hazardous materials on land or into a river, stream, lake, pond, sewer, or into the air; 
(2)  Hazardous materials means any material which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: 
a.  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
b.  Pose a substantial threat or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
(b)  In the even of any discharge of any hazardous materials which results from the transportation, storage, holding, detention, delivery for transportation, or acceptance of hazardous materials in the city, the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the discharge of hazardous materials shall remedy the effects of such discharge at no cost to the city. When deemed necessary by the fire chief, the city may take action necessary to prevent, abate, or remove such hazardous materials. In such an event, the city may recover from any shipper, carrier, bailor, bailee, or any person responsible for such storage, transportation, holding, detention, delivery, or acceptance all costs incurred by the city in the prevention, abatement, or removal of any such discharge or threatened discharge, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred with respect to recovery. 
(Ord. No. 98-42, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Secs. 11-20—11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, adopted June 11, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former art. II, §§ 11-31—11-37, and adding a new art. II. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1972, §§ 10-31—10-36; Ord. No. 9-93, adopted March 22, 1993; Ord. No. 95-32, adopted November 28, 1995; and Ord. No. 00-27, adopted September 12, 2000. 

Sec. 11-31. - Fire prevention code. 
There is hereby adopted by the city council of the city, that certain code known as the "Standard Fire Prevention Code" being the 2000 Edition, and the Georgia State Amendments revised January 1, 2002, except that Chapter 1 shall not be deleted, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended in section 11-47, and is hereby incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the incorporated area of the city. Not less than one copy of the Standard Fire Prevention Code is filed at city hall in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-32. - Adoption of state code. 
In addition to above referenced Standard Fire Prevention Code, there is hereby adopted by the city council the state minimum fire safety standards as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12 and all subsequent revisions thereof. This code is hereby incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the incorporated area of the city. Furthermore, it is hereby resolved that pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(b), the city will enforce the minimum fire safety standards as set forth in subsection 25-2-12(a). 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-33. - Position of city manager 
The city manager or his designee of the city fire department shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of the city Standard Fire Prevention Code, this chapter and other fire prevention and protection rules, regulations and ordinances. The city manager or his designee may appoint qualified members of the fire department/building department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The city manager or his designee of the city fire department may also designate such number of inspectors as shall from time to time be authorized by the city. When used hereinafter in this chapter, the term "fire marshal" shall include the city manager and the lawful designees. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-34. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this chapter, to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner or other person in control of the premises. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner, occupant, or the person in charge shall not be deemed to relieve any of the others. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-35. - Applicability of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-36. - Exercise of police power. 
This act shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the city for the preservation and protection of the public health, peace, safety, and welfare, and all the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-37. - Submission of plans and specifications required. 
Owners, their agents or designees, of all buildings and tenant spaces covered by this chapter are required to submit plans and specifications of the project to the building official or his designee. The building official or his designee shall forward all plans to the fire marshal's office for approval prior to construction. A final inspection and letter of compliance must be obtained from the fire marshal prior to occupation or conducting of business. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-38. - Duties of fire marshal. 
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal (which shall be a concurrent duty of the police department of the city) in addition to the general duties of section 11-32, to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city covering the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires; 
(2)  The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive material. 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of automobile and other fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment. 
(4)  The maintenance and regulations of fire escapes. 
(5)  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire, from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose. 
(6)  The investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires. 
(7)  The establishment of fire lanes. 
(8)  Fire safety, fire prevention, and fire protection. 
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city, by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, as far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire, and if design is suspected, the fire marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence and cause a complete investigation to be initiated to include prosecution. Every fire shall be reported in writing with the fire department as soon as possible after the occurrence of an investigated fire. Such reports shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the fire marshal and shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin, and circumstances of such fire, the extent of the damage thereof, and the insurance upon such property and such information as may be required, including the injury, death or rescue of persons. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-39. - Powers of fire marshal. 
The fire marshal or his designees and fire inspectors are hereby vested with the powers of police officers while acting in their fire department capacity, and are authorized to issue citations for violations of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, this chapter, rules and regulations, or other fire protection ordinances enacted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-40. - Fire prevention scope. 
The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, this chapter, rules and regulations and other fire protection ordinances of the city, shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-41. - Inspections. 
(a)  The fire marshal or his assistants and inspectors shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises on a periodic basis for compliance with the Standard Fire Protection Code, this chapter, rules and regulations and other fire protection ordinances of the city, and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same. 
(b)  Additionally, upon complaint submitted in writing alleging a failure to comply with the Standard Fire Prevention Code, this chapter, and fire related rules, regulations and ordinances, the fire marshal or assistants or inspectors may enter in or upon any building or premises complained of for the purpose of investigating the complaint. 
(c)  Additionally, if the fire marshal or assistants or inspectors has been deputized by the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12.1, then that person is further authorized to seek inspection warrants against non-cooperating parties pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-22.1. Inspection warrants may be issued by any judge of the superior, state, municipal or magistrate court upon proper oath or affirmation showing probable cause. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-42. - Order to remove fire hazard. 
Whenever the fire marshal or inspector, shall find in any building or upon any premises or other places, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable material especially liable of fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, door or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, the fire marshal or inspector shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to the appeals procedure provided for in this chapter. Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of the said order shall be liable to penalties as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-43. - Service of order to remove hazard. 
The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant or owner of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant or owner personally, or leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of said premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with said person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such copy by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-44. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, this chapter, or other fire-related ordinance or rule or regulations, or shall fail to comply therewith, or shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or shall build in violation of any details, statements, specifications, or plans submitted or approved thereunder, or shall operate not in accordance with the provisions of any certificate, permit, or approval issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both such fines and imprisonment. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor excuse required correction or remedy of such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-45. - Permits. 
In accordance with requirements as detailed in chapter 4 of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, a permit shall be obtained from the fire marshal to conduct certain operations described therein or to store, handle, or use those processes described therein that are considered to present an extra or unusual fire hazard to life or property. 
Before permits may be issued, the fire marshal or assistants and inspectors shall inspect and approve the receptacles, processes, vehicles, buildings, storage places or sites to be used for any such purposes. A $10.00 processing fee to cover administrating cost shall be imposed upon each permit application. The cost of each permit shall be $25.00 as set forth in the city fee schedules. No processing fee or permit fee shall be required for the reduction of leaves and any other organic material by the owner or person in control of a residential occupied property, provided that such property meets the requirements otherwise set forth in this chapter. The city shall revoke, or suspend an individual's or entity's business license for violation of this section. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment of up to 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-46. - Building numbering and identification for emergency response. 
Each one-, two- and multi-family (three or more dwellings units) and each commercial and industrial building or structure shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general, public access, the address of such dwelling unit building or structure as required in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-47. - Outdoor burning. 
No open burning shall be conducted in violation of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division Regulations, Chapter 391-3-1, as revised. In addition to any environmental protection division authorizations which may be required, no open burning shall take place in the city except as otherwise provided herein without a permit issued by the fire marshal or his designee, and in full compliance with any conditions imposed by the fire marshal. The fire marshal may prohibit any or all burning when local conditions make such fires hazardous. Failure to obtain a permit and keep such permit at the site or follow the fire marshal's requirements set forth for the permit will result in revocation of the permit and/or a fine up to $1,000.00 for each and every occurrence. 
Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Outdoor cooking of food for immediate human consumption is allowed. 
(2)  Small outdoor fires using untreated wood are allowed to keep persons warm for working outdoors. 
(3)  Fires set for the purpose of fire fighting training are allowed. 
The burning of tires, asphaltic materials, heavy oils, petroleum based products, rubber or plastic products, pressure treated wood and household garbage is prohibited under all circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-48. - Fire prevention code, amendments and changes. 
The Standard Fire Prevention Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. is amended and changed in the following respect: 
(1)  Amend chapter 1 of the Fire Prevention Code by adding a new section 105.8 as follows: 
Sec. 105.8 Appeals. Whenever the Fire Marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit when applied for, or when it is claimed the provisions of the Standard Fire prevention Code, this chapter, or other City fire-related rules, regulations, or ordinances do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the same has been misconstrued or improperly applied, claimant may appeal the decisions to the City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia, within 30 days from the date of decision. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-49. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle within a designated fire lane. 
(b)  A fire lane shall be the 20-foot traffic lane closest to buildings and other structures unless otherwise designated. The police chief or the fire marshal shall be authorized to designate fire lanes within the city by posting of signs or by markings upon the pavement or roadway, so designating the fire lanes, or by requiring the owner of the property to so designate the fire lane. 
(c)  This section shall be enforced by any police officer of the city. Citations for violations shall be issued by such officers. 
(d)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or by imprisonment of up to one year. 
(Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 11-50—11-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-11, adopted June 11, 2002, amended the Code by renumbering former §§ 11-47—11-56 as new §§ 11-60—11-69. 

Sec. 11-60. - Establishment; composition; appointment of chief. 
There is hereby created and established a fire department for the city consisting of the fire chief, who shall be director of the department, and such other members as may be provided for by the council. The chief shall be appointed in accordance with charter provisions of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 10-47; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-61. - Chief to have control of department and apparatus; members subject to orders of chief. 
The fire chief shall have the control, subject to the order and direction of the city manager, of the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city. Whenever any fire apparatus needs repairing, the fire chief shall cause the same to be done without delay. All persons who are members of the department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1972, § 10-48; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-62. - Command at fires; removal of buildings to prevent spread of fire. 
In case of fire, the fire chief and his assistants shall rank in the order named, and the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the best manner possible. When it may be necessary for the protection of other property and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the best manner possible. 
(Code 1972, § 10-49; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-63. - Records and reports. 
The fire chief shall keep or cause to be kept such records and make such reports, concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 10-50; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-64. - General duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires, to prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires, to promote safety from fires and to patrol the central business district nightly. The inspector shall inspect all business premises on a regular basis and note any fire hazards and have same corrected immediately. 
(Code 1972, § 10-51; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-65. - Enforcement of article. 
It shall be the duty of all officers of the fire department and all police officers of the city to see that the provisions of this article are enforced and to arrest on view any person who shall be found violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall hinder, resist, or refuse to obey any such officer in the discharge of his duty, and to that end all such officers are hereby vested with the usual power and authority of police officers. 
(Code 1972, § 10-52; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-66. - Investigation of fires. 
The fire marshal shall investigate the causes of all extended or destruction fires occurring within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 10-53; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-67. - Conduct of members. 
It shall be the duty of every member of the fire department to conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner. 
(Code 1972, § 10-54; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-68. - Rules and regulations of chief. 
The chief of the fire department may make or describe such rules and regulations for the guidance of the members of the department as he shall see fit. Such rules, when approved by the city manager, shall be binding on such members. 
(Code 1972, § 10-55; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 11-69. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  Each person employed as a member of the fire department shall possess the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a graduate of an accredited high school or have obtained a G.E.D. 
(3)  Pass a physical exam by a physician. 
(4)  Possess a valid state driver's license. 
(5)  Pass intensive background investigation. 
(b)  In addition to the above qualifications the person employed by the department shall: 
(1)  Successfully complete entry level written examination. 
(2)  Successfully complete physical agility test. 
(3)  Pass oral examination by board composed of officer of department as constituted by the chief of fire department. 
(Code 1972, § 10-56; Ord. No. 02-11, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Chapter 12 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of municipal court to try and punish all violations of city ordinances, § 4.4. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; emergency services, Ch. 9; environment, Ch. 10; municipal court, Ch. 13; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 14; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise police power, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(1); law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day; police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20; special policemen, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1; torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-26. - Composition; appointment of chief. 
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other members and officers as may be provided for from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 21-1) 
Sec. 12-27. - General duties of members. 
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the enforcement of all ordinances of the city and all statutes effective in the city, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest any person violating such laws. 
(Code 1972, § 21-2) 
Sec. 12-28. - Conduct of members. 
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner, and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. 
(Code 1972, § 21-6) 
Sec. 12-29. - Duty of member to appear as witness. 
Every member of the department shall appear as a witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a city ordinance or of a state or federal law. 
(Code 1972, § 21-7) 
Sec. 12-30. - Qualifications of officers. 
Each person employed as a police officer shall meet the following requirements. 
(1)  Be at least 20 years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States; 
(3)  Have a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent; 
(4)  Not have been convicted by any state or by the federal government of any crime the punishment for which could have been imprisonment in the federal or state prison or institution nor have been convicted or sufficient misdemeanors to establish a pattern of disregard for the law; provided that, for purposes of this subsection, violations of traffic laws and other offenses involving the operation of motor vehicles when the applicant has received a pardon shall not be considered; 
(5)  Be fingerprinted and a search made of local, state and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record; 
(6)  Possess good moral character as determined by investigation under procedure established by the council; 
(7)  Have an oral interview with the hiring authority or its representative to determine the applicant's appearance, background, and ability to communicate; 
(8)  Be found, after examination by a licensed physician or surgeon, to be free from any physical, emotional, or mental conditions which might adversely affect his exercising the powers or duties of a peace officer; and 
(9)  Within six months after appointment, attend and pass a course at the state police academy to be a certified police officer. 
(Code 1972, § 21-9) 
Secs. 12-31—12-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF OF POLICE 

Sec. 12-46. - Appointment. 
The chief of police shall be appointed in accordance with charter provisions of the city and shall be the head of the police department. 
(Code 1972, § 21-1) 
Sec. 12-47. - Bond. 
The chief of police shall be bonded at the city's expense in the amount of $25,000.00. 
(Code 1972, § 21-10) 
Sec. 12-48. - General powers and duties. 
The chief of police shall have jurisdiction over the operations of the department. He shall in addition be the keeper of the city jail, and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records and make such reports, concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or ordinance or as may be required by the city manager. The chief shall be responsible for the performance by the police department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police. 
(Code 1972, § 21-3) 
Sec. 12-49. - Rules and regulations. 
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the guidance of the members of the department as he shall see fit. Such rules, when approved by the city manager, shall be binding on such members. 
(Code 1972, § 21-8) 
Sec. 12-50. - Custodian of lost, abandoned, stolen property. 
The chief of police shall be custodian of all lost, abandoned or recovered stolen property in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 21-4) 
Sec. 12-51. - Process serving. 
The chief of police shall be authorized to serve writs, summons, and other processes, but no patrolman shall serve any such summons or process except on the order of the chief of police. 
(Code 1972, § 21-5) 
Chapter 13 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 4.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, Ch. 12; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 14; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. 6, sec. 1, par. 1; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Establishment, function. 
There shall be a municipal court in the city, named the Municipal Court of the City of Newnan, for the trial of offenders against the laws and ordinances thereof as well as those laws of the state, which court is specifically authorized to try and to punish for a violation of same. 
(Code 1972, § 23-1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Location and frequency of sessions. 
The municipal court shall be held in the courtroom of the police department as often as necessary. 
(Code 1972, § 23-2) 
Sec. 13-3. - Powers enumerated. 
The municipal court shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Conduct hearings. To hear and determine all causes of prosecution for violating the penal laws and ordinances of the city and all other controversies arising under the laws and ordinances of this city. 
(2)  Subpoena power. To compel the attendance of parties and witnesses and compel the production of papers. 
(3)  Issuance of process. To issue all processes and writs necessary to the exercise of its jurisdiction. 
(4)  Punish for contempt. To punish contempt by fine or imprisonment, or both. 
(5)  Appoint officers. To appoint such special officers as may be necessary in the absence of the chief of police to execute its writs and processes including the designation of warrant clerks. 
(6)  Prescribe rules. To prescribe rules of practice in cases where there are no rules applicable. 
(7)  Conduct sessions. To sit at such times as it may appoint for hearing cases. 
(8)  Authority as to violations of state law. To bind over or commit to jail offenders against any criminal laws of this state, whenever in the course of investigation before such officer a proper case therefor shall be made out by the evidence. 
(9)  Other powers. To exercise such other powers as are necessary in the matters of its jurisdiction, or as may be conferred on it by law or ordinance, including the same powers and authorities as magistrates in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatever nature in the several courts of this state. 
(Code 1972, § 23-3) 
Sec. 13-4. - Motions, appearances and notice to city attorney. 
All motions and notices of appearance by defense counsel, who intend on proceeding with a bench trial, shall be made, in writing, before time of arraignment, with a copy provided to the city attorney. All such motions and bench trials in which defendants are represented by counsel shall be heard and considered at such time, date and place as set by the presiding judge. Generally, such motions and bench trials will be heard during regular court sessions; however, in order to accommodate the presiding judge, defense counsel, the city attorney, witnesses and parties to other cases, motions or bench trials involving unusual or complicated legal or factual issues may be specifically set, in the court's discretion. 
Sec. 13-5. - Arguments of counsel; rules of evidence. 
The city attorney, or anyone representing the city, shall have the opening and conclusion in each case, unless the defendant introduces no evidence, in which case the defendant shall be entitled to the opening and conclusion of the argument. The defendant shall announce first if he is ready for trial. The rules of evidence shall be the same as in the superior court, as far as applicable, to the case on trial. 
(Code 1972, § 23-4) 
Sec. 13-6. - Failure to appear for trial. 
If any person shall fail, refuse or neglect to appear for trial, after arrest and notice of the time of trial, or to render a satisfactory excuse or showing for such failure, neglect or refusal to appear and answer the charge specified, he may be punished for contempt as prescribed, and the case shall be continued until such time as the court may direct. It shall be the duty of the police of the city to arrest the offender, when so ordered by the presiding officer of the court, and keep him in custody until he is brought before the court for trial. 
(Code 1972, § 23-5) 
Sec. 13-7. - Preservation of order, compelling attendance of witnesses; punishment for contempt. 
The court shall have the power to preserve order and compel attendance of witnesses, punish for contempt by imprisonment or fine as prescribed, one or both. 
(Code 1972, § 23-6) 
Sec. 13-8. - Service of subpoenas for witnesses. 
Subpoenas for witnesses may be served at any time before the time for appearance of the witness. 
(Code 1972, § 23-7) 
Sec. 13-9. - Service of subpoenas duces tecum. 
Subpoenas duces tecum shall be served at the latest on the day before the papers are to be produced. 
(Code 1972, § 23-8) 
Sec. 13-10. - Right to examine witnesses separately. 
In all cases before the court, either party has the right to have the witnesses of the other party examined out of hearing of each other. The court shall, upon motion of either party, take proper care to effect this object as far as practical and convenient, but any mere irregularity, or a failure of the witness to obey the order of the court, shall not prevent the witness from testifying. 
(Code 1972, § 23-9) 
Sec. 13-11. - Preventing witnesses from attending court; intimidating witnesses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent or attempt to prevent the attendance of any witness, or to intimidate any witness at or subpoenaed to attend the court, by threat, menace, persuasion or any other means. 
(Code 1972, § 23-10) 
Sec. 13-12. - Bonding of witnesses. 
The presiding officer shall have authority to order any witness, either for the city or the defendant, to be put under bond in an amount determined by the presiding officer of the court, for his appearance at the trial of any case in which he is subpoenaed as witness. Upon failure of the witness to give bond, he shall be committed until the day or hour of trial. 
(Code 1972, § 23-11) 
Sec. 13-13. - Imposition of costs of prosecution upon prosecutor. 
Costs of prosecution shall not be chargeable to the prosecutor, unless the court trying the same shall find the prosecution malicious and without probable cause, in which event the prosecutor shall pay the costs instanter, under penalty of punishment for contempt. 
(Code 1972, § 23-12) 
Sec. 13-14. - Continuances of proceedings. 
When the ends of justice require it, all cases may be continued. All continuances shall be addressed to the sound discretion of the court under the rules governing continuances in the superior court of the state. 
(Code 1972, § 23-13) 
Sec. 13-15. - Judgment to be in writing, signed and recorded. 
Upon the trial of any case, judgment of the court shall be in writing, signed by the presiding officer of the court trying the same, and recorded upon the minutes. 
(Code 1972, § 23-14) 
Sec. 13-16. - Form of judgment. 
The form of judgments against offenders may be substantially as follows: 
Upon hearing the evidence in this case, it is the judgment of the court that the defendant is guilty and the defendant is sentenced to confinement in the Newnan City Jail for a period of ____________ days. Upon payment of a fine of $;$rule;, said defendant may be discharged. This ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 

 
Amount of fine paid $;$rule;. 
(Code 1972, § 23-15) 
Sec. 13-17. - Imposition of sentences. 
(a)  The court shall have authority to try offenses against the laws of the city, and shall have power to impose fines and/or sentences of imprisonment. A suspended sentence shall be interpreted to mean that the defendant, during the term of the sentence, shall not again violate the law. 
(b)  The court shall have the authority to impose alternative forms of punishment allowed by law in case such fines are not paid. 
(c)  The court shall have the authority to impose a sentence of community service. 
(d)  The court shall have the authority to impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 23-16) 
Sec. 13-18. - Execution to collect fine. 
On failure of any person upon whom a fine is imposed to pay the same, the presiding officer of the court may execute orders to collect the unpaid fine, although such person be imprisoned in default of paying such fine. 
(Code 1972, § 23-17) 
Sec. 13-19. - Executions; direction, return. 
All executions issued by authority of the city shall be directed to the chief of police, bear test in the name of the presiding officer of the court and be returnable to a regular meeting of the board, except executions to collect forfeiture recognizances, which shall be directed to all sheriffs, coroners, constables and marshals of this state, and may be executed by any of the officers. 
(Code 1972, § 23-18) 
Sec. 13-20. - Certiorari from municipal court. 
Parties dissatisfied with the decision in the municipal court may petition for a writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 23-19) 
Sec. 13-21. - Limitation of prosecution for violation of city ordinance. 
All prosecutions for violations of city ordinances shall be commenced within two years after such violations, and any offense against such ordinances for which no prosecution is begun within two years shall be barred, and no person shall be tried therefor, unless the party shall have been beyond the limits of the city, in which case the time of absence from the city shall not be embraced or computed as within two years. 
(Code 1972, § 23-20) 
Sec. 13-22. - Authority to permit prisoners to spend time at home. 
Upon the application of any person serving a sentence in the city and by permission of the presiding officer of the court, when such person is not actually at work, the person shall be allowed to spend the time at home or place of abode; however, the release of the prisoner for such purpose shall in no instance operate to discharge him from serving the full term of imprisonment imposed upon him by the sentence of the court. 
(Code 1972, § 23-21) 
Secs. 13-23—13-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHIEF JUDGE 

Sec. 13-41. - Office created. 
The office of chief judge of the city is hereby created. 
(Code 1972, § 23-32) 
Sec. 13-42. - Selection; term. 
Annually at their first regularly scheduled meeting in January, the city council shall elect a chief judge for the city, who shall hold the office for one year, unless sooner removed and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Code 1972, § 23-33) 
Sec. 13-43. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the chief judge shall be prescribed by the city council each year at the beginning of the term of service or as soon thereafter as practicable, which compensation shall not be changed except at the beginning of a year. 
(Code 1972, § 23-34) 
Secs. 13-44—13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASSOCIATE JUDGES 

Sec. 13-61. - Office established; selection, term. 
There is hereby established an office of associate judge who shall be elected by the city council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 23-38) 
Sec. 13-62. - Jurisdiction. 
The associate judges shall have jurisdiction to issue summons, subpoenas, arrest warrants and search warrants in all cases arising under the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city; shall preside over the municipal court when requested to do so by the chief judge; and shall have all powers and be able to perform any duty designated by this section to be performed by the chief judge. 
(Code 1972, § 23-40) 
Secs. 13-63—13-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - QUALIFICATIONS 

Sec. 13-81. - Qualifications. 
No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge of the municipal court unless that person is at least 21 years old. The chief judge shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. 
Sec. 13-82. - Oath. 
Before taking on any duties of office, each judge shall take an oath to be administered by the mayor and shall promise to discharge honestly and faithfully the duties of office without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 23-39) 
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court to try and punish all violations of city ordinances, § 4.4. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; dangerous dog control, § 4-66 et seq.; violation of building regulations, § 5-6; emergency services, Ch. 9; nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; law enforcement, Ch. 12; municipal court, Ch. 13; littering, § 17-36 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Misdemeanors under state law. 
Any act the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state is prohibited within the city, and if committed within the city is hereby declared to be an offense; provided, however, that the penalty therefor shall not exceed the penalty prescribed in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 16-12) 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-2. - Conspiracy. 
It shall be unlawful for any two or more persons in this city to conspire to do any act which is contrary to the laws or ordinances of this city. They may be jointly or severally prosecuted. 
(Code 1972, § 16-3) 
State Law reference— Conspiring, O.C.G.A. § 16-4-8. 
Sec. 14-3. - Refusing to pay for lodging or food at hotel or restaurant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without contracting for credit therefor, to board or lodge at a hotel or similar establishment, or eat at an eating house or similar establishment and then to refuse or fail to pay for the same. 
(Code 1972, § 16-2) 
State Law reference— Affray, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 14-4. - False pretenses. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to obtain or to obtain entrance into any residence or place of lodging in the city by false representation or pretense, or by impersonating another, or by representing himself to be the representative of a person whom he does not represent. 
(b)  Obtaining lodging under false representation of being man and wife. It shall be unlawful for any persons to obtain lodging in this city, by representing themselves to be man and wife, when in fact they are not legally married. 
(Code 1972, § 16-7) 
State Law reference— Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5; deceptive practices, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-61. 
Sec. 14-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-20, adopted Oct. 9, 2012, repealed § 14-5, which pertained to distribution of handbills, circulars and similar matter and derived from Code 1972, § 16-8. 
Sec. 14-6. - Interference with another's business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the premises of another in the city for the purpose of interfering with the business of such person or to interfere directly or indirectly with the business of any person. 
(Code 1972, § 16-9) 
Sec. 14-7. - Interference with another's work. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent or restrain or attempt to prevent or restrain another from going to or from his work or place of work, or to prevent or restrain, or to attempt to prevent or restrain, any person from remaining at his work or place of work. 
(Code 1972, § 16-10) 
Sec. 14-8. - Soliciting. 
Soliciting shall be prohibited in the business zone. In residential zones, the same shall be allowed only upon permit issued by the chief of police. 
(Code 1972, § 16-16) 
Sec. 14-9. - Impersonating police officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in this city, not being a police officer, to assume to be, or act as such, or represent himself, as such police officer. 
(Code 1972, § 16-21) 
State Law reference— Impersonating public officer, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23. 
Sec. 14-10. - Interfering with police. 
When any police officer in this city shall have any party under arrest it shall be unlawful for any person to approach or stay within 30 feet of such arresting officer after being warned by him not to do so. 
(Code 1972, § 16-22) 
State Law reference— Obstructing law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 14-11. - Resisting, interfering with officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct or oppose or in any manner to interfere with a police officer or any other officer or employee of the city in the discharge of such officer's or employee's official duty. 
(Code 1972, § 16-23) 
Sec. 14-12. - Curfew. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor under 16 years of age to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above referenced places during the prescribed period of time; and 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child under 16 years of age to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow, such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section. Upon conviction of a violation of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, a person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or work on the city streets or work on the public works of the city for not more than 60 days, or be subject to any one or more of the within punishments. Each violation of this shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Institution of an extended curfew. 
(1)  When imposed: Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city governing authority, or its mayor or its mayor's designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its mayor or the mayor's designee may adopt a resolution instituting an extended curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the City of Newnan. 
(2)  Where imposed: All of the territory of the incorporated city shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(3)  Times for extended curfews: The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(4)  Definitions. 
Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this section from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to the City of Newnan Ordinance No. 12-16 ("Ordinance to Require Registration and Licensing of Building and Repair Services During a State of Emergency"), performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(5)  Prohibition. It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of incorporated City of Newnan during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(6)  Penalties. Any individual violating this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(7)  Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this section is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this section. 
(8)  Effective date. This section shall become effective upon adoption by the City Council of the City of Newnan. 
(Ord. No. 12-91, § 16-93, 10-21-91; Ord. No. 12-15, § 1, 8-28-12) 
Cross reference— Emergency services, § 9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-13. - Loitering. 
(a)  In public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to be found idling, loitering or loafing, in any alcoholic beverage establishment, hotel, motel, billiard room, street, lane, sidewalk or alley, or in any other public place within the city to the encouragement of loafing and idleness; to be one of an assembly of persons loafing, idling or loitering in streets, lanes, sidewalks or alleys, or in any public places within the city to the encouragement of loafing and idleness; or to act or conduct himself in a suspicious manner or to fail to give a satisfactory explanation for his presence at this place under these circumstances. 
(b)  Duty as to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person, guardian or any other person within the county, having the custody or control of any minor, to permit, allow or encourage such minor to become a common loiterer. Upon conviction of violation of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, a person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or work on the city roads or work on the public works of the county for not more than 60 days, or be subject to any one or more of the within punishments. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 12-91, § 16-94, 10-21-91) 
Secs. 14-14—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES UPON ARREST[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal procedure, O.C.G.A. § 17-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-31. - Warrant against offenders. 
Offenders against the laws of the city shall be tried upon warrant issued either upon information on the oath of the informant, or on the knowledge of the person issuing the warrant. The complaint or warrant may be amended instanter as often as necessary. 
(Code 1972, § 16-104) 
Sec. 14-32. - Information required to obtain warrant. 
The information required to obtain a warrant shall describe the offense substantially in the terms of the ordinance and with such particularity as to put the accused on notice of the nature of the charge, and may be substantially of the following form: 
State of Georgia, City of Newnan: 
The undersigned, upon his quote, deposes and says that on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ , at ____________ (a.m.-p.m.) ____________ (name) ____________ (address) ____________ (occupation) did unlawfully in the city, county and state aforesaid commit the following offense: ____________ contrary to the city code. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me, this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 

 
(Code 1972, § 16-105) 
Sec. 14-33. - Form of warrant. 
A warrant shall be attached to the information, and shall be in a form substantially as follows: 
State of Georgia, City of Newnan: 
To the policemen of said city: 
The foregoing affidavit having been made before me, you are therefor commanded to arrest the body of said accused person, and bring the same before the chief judge or other persons authorized to hold municipal court, to be dealt with as the law directs. Herein fail not. 
Witness my hand and official signature, this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 

 
(Code 1972, § 16-106) 
Sec. 14-34. - Corporations violating penal ordinances. 
Whenever complaint is made, under oath, that a corporation has violated a penal ordinance of this city, it shall be the duty of the officer to whom complaint is made, having authority to issue a warrant for a violation of the city ordinances, to issue a summons directed to such corporation, requiring it to appear by agent or attorney, at the municipal court, at a time therein named, to answer such charge. Service in such cases may be made by delivering a copy of the affidavit of complaint, and of the summons to any agent or employee of the defendant at least three days before the time set for the hearing, any person, being competent to make such service, the entry of the arresting officer of the city, or affidavit of any other person, being evidence of service. The trial may proceed ex parte, if the defendant fails to appear. If judgment is against the defendant, it shall be for a fine and costs, the same to be collected by execution. 
(Code 1972, § 16-107) 
Sec. 14-35. - Warrant required for arrest; authority to arrest without warrant. 
Generally an arrest must be made by authority of warrant; but an arrest may be made without a warrant if the offense is committed in the presence of the officer, or if the offender is endeavoring to escape, or if for other cause there is likely to be a failure of justice for want of an officer to issue a warrant. 
(Code 1972, § 16-108) 
Sec. 14-36. - Duty upon arrest without warrant. 
In every case of an arrest without a warrant, the person arresting shall without delay convey the offender before a proper officer and obtain a warrant, and no imprisonment shall be legal beyond a reasonable time allowed for the purpose. After such warrant has been obtained the proceedings shall be the same as in cases of arrest under warrant. 
(Code 1972, § 16-109) 
Sec. 14-37. - Arrest by private citizen. 
A private person may arrest for a city offense under circumstances which would justify such arrest for a state offense. 
(Code 1972, § 16-110) 
State Law reference— Arrest by private person, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-60 et seq. 
Sec. 14-38. - Posse summoned by arresting officer. 
Whenever a police officer may deem it necessary, he may, verbally or in writing, summon to his assistance, in making an arrest, or endeavoring to do so, any male person found in this city; and the acts of such posse in aid of such officer shall be protected as official acts. It shall be unlawful for any person summoned to refuse to assist in good faith. 
(Code 1972, § 16-111) 
State Law reference— Summoning posse, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-24. 
Sec. 14-39. - Right of accused to speedy trial. 
The accused shall have a right to a speedy trial; and to that end the city shall have a right to a peremptory continuance but one time; it must after that show good cause for additional delay. If the accused is in custody, a continuance shall not be for a time longer than three days, except upon agreement of the defendant. If the accused is not in custody a continuance may be to such time as the court may appoint. 
(Code 1972, § 16-112) 
Sec. 14-40. - Escape. 
It shall be unlawful for any person lawfully arrested by authority of this city to escape from the arresting officer, or break or escape from the city jail, or city work-gang. 
(Code 1972, § 16-113) 
Sec. 14-41. - Defendant's bond generally. 
Any person arrested under a warrant may give to the arresting officer a bond with good security, to be approved by such officer or by the municipal court, which bond shall be joint and several, and in such sum as may be endorsed on the warrant by the officer issuing the same. The condition of the bond shall be for the appearance of the defendant at the municipal court at a specified time, and from time to time thereafter as required, then and there to stand to his trial on such charge, and not to depart thence without leave of the court. 
(Code 1972, § 16-114; Ord. No. 10-93, § 1, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 15-94, § I, 11-22-94) 
Sec. 14-42. - Power of bail over principal. 
The principal shall be subject to the control of his bail and may be imprisoned or surrendered by them at any time. 
(Code 1972, § 16-115) 
Sec. 14-43. - Fixing type of bond; check not taken. 
(a)  Bond may be in the form of a cash bond; a real or personal property bond, provided that the surety produce evidence of ownership of such property as required by such officer or the municipal court and provided that if the property is located outside of the corporate limits of the city, approval by the sheriff of the county in which the property is located; a surety bond of a professional bondsman or person as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 provided that such bondsman or person has made application to the chief of police for approval to furnish bonds and has been approved to act as surety by the municipal court; or by posting the driver's license of a licensed driver charged with a traffic offense as allowed by general state law and approved by such officer or the municipal court. 
(b)  Application for approval to serve as surety by a professional bondsman or person as set forth in this section shall be to the chief of police. Such bondsman shall post with the initial application and by March 1 of each year thereafter a current financial statement evidencing financial responsibility and showing a net worth of $75,000.00. Such bondsman shall post with the initial application and by March 1 of each year thereafter a certificate that all occupational taxes due for the current year have been paid. The form of the application shall be as approved by the municipal court. 
(c)  In no event shall a check be taken from an accused violator as bail. 
(Code 1972, § 16-116; Ord. No. 15-94, § II, 11-22-94) 
Sec. 14-44. - Forfeiture of bond or recognizance. 
(a)  Issuance of scire facias. Upon failure to appear of any principal in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a penal offense, or by a witness to appear and testify, the principal and the sureties on the bond or recognizance shall be called in the manner practiced in the superior courts of this state, and on failure of such persons so called to cause such principal to appear at once in court, such obligation shall be forfeited, whereupon the court shall order scire facias to issue, calling upon the principal and sureties to show cause why judgment should not be entered against them for the amount of the bond. 
(b)  Return of scire facias. The clerk shall issue scire facias according to the order returnable to the municipal court at a certain time therein specified. 
(c)  Service of scire facias. Such scire facias shall be served by any police officer, if the same can be done within the city. If service cannot be perfected within the city, the same may be done by any person within the state. 
(d)  Manner, time of service. The defendant may be served with a copy personally or by leaving the same at his residence or place of business, at least three days before the return day, or on a defendant residing out of the state, or whose residence is unknown, by publication of the scire facias in the official newspaper of the county twice before return day of the scire facias, or in such other manner as the court may direct. 
(e)  Evidence of service. The official return of the police officer or any constable or sheriff, or the affidavit of a private person, as to the service of the scire facias, shall be sufficient evidence of such service. 
(f)  Entry of judgment. Judgment on the recognizance shall be entered for the penal sum thereof at the return day thereof, or at a subsequent term, against the principal and sureties, or either or any who have been served, unless sufficient cause be shown to the contrary. A surrender of the principal before the return day of the scire facias and a payment of the accrued cost shall relieve the sureties from further liability. 
(Code 1972, § 16-117) 
Secs. 14-45—14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY 

Sec. 14-61. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to engage in any conduct described in the following subsections; provided, however, that no person shall be convicted of any of the following sections upon a showing that the predominant intent of such conduct was to exercise a constitutional right: 
(1)  To act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  To act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed. 
(3)  To cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  To be in or about any place, where illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed, or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcoholic beverages; 
(5)  To direct "fighting words" toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite a breach of the peace; 
(6)  To interfere with, by acts of physical obstruction, another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(7)  To congregate with another or others on or about any public way so as to halt the flow or vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear that public way after being ordered to so do by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(8)  To disrupt, by actions which tend to incite a breach of the peace, the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital or home for the elderly; or 
(9)  To throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles or any other debris on public property. 
(Code 1972, § 16-14) 
Sec. 14-62. - Disturbing assemblies or exhibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person visiting or attending theaters, concerts or other public exhibitions or public assemblies, in this city, in any manner to disturb either the performance in such exhibition, or the audience assembled, by acting in a disorderly manner, by talking, hooting, whistling or cheering in a loud and boisterous manner, or by using vulgar or indecent language, or by committing any other indecorous conduct in the presence of the audience assembled or any part thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 16-6) 
State Law reference— Public disturbance, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 14-63. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators and similar receptacles. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant of any premises within the city to allow or permit any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, trunk, chest or other receptacle or container in which a person might become imprisoned; to be or remain on such premises if such icebox, refrigerator, trunk, chest, receptacle, container or device has a virtually airtight lid, door, snap lock, latch or other locking device, without first removing such door, lid, snap lock, latch or other locking device. 
(b)  Definition. Any such container shall be considered and deemed abandoned or discarded when it is no longer used for the purpose for which it was intended, and is unattended outside of any building or structure, or is within an abandoned or unoccupied house, shed, bar or structure within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 16-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Sec. 14-64. - Weapons. 
(a)  Drawing concealed weapons. It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to draw from a place of concealment about his person any pistol, dirk, or knife. 
(b)  Drawing weapon on another. It shall be unlawful for any person to draw on another any weapon; provided that, any person may in good faith draw in self-defense any weapon not a concealed weapon. 
(c)  Discharging firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a gun or pistol in the city, except a duly licensed gunsmith may test fire firearms in a specific facility approved for safety annually by the chief of police. 
(Code 1972, § 16-20) 
State Law reference— Dangerous instrumentalities and practices, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100 et seq.; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq. 
Sec. 14-65. - Use of airguns, bow and arrow, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or use any air rifle, pellet rifle, BB gun, bow and arrows or slingshot. 
(Code 1972, § 16-15) 
Sec. 14-66. - Throwing rocks, stones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to rock or stone any house or person in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 16-17) 
Secs. 14-67—14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 14-81. - Malicious mischief. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly or negligently injure or prevent the free use of any property, not his own, in this city. 
(b)  Dwellings, other structures. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or mutilate any dwelling or similar structure in the city in any manner. 
(c)  Defacing buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, draw, carve, or cut any letters, word or words, or device, or paste or glue, or fix in any manner any cardboard or paper advertisement on, or in any way mutilate or deface any church, public building, private house, wall or fence, or sign belonging to another in the city without the permission of the owner. 
(d)  Defacing telegraph poles, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, or in any way deface any electric, telephone or telegraph pole in this city, or to break any lamp or insulator, or to throw any missile at any wire, or in any manner interfere with any pole, line, or lamp of any electric light, telephone or telegraph company in this city, to the injury or inconvenience of such company. 
(Code 1972, § 16-11) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 14-82. - Dispossessing another of property. 
(a)  Any person who shall wilfully take possession of any goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment within the city with the intention of converting the same to his own use without paying the purchase price thereof shall be guilty of the offense of dispossessing another's property. 
(b)  Any person willfully concealing unpurchased goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment either on the premises or outside the premises of such store shall be prima facie presumed to have so concealed such article with the intention of converting the same to his own use without paying the purchase price thereof within the meaning of subsection (a) of this section. The finding of such unpurchased goods or merchandise concealed upon such person or among the belongings of such person shall be prima facie evidence of willful concealment. If such person conceals, or causes to be concealed such unpurchased goods or merchandise upon the person or among the belongings of another, the finding of the same shall also be prima facie evidence of willful concealment on the part of the person so concealing such goods. 
(Code 1972, § 16-5) 
State Law reference— Theft, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-83. - Trespass—Private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the property of another in the city for any purpose unless invited or authorized by the owner of the property; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person from going upon any such property for the purpose of legitimate business. 
(Code 1972, § 16-18) 
Sec. 14-84. - Same—Watershed. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon any of the lands embraced in the watershed of the waterworks of the city, or on any of the land lots thereof. 
(b)  Hunting, cutting wood, fishing, bathing. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or cut wood upon any of such lands constituting the watershed and to fish in any of the streams upon such land, or in the reservoir on such watershed, or to bathe therein. 
(Code 1972, § 16-19) 
Sec. 14-85. - Nuisances—Defined. 
A nuisance is anything which tends to lead to the immediate annoyance of the citizens in general, or which is manifestly injurious to the public health and safety, or tends greatly to corrupt the morals and manners of the people. 
Sec. 14-86. - Same—Abatement petition; notice to appear. 
Any person annoyed by any nuisance may apply to the superintendent of sanitation of the city by written petition, in which that person shall describe the thing complained of as a nuisance, where it is located, and the name of the person maintaining the same and pray that the same be abated. Such petition shall be investigated by the superintendent and, if such investigation shows a nuisance to exist, he may issue a summons addressed to the defendant, requiring that person to be and appear before the municipal court at a named time and place and show cause why the alleged nuisance shall be abated. A copy of such petition and summons shall be served on the defendant personally, or by leaving it with a person who is competent at the defendant's residence, by the chief of police or any police or other legal officer of the city, who shall make an entry on the original petition showing the time and method of service. 
Sec. 14-87. - Same—Hearing. 
When a rule is served as provided in section 14-86, the chief judge of the municipal court shall hear, at the time and place appointed, evidence regarding the alleged nuisance. All such hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of the municipal court. 
Sec. 14-88. - Same—By owner upon order. 
If the chief judge of the municipal court of the city adjudges an object or thing a nuisance, and orders its removal, it shall be the duty of the person erecting, causing, or maintaining the nuisance to remove or abate the same within the time period prescribed by the judge. A failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the judge's order shall be punishable as a contempt of court. 
Sec. 14-89. - Same—Performance by city; collection of cost. 
If the defendant fails or refuses to remove or abate the nuisance as directed by the chief judge of the municipal court of the city, the city manager or his designated representative shall abate the same and report the same to the city clerk, together with a bail of costs incurred. The city clerk shall thereupon issue an execution for the expenses and costs incurred against the defendant, file a lien and the chief of police shall proceed to collect such execution by levy and sale as in the case of a tax fi. fa. 
Secs. 14-90—14-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY AND MORALS 

Sec. 14-101. - Disorderly houses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or occupy, temporarily or otherwise, a disorderly house. For the purpose of this section, the term "disorderly house" shall be held to include any house, room or place, whether enclosed or unenclosed, in which or at which any person abides, comes together or resorts to the disturbance of the public generally, or any person in the neighborhood and engages in or commits any immoral, indecent or illegal practices or in which loud, boisterous, or annoying conduct, talking, singing, laughing, dancing or like acts which tend to harm, disturb or violate the peace, tranquility or decency of the public generally or of any person in the neighborhood or passing by. 
(Code 1972, § 16-4) 
State Law reference— Disorderly houses, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 14-102. - Indecent dress, exposure. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to appear in any public place naked, or in an indecent or lewd dress, or to make any indecent exposure of his person, or to be guilty of any indecent or lewd act or behavior. 
(Code 1972, § 16-72) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 14-103. - Obscene publications, exhibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, sell or offer for sale, any obscene, vulgar or licentious book, picture or painting of any character whatever, or to exhibit or perform in any hall, house or public place in the city, any indecent, immoral or lewd play or dance, or to sing to a public audience any sacrilegious, indecent, vulgar or lewd song. 
(Code 1972, § 16-73) 
State Law reference— Distributing obscene materials, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq. 
Sec. 14-104. - Obscene movies. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or agent in charge of any motion picture theater in the city to exhibit or allow to be exhibited in such theater any indecent, immoral or obscene motion pictures. 
(Code 1972, § 16-74) 
Sec. 14-105. - Houses of ill fame. 
(a)  Living in, frequenting. It shall be unlawful for any person to live in or frequent houses of ill fame in this city. 
(b)  Permitting occupancy. It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of the owner, to rent, or cause to be rented, or occupy or cause to be occupied, any house or portion of a house, to be used as a house of ill fame in this city; or for any owner or agent of such owner, of any house in this city, to suffer or permit any woman of ill fame to occupy such house in this city, for the purpose of adultery or fornication, for the space of two days after the same shall have been adjudged a house of ill fame by the court; or for any person to occupy or allow to be occupied any house, or portion of a house, to be used as a house of ill fame. 
(c)  Ejection of occupants. Whenever it develops upon the trial of any cases made under any of the foregoing provisions, that any house is a house of ill fame, and is so adjudged by the municipal court, it shall be the duty of the police to eject the occupants. 
(d)  Proof of violation. Circumstances from which it may be reasonably inferred that any house is inhabited by disorderly persons or by persons of immoral character and notoriously bad fame, shall be sufficient to establish the fact that such house is a house of ill fame. 
(Code 1972, § 16-75) 
State Law reference— Prostitution and related offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10. 
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to acquire, operate, etc., parks, etc., § 1.4(12); authority to regulate and control erection, control, etc., of signs, etc., along roadside areas, § 1.4(18). 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(5); authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; state commission on physical fitness created, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1—15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-166 et seq. 

Sec. 15-26. - Establishment; purpose. 
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the City of Newnan Parks Commission and to be referred to in this article as the "commission" for the purposes of planning the development of and recommending placement of the improvements and structures in the city's public parks; establishing a recommended schedule for the maintenance of the city's parks; and to generally improve the general welfare and health of the people of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-112; Ord. No. 23-90, § I, 9-24-90) 
Sec. 15-27. - Composition; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The parks commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council who shall serve for a term of three years. Each member shall be a resident of the city during their term of office. The current members of the commission shall serve the remainder of the term for which he/she has been appointed. The new member of the commission shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
Vacancies in office during the term of any appointment caused by death, resignation, disqualification or otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council in the same manner as the person was appointed whose office has become vacant. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint a member of the city staff to act as a liaison between the commission and the city. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1972, § 2-113; Ord. No. 23-90, § I, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 14-2, § I, 2-11-14 ) 
Sec. 15-28. - Duty; responsibility; authority. 
The commission created in this article shall have the duty, responsibility and authority: 
(1)  To study, develop plans, and establish goals, for the establishment, development, care, preservation, maintenance, and placement of improvements and structures in all of the city's public parks and to present such plans, as a recommendation, to the mayor and council on or before October 1 in each calendar year or as often as may be necessary to insure orderly development and operation of the city's public parks. 
(2)  To assist and coordinate its activities with the city tree commission which has the responsibility and duty to provide for and preserve the trees and shrubs in the city's public parks. 
(3)  To assist the proper authorities and officials of the city in a program to protect and maintain existing city-owned public parks. 
(4)  To assist the proper officials and make available to the general public news and information regarding the improvement, use, and maintenance of the city's public parks; to recommend from time to time as necessary ordinances and other programs that will be beneficial to improve, protect and maintain such parks. 
(Code 1972, § 2-114; Ord. No. 23-90, § I, 9-24-90) 
Sec. 15-29. - Officers' meetings. 
Upon appointment of the initial commission by mayor and council, the commission shall meet and elect one of its members as chairman and one of its members as secretary. The commission shall then provide for the rules and procedure for the holding of regular and special meetings of the commission as deemed advisable and necessary. 
(Code 1972, § 2-115; Ord. No. 23-90, § I, 9-24-90) 
Secs. 15-30—15-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-166 et seq. 

Sec. 15-71. - Established. 
There is hereby established a department of parks and recreation for the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-1) 
Sec. 15-72. - Control of parks. 
General control over the lands and property in the city now used as public parks and places or hereafter acquired, is hereby vested in the city parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1972, § 18-2) 
Sec. 15-73. - General powers and duties. 
The parks and recreation department shall, subject to the supervision and review of the city manager, lay out, establish, beautify and improve the parks of the city, and shall have authority generally to maintain and carry forward improvements, as money may, from time to time, be appropriated by the city council or received from the proceeds of bond issues, private contributions or other sources. 
(Code 1972, § 18-3) 
Sec. 15-74. - Power relative to trees, and other plants in streets and sidewalks. 
Subject to the supervision and review of the city manager, the parks and recreation department shall have general control over all trees, flowers, vines, plants and shrubs in and upon the streets, alleys and sidewalks of the city, with power to plant, care for, trim, cut, remove and transplant or otherwise dispose of the same. 
(Code 1972, § 18-4) 
Sec. 15-75. - Appointment of director. 
The city manager shall appoint a director of parks and recreation who shall be confirmed by the city council in accordance with charter provisions. 
(Code 1972, § 18-6) 
Sec. 15-76. - Director's police power. 
For the purpose of carrying out his duties, the director of parks and recreation shall have the power to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 18-7) 
Secs. 15-77—15-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 15-96. - Permission required to cut, plant, remove, etc., trees and other plants in streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, cut, trim, prune, transplant, remove or interfere with any tree, flower, vine, plant or shrub in or upon any of the streets, alleys, or sidewalks within the city, or any boxing, pot or other thing provided for the protection thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 18-5) 
Sec. 15-97. - Destroying or injuring park property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break, mutilate, mark, deface or in any other manner destroy or injure any public property, real or personal, belonging to or used by the city or the park and recreation department in, upon, or about any of the public parks of the city or in the municipal swimming pools. 
(Code 1972, § 18-9) 
Sec. 15-98. - Closing hours. 
(a)  Every public park in the city and every place of amusement therein shall be closed to all persons at 12:00 midnight every day and shall not be re-opened before 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  All persons within the bounds of such parks or amusement places therein shall vacate the same by 12:00 midnight and shall not remain therein or be therein after that hour or between that hour and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any such park or amusement place therein after 12:00 midnight of any day and before 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1972, § 18-8) 
Sec. 15-99. - Posting or distributing advertising matter or littering prohibited in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any bill, sign, or notice on any tree, building or fixture in any of the parks of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any handbills or dodgers or scatter or place any paper, books, refuse or trash of any kind in or about any of the public parks of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-10) 
Sec. 15-100. - Pollution or disturbance of springs, ponds, etc., in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or disturb any spring, branch, pond or other water within the confines of any of the parks belonging to the city by throwing sticks, stones, refuse or trash therein or by washing the person or objects in such waters. 
(Code 1972, § 18-11) 
Sec. 15-101. - Killing or catching animals, fowl or fish in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or catch, or pursue, with such intent, any animal, fish or bird, or to rob or destroy any bird's nest in any park. 
(Code 1972, § 18-12) 
Sec. 15-102. - Discharging firearms, firecrackers, etc., or throwing missiles in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to handle or discharge any firearm, firecracker, air gun, slingshot or other explosive, noisy or destructive article or substance, or throw any stone or other missile in, about or across any of the parks belonging to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-13) 
Sec. 15-103. - Drinking liquor, making noise and other disorderly or disturbing conduct in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any spirituous liquors, be in an intoxicated condition, make any loud or unnecessary noises, engage in noisy disputes or conversations, engage in any indecent or lewd acts or behavior, or in any other manner disturb the public peace, quiet and order in or within the vicinity of any of the parks of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-14) 
Sec. 15-104. - Certain persons prohibited in parks. 
No person of loose or disreputable character shall walk or loiter in or about the parks or public places of the city to the annoyance of peaceable citizens. 
(Code 1972, § 18-15) 
Sec. 15-105. - Scheduling of organized games and assemblages in parks; permission required for erection of booth or stand or sale of articles in parks. 
The director of parks and recreation shall schedule the use of all parks and public places for organized games, assemblages or gatherings. No person shall be allowed to erect any booth or stand or to sell any article within the limits of any of the public parks without the permission of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1972, § 18-16) 
Sec. 15-106. - Curfew for occupancy of C. J. Smith Memorial Park and surrounding streets. 
A curfew of 10:30 p.m. is hereby put into effect for the use and occupancy of the C. J. Smith Memorial Park. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy the C. J. Smith Memorial Park after 10:30 p.m. It shall further be unlawful for any person not a resident of Farmer Street, Glen Street, or Murray Street to loiter on such streets or in parked cars thereon after 10:30 p.m. 
(Code 1972, § 18-16.1) 
Sec. 15-107. - Use of motorized vehicles in C. J. Smith City Park. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, use or ride on any motorized vehicle including motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, or automobiles within the limits and boundaries of the C. J. Smith City Park. Any person violating this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Code 1972, § 18-16.2) 
Secs. 15-108—15-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 15-131. - Supervision, control and management. 
The municipal swimming pools shall be under the general supervision, control and management of the director of parks and recreation, subject to the provisions and regulations provided and authorized under the general supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 18-17) 
Sec. 15-132. - Employment and discharge of managers and other employees. 
The director of parks and recreation shall name and designate managers of the swimming pools and such other employees and attendants as may be deemed necessary, and shall have full power and authority to employ and discharge them. 
(Code 1972, § 18-18) 
Sec. 15-133. - Records, accounts and reports of managers. 
(a)  The managers of the swimming pools shall be required to keep a complete and accurate system of books and records showing: 
(1)  All personal properties in their custody, or in use by the swimming pools and skating rink. 
(2)  All receipts and disbursements. 
(b)  They shall fully account for such properties and moneys, making a complete report to the city clerk and treasurer at the close of each day. 
(Code 1972, § 18-19) 
Sec. 15-134. - Qualifications for lifeguards. 
Any person engaged as the chief lifeguard at a municipal swimming pool shall be an American Red Cross first-aid and water safety instructor and shall hold certificates that will enable him to pass pupils in the senior first-aid course and the courses qualifying them to become senior and junior life savers. Other lifeguards who may be employed at a municipal swimming pool shall hold certificates showing that they are qualified American Red Cross senior life savers and that they have successfully passed and hold certificates for the standard American Red Cross first-aid course. No person not having the foregoing qualifications shall be employed as a lifeguard. 
(Code 1972, § 18-20) 
Sec. 15-135. - When to be open; lifeguard to be on duty; entering while closed prohibited. 
The municipal swimming pools shall be kept open during specified hours, notice of which shall be posted at some conspicuous place at the swimming pools. At least one lifeguard shall be on duty at all times while the pool is open for use. It shall be unlawful, except during the open hours, for any person to enter the water of such pools or enter any enclosure provided for the purpose of keeping people away from the pool. 
(Code 1972, § 18-21) 
Sec. 15-136. - Small children to be properly attended. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having in his care any small child to permit such child to enter any municipal swimming pool unless such child is properly attended by the person charged with the care of such child. 
(Code 1972, § 18-22) 
Chapter 16 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; businesses, Ch. 6; environment, Ch. 10; utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Position of city planner established; planner's duties. 
The position of city planner is hereby established and his duties shall be as prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 19-1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Chattahoochee-Flint Regional Development Commission. 
The city shall be a member of the Chattahoochee-Flint Regional Development Commission. 
(Code 1972, § 19-2; Ord. No. 14-88, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 16-3. - Zoning and subdivision ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to zoning or any ordinance regulating subdivisions, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 19-3) 
Secs. 16-4—16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 16-31. - Purpose; creation. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the city of Newnan Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as "the planning commission," is hereby created and established as authorized by the provisions of article IX, section II, paragraph IV of the 1982 Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Zoning Procedures Law of 1985. 
(Code 1972, § 19-13; Ord. No. 29-90, § I, 12-19-90) 
Sec. 16-32. - Membership; appointment, terms, compensation, removal. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the city and appointed by the city council. The terms of the members shall be for four years except that current members shall serve the terms to which they have been appointed. Two new members shall be appointed: one shall be appointed for a term of two years and the other shall be appointed for a term of four years. Should a vacancy occur in the membership it shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council, which shall also have authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, at a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. Failure of any regular member to attend a minimum of 75 percent of all meetings and workshops of the planning commission during any calendar year shall result in automatic removal from membership on the planning commission. 
(Code 1972, § 19-14; Ord. No. 29-90, § I, 12-19-90; Ord. No. 5-94, § I, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 16-33. - Organization; staff. 
The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year from eligibility for reelection. The term of the chairman shall commence the first meeting of the next calendar year after his election. The secretary of the commission shall be the city planner. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may, with approval of city council, contract with the state planning commission and with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(Code 1972, § 19-15; Ord. No. 29-90, § I, 12-19-90) 
Sec. 16-34. - Meetings, rules, records. 
The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. Three members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1972, § 19-16; Ord. No. 29-90, § I, 12-19-90) 
Sec. 16-35. - Finances. 
The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amount appropriated for the purpose by the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 19-17; Ord. No. 29-90, § I, 12-19-90) 
Sec. 16-36. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities as directed by city council, as contained in this Code and as set forth in the Zoning Procedures Law of 1985. Additional powers, duties and responsibilities deemed necessary by the city council shall be as follows: 
(1)  To make studies and project plans for the improvement of the city, with a view toward its future development and extension, and to recommend to the city council all matters for the development and advancement of the city's facilities, layout and appearance. 
(2)  To make plans and maps of the whole or any portion of the city. 
(3)  To confer with and advise property owners pertaining to location and erection of structures in order to promote conformity to the overall city plan. 
(4)  To assist all other municipal and governmental agencies, and especially the city council, in formulating and executing proper plans of municipal development. 
(5)  To plan and recommend the location, plan, and extent of city alleyways, viaducts, bridges, parkways, parks, playgrounds, airports, automobile parking places and other public properties, and of public utilities, including railroads, railroad depots and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, for water, lights, sanitation, sewerage, sewage disposal, drainage, flood control, transportation, communication, power, and for the removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing public places, works, buildings, facilities or utilities. 
(6)  To select and recommend to the city council routes of streets, avenues, and boulevards, and particularly to investigate and recommend the opening, widening, or abandonment of streets, avenues, boulevards, and alleys or the changing thereof to conform with the city's system, present and future, of boulevards, streets, avenues, alleyways, parks and parkways. 
(7)  To investigate, consider and report to the city council upon the layout or platting of new subdivisions of the city. 
(8)  To recommend to the city council for adoption and promulgation rules and regulations governing plats and subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city; to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community, and the safe, orderly and healthful development of such community. 
(9)  To recommend plans to the city council for improving, developing, expanding and beautifying the parks, parkways, and streams and to cooperate with the city council and other agencies and commissions of the city in devising, establishing, locating, improving, selecting, expanding and maintaining the public parks, parkways, playgrounds and places for public recreation. 
(10)  To suggest plans for clearing the city of deteriorated and blighted areas. 
(Code 1972, § 19-18; Ord. No. 29-90, § I, 12-19-90) 
Secs. 16-37—16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 16-51. - Created; supervision; divisions within department. 
There is hereby created an administrative department of the city under the general supervision of the city manager, which shall be known as the department of community development. There shall be the following divisions within the department: 
(1)  Planning. 
(2)  Zoning. 
(3)  [Reserved.] 
(4)  Community development. 
(Code 1972, § 2-116; Ord. No. 10-6, § I, 4-13-10) 
Sec. 16-52. - Position of director established. 
There is hereby established the position of director of the department of community development, an administrative officer, who shall be appointed by, and be responsible to the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-117) 
Sec. 16-53. - Powers, duties of director. 
The director of the department of community development, on behalf of the department shall: 
(1)  Supervise and direct all employees of the department. 
(2)  Advise the city council through the city manager on all matters affecting the physical growth and development of the city when requested and required to do so. 
(3)  Issue or delegate the responsibility to the various division personnel to issue all permits, certificates, orders and notifications resulting from decisions on ordinances administered by the department. 
(4)  Recommend action on subdivision plats to the city manager. 
(5)  Serve as liaison between the city and the Newnan-Coweta Planning Commission. 
(6)  Establish liaison and close working relationships with the administrative offices of the city and other local government agencies and institutions in order for plans of the area to be coordinated. 
(7)  Promote the realization of the comprehensive plan. 
(8)  Provide information to the public in community development problems and develop a program of citizen participation. 
(9)  Provide information to the zoning board of appeals and the Newnan-Coweta Planning Commission. 
(10)  The director shall integrate all individual projects or programs and develop plans to insure harmonious and integrated planning for the area concerned. 
(11)  The director shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed from time to time, by the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 2-117(1)) 
Sec. 16-54. - Planning division. 
The planning division of the department of community development shall: 
(1)  Undertake research studies and prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan, including the development of more detailed plans and programs based on the comprehensive plan for area renewal, conservation, rehabilitation or redevelopment. 
(2)  Review all annexation and disconnection proposals and submit written recommendations to the director. If the recommendation is for approval of an annexation, the director shall review and submit his written comments to the city manager and the city council on the zoning classification for the annexed tract. 
(3)  Review and submit written comments to the director upon all proposals to amend the zoning ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, official map and standards ordinance, and such other ordinances as the city council or city manager may refer to the department. From time to time make recommendations for the updating and revisions of the ordinances concerned or for the adoption of new ordinances related thereto. 
(4)  Maintain the official map and keep it up to date. 
(5)  Prepare and recommend, and assist other departments of the city in the development of specific projects intended to complement the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1972, § 2-117(2)) 
Sec. 16-55. - Zoning division. 
The zoning division of the department of community development shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Administer and enforce the zoning ordinance and conduct inspections of all buildings, structures, signs, and uses of any premises to determine compliance and/or noncompliance with the terms of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Maintain current the zoning district map. 
(3)  Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, official actions on all amendments, special uses, variations, appeals, and applications therefor. 
(4)  Administer and enforce the subdivision ordinance and the official map and standards ordinances, including the review of all plats of subdivisions, and submit a written report and recommendation for approval or disapproval to the city manager. 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the city manager an annual report on the work of the zoning board of appeals, and the effectiveness of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 2-117(3)) 
Sec. 16-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-6, § II, adopted April 13, 2010, repealed § 16-56, which pertained to urban renewal division and derived from Code 1972, § 2-117(4). The user's attention is directed to § 16-61 et seq. 
Sec. 16-57. - Community development division. 
The community development division of the department of community development shall develop long range plans for development of the city in accordance with federal regulations and which are approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-117(5)) 
Sec. 16-58. - Staffing; expenditures. 
The city manager may employ or assign to the department of community development persons who are qualified by training and/or experience to perform the work of the department and also employ technical and professional consultants as desired and needed to perform specific work for the department. No expenditure pursuant to this article may be made or liability incurred without a prior appropriation therefor in the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 2-117(6)) 
Secs. 16-59, 16-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY OF NEWNAN URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 16-61. - Establishment: purpose. 
In accordance with the authority granted the city in O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq., there is hereby created an agency to be known and designated as the City of Newnan Urban Redevelopment Agency and to be herein referred to as "NURA" for the purposes of implementing and regulating the components of the city's plan for redevelopment. 
(Ord. No. 10-6, § III, 4-13-10) 
Sec. 16-62. - Composition; terms. 
The NURA shall consist of nine commissioners, residents of the City of Newnan, and otherwise eligible for appointment, who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council who shall serve for a term of three years. Each commissioner shall be a resident of the city during their term of office. The initial group of commissioners of the agency shall be appointed for terms of office as follows: three commissioners for a term of one year, three commissioners for a term of two years, and three commissioners for a term of three years. Each councilmember shall have the opportunity to nominate for appointment to the agency one commissioner. The mayor shall have the opportunity to nominate for appointment to the agency three commissioners, two of whom shall be current members of the Newnan Housing Authority Board of Directors serving concurrently with their appointment to this agency. 
Each commissioner shall hold office until his or her successor has been appointed and has qualified. 
For inefficiency, neglect of duty, or misconduct in office, a commissioner may be removed, but only after a hearing. He or she shall be given a copy of the charges as least ten days prior to such hearing and shall have an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. 
Vacancies caused by death, resignation, disqualification of otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 10-6, § III, 4-13-10) 
Sec. 16-63. - Compensation. 
The members of the agency shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any actual expenses incurred by them, including travel expenses, in the discharge of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 10-6, § III, 4-13-10) 
Sec. 16-64. - Duty; responsibility; authority. 
The agency shall have the duties, responsibility, and authority to exercise all urban redevelopment powers set out in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-61-17 and 36-61-18, as such sections may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 10-6, § III, 4-13-10) 
Sec. 16-65. - Officers; meetings. 
Upon appointment of the initial agency by mayor and council, and designation by the mayor of one of its commissioners as chairman and one of its commissioners as vice-chairman, the agency shall meet and elect one of its commissioners as secretary. The agency shall then provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special meetings of the agency as deemed advisable and necessary. 
A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business and exercising the powers of the agency and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the agency upon a vote of a majority of the commissioners present, unless in any case the bylaws require a larger number. 
(Ord. No. 10-6, § III, 4-13-10) 
Chapter 17 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-28, adopted September 8, 2003, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 17, §§ 17-1—17-10 and 17-36—17-43, and added a new ch. 17, §§ 17-1—17-12, 17-31—17-48, 17-56—17-62, 17-71—17-73, 17-81—17-88. Former ch. 17 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1972, §§ 12-2, 12-3, and 12-9—12-14; Ord. No. 2-90, adopted January 8, 1990; Ord. No. 12-90, adopted July 9, 1990; and Ord. No. 22-93, adopted October 25, 1993. 
Charter reference— Authority of city to establish garbage fees, § 1.4(24). 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the words below shall have the following meanings: 
Ashes means residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. 
Bulk waste means stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture and other waste materials excluding contractor's construction debris (but including construction debris produced by the resident), dead animals, hazardous waste (including but not limited to tires, motor oil, batteries, etc.) and refuse with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for carts. 
Cart means the receptacle designed or used for the depositing of garbage, refuse, trash, ashes, or recyclable materials as specified by the city and provided by the city contractor. 
City contractor means DL&C, Inc. d/b/a CLM or its successors or assigns. 
Commercial establishment means all retail commercial, office, industrial and institutional establishments. 
Commercial and industrial refuse means all garbage and rubbish generated by a resident at a commercial or industrial unit, but in all cases to exclude hazardous waste, such as but not limited to tires, motor oil and batteries, paint and paint thinner, gasoline, and batteries, etc. 
Commercial and industrial unit means all premises, locations or entities, public or private requiring refuse collection within the service area for which refuse collection using carts or dumpsters is deemed to be appropriate, other than a residential unit. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations by a contractor, not a private resident owning the property. 
Container means the receptacle designated or used for depositing of garbage refuse, trash, ashes or recyclable materials as specified by the city and includes but is not limited to carts, dumpsters, and bins. 
Dead animals means animals or any portions thereof, weighing ten pounds or more, which have expired from any cause. 
Dumpster means a metal receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use primarily at commercial and industrial units. 
Dumpster, recyclable means a receptacle, designed for the depositing of recyclable material, made of any material and having a capacity of two cubic yards or more. 
Dumpster, refuse means a receptacle designed for the depositing of garbage, refuse, trash, ashes or reusable materials, made of any material and having a capacity of two cubic yards or more. 
Garbage means every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains, or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not limited to, used metal cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or rubbish, wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Hazardous waste means any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated as "hazardous" by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state environmental protection division or the appropriate state, county or city agency by or pursuant to federal or state law. For purposes of this agreement, the term hazardous waste shall also include tires, batteries, paint thinner, motor oil, gasoline, paint or paint cans (excluding empty paint cans or paint cans filled with absorbents to dry out the paint) and bulky waste containing chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants or freon. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, non-hazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Recyclable material means material that is capable of being reused or returned to use in the form of a raw material. 
Recyclable material(s) means newspaper, glass, plastic, aluminum and cardboard. If at any time the pickup of any of the items named as recyclable materials becomes uneconomical or unrecyclable. CLM reserves the right to terminate the collection of such item. 
Refuse means garbage and rubbish generated at a residential, commercial, church, park, medical, or industrial unit and includes combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catchbasin dirt, contents of litter receptacles. Provided, refuse shall not include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations. 
Residential refuse means all garbage and rubbish generated by a resident at a residential unit, in all cases to exclude hazardous waste or location. 
Residential unit means: 
(1)  A free-standing structure constructed for use as a residence by a person or group of persons comprising a family; or 
(2)  A residential unit within a multi-family structure for which refuse collection using carts is deemed to be appropriate. 
A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when water, waste water or domestic utility services are being supplied thereto. 
Reusable material means items or materials that can be reused with little or no value added. 
Rubbish means all used and discarded printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, mattresses, clothing, shoes and booths, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping for crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, hazardous waste or yard trimmings. 
Service area means the entire geographic area within the corporate limits of the city. 
Yard trimmings means wood, wood products, tree trimmings, dead plants, weeds, trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust resulting from homeowner landscaping maintenance, leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-2. - Public works director—General duties. 
The public works director shall discharge the duties imposed upon him in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-3. - Scope of provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all public and private markets, as well as all places of business, hotels, restaurants, and all other premises, whether used for business or residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-4. - Administrative regulation. 
The city clerk of the city shall not issue a business license or certificate of occupancy to any person, firm, or corporation which has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. The violation, noncompliance, or other violation of an administrative order issued by the public works director or the city's code enforcement officer, under this chapter, will be grounds for suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificates pursuant to article I of chapter 6. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-5. - Uncovered garbage. 
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage or other material subject to decay, other than yard trimmings, leaves or grass, excepting in a tightly covered container. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-6. - Wind-blown refuse. 
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes, or refuse of such a material capable of being blown away by the wind anywhere in the city, other than yard trimmings, leaves or grass, except in a covered container. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-7. - Depositing garbage on the street. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any garbage, refuse or ashes on any public street, parking area, or alley in the city; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit temporarily placing garbage, refuse, trash or ashes or recyclable materials in a container at an approved collection point complying with the provisions of this chapter preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-8. - Collection of garbage. 
The public works director shall have charge of the collection of administration of this chapter. The collection shall be made from all premises at least once each week, provided that the material is properly stored for collection in a container complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-9. - Containers—Generally. 
(a)  All garbage shall be placed in closed containers. 
(b)  Containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when momentarily open to receive garbage or to have the contents removed. No container shall be so overloaded with garbage or waste matter that its cover will not fit securely. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-10. - Same—In commercial and multiple-dwelling units. 
(a)  Any apartment house, development, condominium development or town house development constructed after November 20, 1978, and any hotel, motel containing four or more units, roominghouse, business, industry, public or semiprivate establishment of any nature or kind other than a single-family, duplex or triplex residential unit shall install a garbage container meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  All containers must be steel, continuous welded and property reinforced. 
(2)  All lids will be flanged and reinforced for strength. 
(3)  Bottoms must be reinforced with a 1½-inch drain plug installed flush to bottom. 
(4)  All containers must be primed and finished with enamel or epoxy paint. 
(5)  Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths will be 72 inches. Minimum gauges of steel shall be as follows: 
a.  12 gauge throughout. 
b.  16 gauge boxed lid. 
c.  1 5/16 ″ CRS trunion bar. 
d.  1″ × 2″ channel bracing around top. 
e.  1″ × 2″ channel bracing from trunion to rear corner. 
f.  4″ × 6″ × 10″ gauge pads on bottom four corners. 
(6)  No establishment or business named in this section shall be allowed to remove any container now in place without the approval of the public works director or his/her designee. 
(b)  The preparation and storage of commercial and multiple-dwelling refuse for collection shall be as follows: 
(1)  Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment, condominium or multiple dwelling, arrangements for a storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the superintendent of sanitation. 
(2)  Commercial containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings serviced by city collection vehicles shall be placed at locations approved by the superintendent of sanitation for collection by the sanitation department. The city will not collect refuse from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located, except where space or other limitations dictate other arrangements, which shall be specifically approved by the superintendent of sanitation. 
(3)  Where the occupants of two or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or commercial containers, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(4)  The occupant or occupants of commercial establishments and the management of multiple dwellings serviced by commercial containers shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding such commercial containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(5)  All garbage and rubbish shall be free from liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags with the tops secured prior to placing in commercial containers. 
(6)  Cardboard boxes shall be flattened before placed in containers. 
(7)  Commercial containers containing the following items will not be emptied until they are removed therefrom: 
a.  Large household or industrial appliances. 
b.  Furniture. 
c.  Tires. 
d.  Wooden crates. 
e.  Logs or limbs over four feet in length or four inches in diameter. 
f.  Bed springs and mattresses. 
g.  Rock, dirt, concrete blocks, sheetrock, roofing, lumber or other building materials. 
h.  Uncontainerized garbage, yard debris and household trash. 
(8)  Normal household appliances will be collected at multiple dwellings served by commercial containers, when placed adjacent to the commercial container and reported to the sanitation department. 
(9)  The user of commercial containers shall be responsible for the appearance, maintenance and serviceability of containers procured by them or placed for their use. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-11. - Garbage collection fees; invoices; penalties for late payment. 
(a)  Fees for the collection of all types of garbage shall be set by the city contractor and approved by the city council. The charges may be altered from time to time. A garbage collection fee schedule shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Invoices for any residential commercial garbage collection fees established shall be billed on a quarterly basis, and if such bill is not paid on the first day of the month following, a penalty may be added. Such penalties shall not preclude the city contractor from taking whatever action it deems necessary to enforce payment of the garbage collection fees or to discontinue service. 
(c)  Persons, firms, individuals, corporations or associations of individuals who have their collection service discontinued shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 17-12 herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-12. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to prosecution and the penalties set forth in section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances. Each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Secs. 17-13—17-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 17-31. - Supervision by city. 
The public works director and/or city's code enforcement officer shall be empowered to inspect the manner in which all garbage, refuse or ashes within the city are accumulated or disposed for compliance with this chapter. The public works director and/or city's code enforcement officer is empowered to order the discontinuance of actions in violation of this chapter or take any other action authorized to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-32. - Pickup hours regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any commercial garbage service to pick up trash carts, dumpsters, or other such containers between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except in the case of a bona fide emergency, the nature of which has been communicated to the public works director of the city at the time of said emergency. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-33. - Owner and operator of premises to maintain dumpster site. 
The owner and/or the person in charge of the premises for which a dumpster is permitted shall, at all times, maintain the premises in a high state of police, free and clear of litter, debris, and trash. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-34. - Garbage and recycling collection. 
All residents of the city shall participate in the garbage collection and may participate in the recycling collection by using the city contractor. All residents shall pay the monthly fees charged by the contractor for this service and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-35. - Uncovered garbage. 
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage, or other material subject to decay, other than leaves or grass, except in a tightly covered cart or dumpster. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-36. - Consent of owner. 
It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse or ashes on any premises in the city without the consent of the owner of such premises. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-37. - Disposal. 
It shall be unlawful to dispose of any garbage, refuse, trash or ashes anywhere in the city except in an incinerator, or disposal device, properly constructed and operated or in a lawfully established garbage or refuse dump. Such materials not so properly disposed of shall be placed in carts or dumpsters for collection by a licensed trash and garbage collection service as hereinafter described. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-38. - Accumulation of material treated as disposed. 
Where a party claims the accumulation of refuse, ashes, dust, or wastes from building operations is not a "disposal" within the section 17-37 meaning, the allowance of the accumulation for a period of more than seven days without removal will presumptively cause the accumulation to come within the meaning of section 17-37. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-39. - Screening of dumpsters. 
Business, commercial, educational, and other nonresidential buildings and any multifamily residential building for which the use of a commercial or multi-user dumpster has been authorized by the city shall screen any portion of a dumpster which is visible to an average person from a public street, parking lot, or residential building, which is within 300 feet of such dumpster or as provided in the city's zoning ordinance or development regulations, which ever is less. Said screening shall be constructed of building or fencing materials or shrubs, or evergreen trees that are of sufficient opacity to conceal the dumpster from view and such screening plan must be approved in writing by the public works director or his/her designee. Individual lots zoned under industrial classifications are exempt from the screening requirements, if the properties on each side and in front or across the street from the front of said lots are also zoned under industrial classifications. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-40. - Restaurant container. 
Restaurant containers shall be placed on a concrete pad or other nonabsorbent surface material, in accordance with the county health department requirements. Each restaurant shall have its own container or share a container with another restaurant, but shall not share a container with another type of business. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-41. - Certain matters not to be placed in containers. 
Dead animals, feces, explosives, dangerous and corrosive materials, clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases, heavy metals, bulky waste or any hazardous waste shall not be placed in any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster. Produce, meats, poultry, and food preparation oils shall be placed in sealed bags prior to being placed in any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster in such a manner as to minimize noxious or offensive odor emanating therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-42. - Doors and lids to be kept closed. 
Except when trash or garbage is being loaded into carts or dumpsters, or pickup of the same is being affected, all doors for screening, doors or lids of carts or dumpsters shall be kept closed. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-43. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner thereof shall interfere with any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster placed for the purpose of storing solid waste, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster from the location where the trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-44. - Dumping and littering prohibited. 
(a)  All persons, firms, individuals, corporations or associations of individuals are hereby prohibited from dumping or discarding trash, refuse, bulky waste, rubbish, garbage, or discarded articles of all kinds, including but not limited to refrigerators, stoves, furniture, cans, bottles, boxes, sacks, waste paper, tires, batteries, hazardous waste, and all types of articles not suitable for human use, on private or public property in the corporate limits of the city, including streets, alleys sidewalks, highways, parks and recreational areas. 
(b)  Dumping of any of the items referenced in sub section (a) hereinabove by any person, firm, individual, corporation, or association (hereinafter "person") in a container not owned by such person or for which such person does not have permission shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-45. - Method of disposal. 
All waste and related materials described in section 17-44 shall be discarded in containers, transfer station, landfills and sanitary dumps. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-46. - Maintenance of carts. 
The city contractor shall provide one cart for each residential unit and commercial unit, as appropriate. The city contractor will replace (or at its option, repair) carts, which require replacement or repair as a result of normal wear and tear, and not as a result of misuse by the city resident. If the cart is deemed destroyed by the resident, then a charge of $60.00 will be applied to the resident's next quarterly bill. If the cart is deemed lost or stolen, then a charge of $30.00 will be applied to the residential unit or commercial unit's next quarterly bill. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-47. - Placement of carts. 
All moveable carts provided to residents shall be placed at the curbside location for pick-up not earlier than 12 hours prior to the scheduled collection date and shall be removed from such location within 24 hours of the collection date. No person shall leave the cart at the location for pick-up in excess of the time periods set forth herein; provided, however, that no person shall be cited for violating this section in the event that the regular collection schedule is interrupted. Carts shall not be placed in such a manner so as to block or obstruct mail receptacles, water meters or fire hydrants. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-48. - Penalty. 
Any person in violation of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to prosecution and subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Secs. 17-49—17-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITATION AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 17-56. - Collection by city contractor. 
All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city contractor. All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed by the city contractor under the supervision of the public works director. The public works director shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the administration of this chapter as he/she finds necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-57. - Residential services; general conditions of residential collection. 
(a)  The city contractor for refuse collection and removal shall provide minimum once weekly curb service collection of refuse at residential units except as otherwise set out herein. 
(b)  The city or its authorized agent for refuse collection and removal shall provide collection of refuse for disabled persons, as defined in section 17-59 and as directed in that section. 
(c)  Owners or tenants of residential units shall place the refuse in the carts and the carts shall be placed, on assigned collection days, at front curbside locations in such manner as not to obstruct passage. Owners shall place the carts at appropriate curbside locations at or before 6:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the collection vehicles. This placement shall not be made before dusk on the date prior to collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after departure of the pickup crew of the city or its authorized agent shall subject the owner to prosecution for violation of this chapter should the street become littered from refuse. 
(d)  Owners or tenants shall remove the carts from curbside location to storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; removal of the cart should be accomplished within 24 hours following collection on the date the contents are emptied and collected. 
(e)  Owners or tenants shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon their property or the public thoroughfares bounding upon owner's property. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed for collection any hazardous waste, any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(g)  Bulky waste may be collected at the curbside once every week. Owners shall be responsible for the removal of any CFCs and freon from any items of bulky waste prior to its collection. 
(h)  Refuse generated from the conduct of customary home occupations carried on from residential units will be collected on a residential fee basis. 
(i)  All refuse will be collected by the city contractor if placed in the cart. No open containers shall be permitted. 
(j)  Yard trimmings shall be collected by the city contractor once every week if placed at curbside for collection. A private contractor providing landscaping maintenance must remove yard trimmings from the premises and may not be placed at curbside for collection. 
(k)  Owners of a residential unit shall be responsible for the proper disposition of any dead animals. 
(l)  During any week in which there is an observed holiday or extremely harsh weather conditions, such as snow or ice, the city contractor may collect refuse in accordance with an altered collection schedule as needed. 
(m)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent owners from contracting with the city contractor for additional services at additional costs. 
(n)  The city at all times reserves the right to direct and control all relevant aspects of the time, place and manner of residential refuse service. Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge the city's right to ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-58. - Residential disposal methods. 
Owners of record of all residential units shall obtain service for each such unit from the city contractor except for multi-family developments which have contracts with other outside contractors. Failure to provide evidence of proper disposal of refuse upon request by city officials (receipts, canceled checks, etc.) shall be a violation of this chapter, punishable as set forth in section 17-48. Refuse may not be disposed of by any person in an open dump nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his/her property. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-59. - Disabled. 
(a)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit and who is disabled to the extent that he or she is incapable of moving his/her refuse shall obtain a physician's certificate which states with particularity the nature and extent of such disability. Disabled persons shall not be required to place the refuse at curbside. This subsection shall not apply unless all of the adult persons in a residential unit are disabled and obtain such physician's certificate. Certificates will be mailed to the city contractor with a copy to the public works director. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed 90 days. The city's contractor may make reasonable rules for noncurbside collection for disabled persons; all garbage and refuse must be bagged. 
(b)  The city contractor or its authorized agent shall provide recycling services to disabled persons to the same extent such services may be provided under section 17-61. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-60. - Commercial collection. 
(a)  The owner of any commercial establishment shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all refuse accumulated at such establishment to a refuse handling facility operating in compliance with state regulation and must arrange for service with the city or its authorized agent. No business license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the owner or occupant of such premises has arranged with the city contractor to provide refuse collection for that commercial establishment. 
(b)  The frequency of refuse collection from any commercial establishment shall be determined in accordance with its need and convenience as determined by the public works director. If necessary to protect public health, the public works director shall have the authority to require more frequent collections than originally determined. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided for herein, no other person, firm or corporation shall collect or convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city other than the city contractor. To the extent there exists, as of the date of the enactment of this chapter, a validly enforceable contract for refuse collection by and between any commercial establishment within the city and a third party company, not the authorized agent of the city, such contract will, upon application made by the commercial establishment who is a party to the contract, be allowed to expire, excluding any provisions for renewal, before the city shall require the commercial establishment to exclusively use the city contractor for refuse collection services. 
(d)  All commercial establishments or other entities producing hazardous waste or special waste shall be responsible for the disposal of and provide for the disposal of the hazardous waste or special waste in accordance with all federal and state laws and regulations. 
(e)  The owner of any commercial establishment serviced by dumpsters which property is adjacent to a residential area shall cause to be built, around the area in which the dumpster is located, a screened fence of durable quality and construction at least six feet in height which conceals and blocks the container from the view of any public property. The owner of any commercial establishment shall provide to the city or its authorized agent unimpeded access to each dumpster by the collection vehicles on collection days at collection times. No parking or other obstructions shall be permitted in the access area for dumpsters. 
(f)  Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall be provided for dumpsters or groups of dumpsters by the property owner. Adequate drainage shall be provided in and around the pad areas. 
(g)  As a condition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of a commercial establishment, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of dumpsters must be approved by the public works director or his/her designee. 
(h)  Owners of commercial establishments shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding dumpsters clean and free of accumulation of refuse. 
(i)  The city reserves the right at all times to direct and control all relevant aspects of the time, place and manner of commercial refuse service. Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge the city's right to ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-61. - Recycling program. 
(a)  Owners of all residential units may participate in the city's recycling program. 
(b)  The city contractor shall collect at least once every week, pursuant to a contractor-provided list of guidelines, certain recyclable materials which may include corrugated cardboard boxes, newspapers, plastic (PET and HDPE), aluminum and tin cans. 
(c)  The city contractor may change the type and number of recyclable materials, and to re-determine collection and disposal of recyclable materials as viable alternatives are developed. 
(d)  The city contractor may provide one bin to each unit of a residential unit in which the residents shall deposit their recyclable materials. The cost of the bin shall be incorporated into the monthly charge for refuse collection services. The contractor may provide carts to condominiums or multi-family residential units to be placed in a common location where all residents of the condominium or multi-family residential unit may deposit their recyclable materials. The contractor may provide other appropriate recycling containers to customers as the need arises. 
(e)  Recyclable materials, which are placed in designated recycling bins for regular curbside collection, collected by the contractor shall become the property of the contractor. 
(f)  Owners of residential units shall place the recyclable materials in the bin and the bin shall be placed, on assigned collection days, at front curbside locations in such manner as not to obstruct passage. Owners shall place the bins at appropriate curbside location at or before 6:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the collection vehicles. This placement shall not be made before dusk on the day prior to collection day. Any recyclable materials placed on the curb after departure of the collection crew of the city contractor shall subject the owner to prosecution for violation of this ordinance should the street become littered from such recyclable materials. 
(g)  Owners of residential units shall remove bins from curbside location to a storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; removal of the bin should be accomplished within 24 hours following collection on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(h)  During the twenty-four hour period commencing at 6:00 p.m. on any day preceding a day designated by the contractor for collection of recyclable materials, no person other than any authorized employee or agent of the contractor shall remove recyclable materials from the designated recycling container which has been properly placed for collection. Each collection in violation of this section during that period shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided in section 17-48. 
(i)  Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any individual, organization or other entity to donate any recyclable materials for disposal, if such disposal does not violate any applicable statute, regulation or chapter. 
(j)  Participation in this recycling program shall be voluntary. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-62. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No owner or tenant shall allow the accumulation on his or her premises of solid waste where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or is unsightly, or emits foul or obnoxious odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a violation of this chapter for each day the solid waste remains on the premises and chapter for each day the solid waste remains on the premises and shall be punishable as set forth in section 17-48. 
(b)  Any owner or tenant failing to comply with the requirements of this section may be prosecuted by the city in accordance with this chapter and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 17-48. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Secs. 17-63—17-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 17-71. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical lift. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-72. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: 
(1)  Composted on the site where the material was grown, followed by incorporation of the finished compost into the soil at that site; or 
(2)  Chipping woody material on the site where such material was generated; or 
(3)  Collecting yard trimmings and transporting them to another site to be chipped or composted. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Sec. 17-73. - Penalty. 
Any person in violation of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to prosecution and subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 03-28, 9-8-03) 
Secs. 17-74—17-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, adopted November 22, 2005, amended the Code by repealing former art. V, §§ 17-81—17-88, and adding a new art. V, §§ 17-81—17-89. Former art. V pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 05-14, adopted May 10, 2005. 

Sec. 17-81. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply at all public and private property within the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, and or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the reminder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 17-82. - Definitions. 
Construction site means any residential, commercial, industrial, or other area, lot, or site which construction or demolition of any type is conducted including roads at buildings, and at all other places actively being constructed, demolished, renovated, or repaired. 
Construction waste means solid waste that is produced or generated during construction, demolition, remodeling, or repair of pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Construction wastes include, but are not limited to lumber, wire, sheet rock, broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, paving materials, and metal and plastics if the metal or plastics are a part of the materials of construction or empty containers for such materials. Paints, coatings, solvents, asbestos, any liquid, compressed gases or semi-liquids and garbage are not construction wastes. 
Discard means to abandon, dispose of, burn, incinerate, accumulate, store or treat before or instead of being abandoned, disposed of, burned or incinerated. 
Discarded material means a material that is abandoned, disposed of, burned, incinerated, accumulated, stored or treated before or instead of being abandoned, disposed of, burned or incinerated. 
Dispose means to discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill, leak or placement of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or any constituent of it may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Nuisance means any use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises is located. This includes but is not limited to the keeping of the following: ashes, rubbish, garbage, lumber, bricks, cinder blocks, insulation materials, building debris, refuse, litter, or waste of any kind whether liquid or solid. 
Person means any individual, corporation, association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary, representative, or group of individuals or entities of any kind. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
Receptacle means a container that is specifically designed, constructed, and placed for use as a depository for litter or solid waste. 
Refuse means all solid waste products having the character of solids rather than liquids and that are composed wholly or partially of materials such as garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, residues from clean up of spills or contamination, or other discarded materials. 
Rubbish means combustible or slowly putrescible discarded materials, which include but are not limited to trees, wood, leaves, trimmings from shrubs or trees, printed matter, plastic and paper products, grass, rags, and other combustible or slowly putrescible materials not included under the term "garbage." 
Sanitary waste or domestic waste or domestic sewerage means water borne, human or animal excreta or body wastes and normal culinary, laundry, and washing wastes. 
Solid waste or waste means any garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, or other discarded material, but does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage, solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, industrial discharges, or special nuclear or by-product materials. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 17-7, § 1, 6-20-17 ) 
Sec. 17-83. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, corporation or company, in person or by his or her agent, employee, or servant to cast, sweep, sift, deposit, accumulate, place, dump, throw or leave or to cause or permit the casting, sweeping, sifting, depositing, accumulating, dumping, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the corporate limits of this city, or any waters in the corporate limits of this city, any drain, sewer or receiving basin within the corporate limits of this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such letter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(4)  The material is deposited under a permit authorized by any ordinance of the city or is deposited in or conducted into the city sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the ordinances of the city relating thereto. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything else contained herein to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to dump or deposit garbage, waste or letter of any kind or nature, household or commercial, in any litter receptacle or container, public or private, the total weight of which, by volume, exceeds five pounds, which garbage, waste or litter, household or commercial, has been generated outside of the corporate limits of the city and which is brought into the corporate limits of the city; except that this section shall not apply to garbage, waste or litter, household or commercial, dumped or deposited into a properly licensed waste transfer station. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 17-84. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his or her or its agent, employee, or servant, to use any vehicle to haul any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste, articles or things of substance whether liquid or solid, unless such vehicle is covered to prevent any part of its load from spilling or dropping at all times while such vehicle is in motion on any street or alley in the city. 
Provided, however, that the requirements herein for covering such vehicles shall not apply to vehicles carrying brush cuttings, tree trimmings, branches, logs and similar waste material, if such matter is securely lashed to such vehicle to prevent spilling or dropping of the aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 17-85. - Construction sites. 
(a)  Litter prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of a construction site, or any contractor on a construction site, to cause, permit, or allow the presence of litter on such site outside of a proper receptacle or to cause, permit, or allow litter or waste to be spilled, discharged, or blown by wind or water. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent of the property and each contractor performing work on the site to keep the property free of litter. 
(b)  Receptacles required. The owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a construction site shall furnish on such site receptacles sufficient to contain workers litter and receptacles sufficient to contain all construction waste. All receptacles shall be conveniently available and maintained and secured or covered so as to prevent litter and waste from being spilled, discharged, or blown by wind or water. The primary contractor should determine the number and capacity of receptacles, but no less than one receptacle for workers litter and no less than one receptacle for construction waste shall be placed at each construction site. Receptacles required under this subsection shall be not less than ten gallons capacity. All receptacles shall be emptied as necessary, but not less frequently than weekly, except that receptacles used exclusively to contain construction waste shall be serviced with sufficient frequency to prevent spillage from overflow and to prevent offensive odors. All receptacles required under this subsection shall remain conveniently available on the site from the time construction activity commences until the construction activity ceases. 
(c)  Exclusion. The requirement for receptacles in this section shall not apply to any construction site on which only repair or renovation of a building is taking place, provided that no litter or construction waste is placed, stored, or otherwise accumulated on the exterior of the property outside of a proper receptacle and any such receptacle is maintained in accordance with this chapter. 
(d)  Portable toilets required. The owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site shall furnish no less than one portable toilet facility on such site but in any event such number sufficient to service the sanitary waste needs for the site. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site to cause, permit or allow such facility to spill or discharge on the site or into waters located on the site. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site to have such facility emptied, serviced and maintained on an "as needed" basis. 
(e)  Concrete truck washout. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site to permit and unlawful for the driver operator or other employee on a concrete truck to wash or discharge excess concrete from the chute, pump, drum or barrel of a concrete truck except in a temporary concrete washout area, as approved by the City of Newnan. 
(f)  Chemical storage. Any chemicals stored on a construction site shall be stored in approved containers, properly secured, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site to permit the improper storage of chemicals on a construction site. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 08-8, § I, 4-8-08) 
Sec. 17-86. - Litter receptacles at places frequented by the public. 
(a)  Receptacles required. Every owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee in control of any property that is held out to the public as a place for assemblage, for the transaction of business or recreation, or as a public way shall provide adequate receptacles of sufficient number and size to contain all litter generated by those persons frequenting that public place. The owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee in control of any property shall determine the number and size of the receptacles, except that no less than one receptacle shall be placed at each site. Receptacles shall be no less than ten gallons in capacity and clearly marked and designed to prevent the escape of litter and waste. Any person owning or in control of any property at which receptacles are required by this chapter shall at his or her own expense be responsible for the placement, and maintenance of such receptacles as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Periodic emptying of receptacles. All litter and solid waste shall be removed from receptacles as necessary, but not less frequently than weekly, and all receptacles shall be maintained in a sanitary and serviceable condition. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 17-87. - Duty of owners and occupants. 
(a)  General requirement. It shall be the responsibility of each owner, agent, occupant, or lessee to keep his or her property free of litter. The owner, agent, occupant, or lessee of any property shall be responsible for removing litter accumulating on said property. 
(b)  Litter prohibited. No owner, agent, occupant, or lessee of any property shall allow the storage or accumulation of litter on the exterior of said property outside of a receptacle that is covered, secured, and maintained so as to prevent blowing, spilling, scattering, or leaking of the litter and waste contained therein, except that this requirement shall not apply to an area designated and approved by the county as a permitted disposal site. 
(c)  Adjacent and surrounding areas. It shall be the responsibility of each proprietor and each operator of any business, industry, or institution to keep the adjacent and surrounding areas free of litter. These areas include, but are not limited to public and private sidewalks, roads, and alleys; grounds; parking lots; loading and unloading areas; and all vacant lots that are owned or leased by such establishment or institution. Removal of any litter shall be performed in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 17-88. - Violations, evidence, notification and enforcement penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Notification. Notice of a violation of this article and chapter shall be made by serving a citation by mail or in person by an officer, agent or official of the city empowered by the Code of Ordinances of the city or by the state to issue citations on behalf of the city. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this article and this chapter or is charged with causing the violation of any provision of this article and this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
(3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article and chapter in the legal organ of the city. 
(e)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05) 
Sec. 17-89. - Abatement. 
Whenever any person convicted of violating this article and chapter shall continue to maintain property in violation of this article and chapter, an appropriate designee of the city may be empowered to enter upon the property and correct the unlawful condition, and to place a lien against the property for the cost of such litter removal and the cost of preparing and filing the lien, including legal expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 05-26, § I, 11-22-05) 
ARTICLE VI. - COMMERCIAL, OFFICE/INSTITUTIONAL, INDUSTRIAL AND RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION IN THE CITY'S CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 17-90. - Collection in the city's Central Business District.. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 17-56 and section 17-60 of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply to the collection of all commercial, office/institutional, industrial and residential solid waste generated and collected in the city's Central Business District, as such district is defined on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Newnan: 
(1)  All refuse accumulated in the city's Central Business District shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city. All refuse accumulated in the city's Central Business District shall be collected, conveyed and disposed by the city under the supervision of the public works director or his/her designee. The public works director or his/her designee shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the administration of this section as he/she finds necessary, and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. 
(2)  Owners of record and tenants of all commercial, office/institutional, industrial and residential units shall obtain service for each such unit from the city except as provided for in this section. Failure to provide evidence of proper disposal of refuse upon request by city officials (receipts, canceled checks, etc.) shall be a violation of this section, punishable as set forth in section 17-91. Refuse may not be disposed of by any person in an open dump nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his/her property. 
(3)  The frequency of refuse collection from any commercial, office/institutional, industrial and residential units shall be determined in accordance with its need and convenience as determined by the public works director or his/her designee. If necessary to protect public health, the public works director or his/her designee shall have the authority to require more frequent collections than originally determined. Carts shall be furnished as needed by the city. 
(4)  Owners or tenants of commercial, office/institutional, industrial and residential units shall place the refuse in the carts and the carts shall be placed, on assigned collection days, at front curbside locations in such manner as not to obstruct passage or in the alley's located in the city as directed by the public works director or his/her designee. If the carts are to be placed at curb side, the owners or tenants shall place the carts at appropriate curbside locations at or before 6:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the collection vehicles. This placement shall not be made before dusk on the date prior to collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after departure of the pickup crew of the city or its authorized agent shall subject the owner to prosecution for violation of this chapter should the street become littered from refuse. 
(5)  Owners or tenants of commercial, office/institutional, industrial and residential units shall remove the carts from curbside location to storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; removal of the cart should be accomplished within 24 hours following collection on the date the contents are emptied and collected. 
(6)  Owners or tenants shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon their property or the public thoroughfares bounding upon owner's property. 
(7)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed for collection any hazardous waste, any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(8)  Bulky waste may be collected at the curbside at the request of the owner or tenant as an unscheduled or special service upon setting up such collections or services with the public works director or his/her designee. Owners or tenants shall be responsible for the removal of any CFCs and freon from any items of bulky waste prior to its collection. There shall be a minimum fee, as established by city council in the fee schedule based on a per vehicle load plus disposal cost based on the current landfill rates for the type of materials collected. Payment for such service shall be due five days following receipt of a statement for such service from the city. Payments received by the city after the due date shall incur a late payment charge as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(9)  All refuse will be collected by the city if placed in the cart. No open containers shall be permitted. 
(10)  Yard trimmings shall be collected by the city once every week if placed at curbside for collection. A private contractor providing landscaping maintenance must remove yard trimmings from the premises and may not be placed at curbside for collection. 
(11)  Owners and tenants of commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units shall be responsible for the proper disposition of any dead animals. 
(12)  During any week in which there is an observed holiday or extremely harsh weather conditions, such as snow or ice, the city may collect refuse in accordance with an altered collection schedule as needed. 
(13)  Fees for collection of solid waste, by the city shall be as established in the city's fee schedule as it may be amended from time to time. The due date for the payment of solid waste collection fees shall be the 1st day of each month. Any payment received after the 1st day of each month shall incur a late payment charge as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(14)  Nothing in this section shall prevent owners or tenants from contracting with the city for additional services at additional costs. 
(15)  The City of Newnan at all times reserves the right to direct and control all relevant aspects of the time, place and manner of refuse service in the Central Business District. Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge the City of Newnan's right to ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(16)  Except as otherwise provided for herein, no other person, firm or corporation shall collect or convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city other than the city. To the extent there exists, as of the date of the enactment of this chapter, a validly enforceable contract for refuse collection by and between any commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units within the city and a third party company, not the authorized agent of the city, such contract will, upon application made by the commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units who is a party to the contract, be allowed to expire, excluding any provisions for renewal, before the city shall require the commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units to exclusively use the city for refuse collection services. 
(17)  All commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units or other entities producing hazardous waste or special waste shall be responsible for the disposal of and provide for the disposal of the hazardous waste or special waste in accordance with all federal and state laws and regulations. 
(18)  All commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units or other entities serviced by dumpsters prior to adoption of amendment shall be permitted to continue dumpster service. New dumpster service shall be permitted upon approval from public works director or his/her designee. The owner and tenant of any commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units shall cause to be built, around the area in which the dumpster is located, a screened fence of durable quality and construction at least six feet in height which conceals and blocks the container from the view of any public property. The owner and tenant of any commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units shall provide unimpeded access to each dumpster by the collection vehicles on collection days at collection times. No parking or other obstructions shall be permitted in the access area for dumpsters. Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall be provided for dumpsters or groups of dumpsters by the property owner. Adequate drainage shall be provided in and around the pad areas. 
(19)  As a condition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of a commercial office/institutional, industrial and residential units, arrangements for the storage of refuse and carts and location of dumpsters, if permitted, must be approved by the public works director or his/her designee. 
(20)  Owners and tenants of commercial, office/institutional, industrial and residential units shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding dumpsters and carts clean and free of accumulation of refuse. 
(21)  Multi-tenant unit/customer: At the discretion of the public works director or his/her designee, combined billing may be made available for multi-tenant facilities whereby eight or more units/customers are present, excluding those situations in which a restaurant and/or residential use is one of the included tenants/customers. 
(22)  Grease collection: All cooking oil or grease generated by the owner or tenant of a restaurant or other food service establishment shall be collected and held by the owner or tenant in a container approved by the public works director or his/her designee. The collection container shall be located on private property and shall not be located or placed on a sidewalk or public right-of-way. The collection container shall be serviced and the cooking oil and grease collected and removed by a private contractor contracted with by the owner or tenant. 
(23)  Exemptions: State, federal and county facilities shall be exempt from the provisions of this section; however, such agencies may contract with the city for such services in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § I, 9-25-17 ) 
Sec. 17-91. - Penalties. 
Any owner or tenant failing to comply with the requirements of this section may be prosecuted by the city in accordance with this section and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 17-48 of the Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § I, 9-25-17 ) 
Chapter 18 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; businesses, Ch. 6; cemeteries, Ch. 7; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 11; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain streets and roads, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Use of streets closed to traffic. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or drive on any street in the city that has been closed to public traffic. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or drive on Armory Road for the purpose of traveling between LaGrange Street and Sewell Road in either direction (no through traffic) between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. when school is in session (school day). 
(Code 1972, § 24-1; Ord. No. 96-20, § I, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 18-2. - Obstructing streets, alleys, sidewalks, driveways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner whatever any street, sidewalk, alley, crossway or private alley used by the public as a driveway. 
(Code 1972, § 24-2) 
Cross reference— Riding animals on sidewalks, § 4-13. 
Sec. 18-3. - Construction on line of sidewalk, street. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner in the city contemplating erecting a fence or building touching any sidewalk or street, to erect the same without first notifying the street superintendent of his intention and having the boundary line of such streets and alleys agreed upon and fixed before such improvements are made. 
(Code 1972, § 24-3) 
Sec. 18-4. - Excavations adjoining streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person making excavations adjoining a street to refuse or neglect to place a railing or barricade next to the street sufficient to protect the excavation and to prevent persons falling. 
(Code 1972, § 24-5) 
Sec. 18-5. - Excavations to have protective guardrails. 
Any person making or causing to be made any excavation, opening or hole in any street, sidewalk or other public place shall protect persons and property from damages by adequate and sufficient guardrails, barricades, coverings, lights and such other means as reasonably may be required and shall maintain such protection until such excavation, opening or hole is refilled and the street, sidewalk or other public place restored to its former condition. Where the excavation occurs at the intersection of two streets, or more, the person responsible for such excavation shall cover the excavation with a steel plate in sufficient size to allow vehicular traffic to pass over it. 
(Code 1972, § 24-5.1) 
Sec. 18-6. - Barbed wire on fences. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to put any barbed wire on any fence on any street or public alley in the city, or cause the same to be done. 
(Code 1972, § 24-6) 
Sec. 18-7. - Racks, stands for vending goods. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish racks or stands for vending goods on the streets, public squares, parks or alleys of the city, without the consent of the city council first obtained, or pursuant to the following conditions for sidewalk displays located in the Central Business District zoning district: 
(1)  Sidewalk displays of merchandise in the city Central Business District. A sidewalk display of merchandise may be conducted on a public sidewalk by a retail or wholesale business in the Central Business District (CBD zoning district) without a permit or prior consent of city council under the following conditions for sidewalks located in the Central Business District (CBD zoning district) zoning district: 
a.  The display shall be situated so as to abut the facade of the building (as defined in the City's Zoning Ordinance) in which the business selling the displayed merchandise is located and shall not obstruct building entrances, fire exits, utility meters, cellar entrances, or standpipes or other safety equipment; 
b.  The display shall not exceed a size of 36 inches in depth and 72 inches in height. The display shall cover not more than one-half of the length of the front wall of said business. 
c.  The provision of paragraph(b) above notwithstanding, an area of not less than five feet of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all times between any display and the nearest curb, tree, pole or other permanent object situate in the right-of-way; 
d.  The display shall consist only of fungible merchandise regularly sold in the ordinary course of the business displaying the merchandise; and no signs, advertisements or other written or graphic material(except such merchandise sold in the ordinary course of the business maintaining the display) may be posted or placed on a sidewalk display; 
e.  The following items are prohibited in any display: tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, obscene material as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, weapons, live animals or pawned items; 
f.  All sidewalk displays as provided for in this section shall be removed from the sidewalk during any time when the business displaying such merchandise is closed to customers; 
g.  All final sales transactions between business and customer shall be conducted within the business establishment, not on the sidewalk; 
h.  Any person or business conducting sidewalk displays shall not cause any loud or offensive noise, either from his or her person or from any device, instrument or equipment for the purpose of attracting attention to such display or to the sale of any goods or merchandise; 
i.  No person or business shall display goods or merchandise directly on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering on any sidewalk or other public right-of-way. All displays must be stabilized with no risk of overturning due to wind or incidental contact. 
j.  No display shall block the sidewalk or in any way interfere with the requirements of the American with Disabilities Act. 
k.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-7(1)b. hereinabove, during specific city sponsored events, the display may extend the entire length of the facade of the building of said business. 
(2)  Penalties. Violation of this section 18-7, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a business owner violates this section 18-7 shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 24-7; Ord. No. 15-8, § I, 7-21-15 ) 
Sec. 18-8. - Building material in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without permission from the street superintendent, to so place in a street, sidewalk or public alley, any building materials as to obstruct the same, and it shall be the duty of all persons obtaining such permission to dispose of such material, and to take such steps to prevent injury to passersby as are necessary, or as the street superintendent may direct, and to exercise all due diligence in removing the same. 
(Code 1972, § 24-4) 
Sec. 18-9. - Signs, posters prohibited on streets, sidewalks, etc.; exception. 
No signs or posters of any type except official state, city or county signs, shall be installed on or along the streets, public alleys, sidewalks and public rights-of-way, unless otherwise provided by law, and any signs so installed shall be removed by the designated official. 
(Code 1972, § 24-8) 
Sec. 18-10. - Banners, pennants, similar displays suspended across thoroughfares. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to hang or suspend any poster, pennant, banner or any other type of sign or display across a public thoroughfare in the city. 
(b)  Exception. This section shall not apply to Christmas decorations, including Christmas lights, hung by or under the supervision of the city and/or the city water and light commission. Upon application to and approval of the city council, a non-profit organization may be permitted to hand or suspend a banner or banners across a street in certain designated locations within the area of the court square for a period of not more than 72 hours upon proof of reasonable liability coverage indemnifying the city for any injury to persons or property. No organization may make application for permission to have a banner or banner(s) more than two times in any one calendar year. 
(Code 1972, § 24-9; Ord. No. 98-03, 1-13-98) 
Sec. 18-11. - Marking signs, advertisements on surface of sidewalk or roadway; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to print, write or work any sign or advertisement or to paint on the surface of any sidewalk or roadway in the city, except (a) that any public or private school may paint, print, write or work school insignias or emblems on the sidewalks or roadways in the city immediately adjacent to school property after approval of the design, numbers and location by the city council, (b) that any governmental entity may paint, print, write, work or mark traffic or pedestrian control lines, arrows, instructions or directions on the roadways in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 24-10; Ord. No. 96-15, § I, 7-23-96) 
Sec. 18-12. - Preservation, protection of shade trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, cut down or anchor or tie wires to any shade tree on the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 24-11) 
Sec. 18-13. - Trimming trees, flowers, shrubs adjacent to sidewalk. 
(a)  Duty. It shall be the duty of any person who has flowers, trees or shrubs growing on his premises or who has planted the same on the outer edge of the sidewalk adjacent to his property, to keep them trimmed so that they do not extend on or into any part of any sidewalk or street in the city. 
(b)  Failure to perform. If any person whose duty it is to trim or prune any flower or shrub because it extends onto any sidewalk or street of the city shall fail or refuse to do so, then it shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to prune or trim any such flower or shrub at the expense of the person who planted or who owns the flowers or shrubs. 
(Code 1972, § 24-12) 
Sec. 18-14. - Tractors with cleats prohibited on paved streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated tractors with cleats, on or over any paved streets in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 24-13) 
Sec. 18-15. - Vehicles hauling over city streets, equipment prescribed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on any paved street of the city, unless the vehicle carrying the load is equipped in accordance with the provisions of state law regulating size, weight and speed of carriers. 
(Code 1972, § 24-14) 
Sec. 18-16. - Hauling dirt from streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or haul any dirt from any of the streets or alleys of the city without the written permission of the street superintendent. 
(Code 1972, § 24-15) 
Sec. 18-17. - Damage caused by hauling. 
(a)  Liability. Any person who shall damage by hauling or transporting any load over any paved street, bridge, viaduct, water main or sewer in the city shall be liable for the damage thereto, which damage shall be collected as provided in this section. 
(b)  Notice required. The city clerk as soon as any such damage is discovered shall notify in writing the person causing the same, of the damages, the time as near as the time can be ascertained, the character and place of the damage, and the time that the city shall commence repairs. 
(c)  Performing work, execution for cost thereof. The city after such notice is given shall then proceed at the time specified in such notice with the work of repairing the damage at the expense of the person liable therefor, and within five days after the completion of such work the person in charge of the same shall report under oath in writing to the city clerk the amount and value of the services performed or expense incurred in such work, whereupon the clerk shall issue execution, as other executions are issued by the city, for such amount against the person liable therefor. 
(d)  Contest of execution. An affidavit of illegality may be made and filed on oath, contesting the whole or any part of the amount for which execution issued, and stating what amount contestant admits to be due, if any, which amount so admitted to be due shall be paid before such affidavit is recorded. Such affidavit when recorded shall be returned to the superior court of the county and there tried, and the issue determined as in cases of illegality subject to all the penalties provided by law for illegality filed for purpose of delay. 
(Code 1972, § 24-16) 
Sec. 18-18. - Playing in public streets prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball, skateboard or ride or use skates on the public streets or sidewalks in the city. 
(Code 1972, §§ 24-19, 24-22) 
Sec. 18-19. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in any street, alley or public place in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 24-20) 
Sec. 18-20. - Washing vehicles within first fire district. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wash or cause to be washed any automobile or other vehicle on any of the streets or sidewalks within the first fire district of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 24-17) 
Sec. 18-21. - Pouring oil, petroleum products on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pour oil or any petroleum product on any street in the city without first obtaining permission to do so from the street superintendent. Such activity shall be under the supervision of the street superintendent. 
(Code 1972, § 24-18) 
Secs. 18-22—18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for public improvements, § 1.4(12). 

Sec. 18-46. - Authority of city council. 
The city council shall have full power and authority to pave or otherwise permanently improve any or all of the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city now, or that may hereafter be opened, laid out or constructed, and to lay curbing along any of such streets, sidewalks or alleys. 
(Code 1972, § 24-32) 
Sec. 18-47. - Assessments for improvement, authority limited; payment in installments. 
(a)  The city council shall have full power and authority to assess the actual cost of paving sidewalks, and placing curbing by the same, against the real estate abutting on the sidewalk, but only on the side of the street on which the sidewalk is improved, if on one side only. They shall have full power to assess one-third of the cost of paving or otherwise permanently improving any roadway or street proper on the real estate abutting on one side of the street improved, and one-third of the cost on the real estate abutting on the other side of the street so improved; and the real estate abutting on both sides of the street shall not together be assessed more than two-thirds of the entire cost. 
(b)  Property owners whose property abuts on the streets and sidewalks shall have the option to pay the assessment in cash upon the completion of the work or in installments as follows: 
(1)  One-third cash on completion of the work and one-third annually thereafter with interest upon such deferred payments at the rate of seven percent per annum, payable annually on the unpaid annual balance. 
(2)  Should any of such installments become delinquent, the remaining unpaid installments shall immediately become due and payable, at the option of the mayor and council. 
(c)  At least ten days before assessments shall be made, the city manager shall cause to be served upon each property owner a notice showing the number of front feet and the cost per front foot of the work done, and each property owner shall be required to sign the following acknowledgment which shall be presented with the notice and returned to the city manager within ten days: 
"GEORGIA, COWETA COUNTY 
Due and legal service of the above acknowledged, and all other and further notice waived. 
I hereby notify the City of Newnan, through its proper officers that I desire to pay for said improvements as follows: 
( )  Cash on completion and assessment. 
( )  1/3 cash on completion and assessment and 1/3 annually thereafter with interest at 7% payable annually on the unpaid annual balance. 

 
Such notice and acknowledgment shall be served in person or by leaving a copy at the owner's last known place of residence. If the owner is a nonresident of the city, such notice and acknowledgment shall be mailed to such owner at his last known place of residence and if such owner is unknown, a copy of such notice and acknowledgment shall be posted at a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(d)  If such property owner shall fail or refuse to sign such acknowledgment and return it to the city manager within the prescribed time, same shall be taken and deemed to be an election to pay cash for such work upon completion and assessment. 
(e)  Upon the expiration of ten days the city clerk shall proceed to make an assessment, and a lien shall arise and exist in favor of the city against the property of the person owning same from the date of such assessment until each assessment is paid. If not promptly paid when due, the city clerk is authorized and directed to collect same by the issuance and levy of fi. fas. and the sale of such property in the same manner as for the collection of taxes, and such fi. fas. shall be transferable in the same manner as tax fi. fas. When such debts and liens are transferred by the city the holders thereof shall be subrogated to and enjoy all the rights of the city, including the right to foreclose and enforce such liens. 
(f)  The procedure and remedies allowed by the charter and ordinances of the city with reference to the levy and collection of taxes shall be available for the enforcement and collection of assessments made hereunder as fully as if set forth in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 24-33) 
Sec. 18-48. - Assessment against railroads. 
Any railroad company having track running along or across the streets of the city shall be required to pay the cost in full for paving or otherwise improving such street between their tracks and for two feet on each side thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 24-34) 
Sec. 18-49. - Ordinance assessing for improvements. 
The city council shall have power and authority to direct by ordinance, that any or all of the streets, sidewalks or alleys or a portion of any street of the city be permanently improved, and to prescribe with what material the improvement shall be done. When such authorities order any street improved, the owners of the abutting property shall be given notice that the street is ordered improved and the kind of material with which the street shall be improved by publishing the ordinance directing the work, and prescribing the material to be used, once in the paper in the city in which sheriff advertisements are published. 
(Code 1972, § 24-35) 
Sec. 18-50. - Lien of assessments for improvements. 
The amount of assessments on each piece of real estate for improvements pursuant to this article shall be a lien on such real estate from the date of the passage of the ordinance providing for the work and making the assessment. 
(Code 1972, § 24-36) 
Sec. 18-51. - Material for paving, quality prescribed. 
All paving shall be accomplished only with plant mix or material of equal or superior quality; provided, that the city council may, from time to time, authorize and direct the paving of existing dedicated and accepted city streets with bituminous application or seal. 
(Code 1972, § 24-38) 
Sec. 18-52. - Curbs and gutters, minimum sizes prescribed. 
All curbs and gutters installed shall be 30-inch gutters with six-inch curbs. 
(Code 1972, § 24-39) 
Sec. 18-53. - Cutting public pavements to lay pipes, special permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or municipal agency or public utility to cut into any public pavement or hard-surfaced street within the city without first obtaining a special permit from the street superintendent. 
(Code 1972, § 24-40) 
Sec. 18-54. - Relocation of pipes under streets, sidewalks, other public places. 
(a)  Duty upon notice. It shall be the duty of any person who has laid, constructed, maintains or owns a pipe line system in or under any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places within the city, within ten days after notice from the city council, to relocate at the expense of such person the pipe line or pipes in accordance with the terms of the notice. 
(b)  Service of notice. The notice referred to in this section shall be served upon the person subject thereto by delivering a copy to the agent of such person in charge of its property in the city, or to any person in the employ of such person to be notified. 
(c)  Noncompliance with notice. If any person subject to this section should fail or refuse to relocate his pipe or pipes within ten days after notice, in that event the city council shall relocate the pipe or pipes at the expense of the person notified. 
(Code 1972, § 24-41) 
Sec. 18-55. - Private improvement of sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to improve any sidewalk in the city except as follows: 
(1)  Grade line required. The person desiring to improve any sidewalk shall, before beginning the work, make written application to the street superintendent stating in the application the location of the sidewalk to be improved, and shall obtain from the street superintendent a permanent grade line at the location where the sidewalk is to be improved. 
(2)  Permit requirements. After making the application required in subsection (1) of this section and obtaining the grade line, the person desiring to improve a sidewalk shall also, before beginning the work, make written application to the city council, which application shall be accompanied by a profile showing the grade line as proposed by the street superintendent and shall obtain from the city council permission to improve the sidewalk desired to be improved. If permission to make the improvement is granted, then the work of improving the sidewalk shall be made and done only in accordance with the grade line shown by the profile. 
(Code 1972, § 24-42) 
Secs. 18-56—18-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POLES AND WIRES 

Sec. 18-76. - Authority of city council. 
All telegraph and telephone companies and other companies owning or using poles placed in the streets of the city shall have the right to keep and use such poles subject to the power of the city council to regulate the placing and removal of such poles, and the council shall have authority in its discretion to reject any poles already in use, or which any of such companies propose to erect; and in case of rejection of poles already in use, to require their removal and to prevent the use of poles which it deems to be unsuitable or unsafe. It shall also be within the power of the city council to require the removal of such poles when necessary, in its judgment, to facilitate the improvement of any street, or portion of the street, or the improvement or convenient use of any lot abutting thereon. 
(Code 1972, § 24-53) 
Sec. 18-77. - Permit prerequisite to erection, removal of poles. 
No telegraph, telephone or other company owning or using poles in the city shall cause any pole to be erected or removed without first obtaining permission to remove or erect such pole from the city council or from its agent authorized to issue such permit. 
(Code 1972, § 24-54) 
Sec. 18-78. - Setting of poles; surplus dirt to be removed. 
All telegraph, telephone and other companies who set poles upon or along streets, sidewalks or alleys in the city shall remove all surplus dirt after setting such poles. 
(Code 1972, § 24-55) 
Sec. 18-79. - Restoration of surface after erection or removal of poles. 
Telegraph, telephone and other companies which erect or remove poles on city sidewalks, streets and alleys shall leave the surface thereof in as good condition as it was before such work was done. It shall not be sufficient in removing poles to saw off the poles on a level with the surface, leaving the body thereof in the ground, but the same shall be removed and the hole filled and the sidewalk or street replaced with material similar to that already on such sidewalk or street. 
(Code 1972, § 24-56) 
Sec. 18-80. - Maintaining poles. 
All telegraph or telephone poles erected on the streets of the city shall be kept in good repair. 
(Code 1972, § 24-57) 
Sec. 18-81. - Authority to cut wires. 
The chief of the fire department, or other authority acting under him, is hereby authorized to cut any and all wires which they deem necessary in case of fire, without expense to the city for so doing; provided, that nothing herein contained shall imply that the city authorizes any person to undertake the risk of cutting any of such wires or renders itself liable for any injury to the person so doing. 
(Code 1972, § 24-59) 
Sec. 18-82. - Noncompliance with notice to remove condemned pole. 
Any person who shall fail or refuse, within five days after notice from the city council, to remove any pole deemed to be unsuitable, unsafe or improperly located, or the location of which they shall require to be changed, shall on conviction be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1972, § 24-60) 
Sec. 18-83. - Liability of city. 
Nothing contained in any of the ordinances, resolutions or acts of the city council in relation to the erection of telephone, telegraph or any other wires, shall be construed to mean that the city holds itself in any manner responsible or liable for damage to person or property by reason of any accident or occurrence, but the city disclaims any liability whatever in the premises. 
(Code 1972, § 24-61) 
Secs. 18-84—18-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVEWAY ACCESS 

Sec. 18-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arterial and collector streets means those streets designated as such on official maps or in resolutions or ordinances of the city. 
Curbline means the exposed approximately vertical face of the curb. Where there is no curb and gutter, "curbline" shall mean the edge of pavement of the public street and "curb cut" shall mean the width of the intersection of the driveway pavement (including radii) with the public street pavement. 
Extended property line means a line extending from the front property corner of a lot to the curbline of the street, perpendicular to such curbline. 
Heavy industrial uses means those permitted in a heavy industrial zoning district, but not in a light industrial zoning district. 
Intersection of two streets, unless otherwise specified, means the intersection of the extended curblines, made by extending the tangents to the corner radius. 
Joint driveway means a driveway which straddles a property line and is used in common by both lots. 
Light industrial uses means those permitted in a light industrial zoning district. 
Pull-off parking means the arrangement of offstreet parking spaces in such a manner that automobiles must back onto the public street in order to exit from the parking spaces. 
(Code 1972, § 24-77; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 18-107. - Sight distance. 
No driveway shall be permitted to enter a public street at a point where sight distance is inadequate, as determined by the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 24-72; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 18-108. - Driveway design. 
(a)  Width. Width of a driveway intersecting a public street shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Residential use, one- or two-dwelling units, 12 feet. 
(2)  Other residential uses, 16 feet for a one-way drive and 30 feet for a two-way drive. 
(3)  Nonresidential uses, 16 feet for a one-way drive, 30 feet for a two-way drive (except 35 feet for a service station), and 40 feet for a joint driveway. 
(b)  Radii. At the intersection of a driveway with the curbline of a public street, a minimum curbline radius shall be formed on each side, as follows: 
(1)  Residential one-lane driveway, three feet. 
(2)  Other residential, nonresidential (except industrial), 20 feet. 
(3)  Industrial, 30 feet. 
No radius may exceed 30 feet except in conjunction with an approved traffic channelizing structure. 
(c)  Angle. The angle of a driveway shall be such that no vehicle will have to make a deflection of greater than 90 degrees when entering or leaving the property, but in no case shall the angle be less than 45 degrees. 
(d)  Tie-in type. A street intersection type tie-in shall be provided wherever ditch drainage is used and where otherwise made necessary by the level of driveway traffic. 
(1)  A concrete valley gutter tie-in shall be provided to a street with curb and gutter and piped storm drainage. 
(2)  If a street intersection type tie-in is preferred by the property owner, catch basins must be provided to channel gutter flow into the storm drainage system. 
(e)  Grade. On streets with ditch drainage along the street and a street intersection type tie-in, the driveway shall slope downward and away from the road surface at a rate not less than one-half inch in one foot out to the ditchline. Driveway grade for a concrete valley gutter tie-in shall conform to standards of the city. 
(f)  Drainage. Curb inlets shall be designed for a ten-year storm. Driveway pipes shall be designed for a 25-year storm unless a larger pipe is emptying into the ditch that leads to the driveway pipe. 
(1)  Pipes 48 inches in diameter and larger shall have an inlet and outlet headwall. Pipes smaller than 48 inches shall have at least a flared end section. 
(2)  All structures and materials shall meet city standards. 
(g)  Adjacent slope. No new slope to be placed on the right-of-way shall be steeper than 4:1 (horizontal:vertical) sloping from the street or 2:1 sloping from the driveway. 
(Code 1972, § 24-73; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 18-109. - Curb cuts. 
(a)  Length. The length of a curb cut shall be the sum of driveway width plus the radius on each side. 
(b)  Separation, two-way driveways. Distance between two-way driveways (not including radii), for driveways on the same lot and on the same street frontage, shall be at least 100 feet (except that for a service station or convenience store which includes gasoline sales and has at least 150 feet of frontage, the minimum distance shall be 50 feet). Lots not wide enough to meet this and related driveway placement requirements may have only a single two-way driveway. 
(c)  Separation, one-way driveways. Where one-way driveways are used, the exit from the property shall be downstream, in the direction of traffic flow from the entrance. Distance between driveways (not including radii) on the same lot and on the same street frontage shall be at least 50 feet on collector streets and 80 feet on arterial streets. 
(d)  Number of driveways. On a collector or an arterial street, no lot with less than 300 feet of frontage shall have more than one two-way driveway or two one-way driveways (except that a service station or convenience store which includes gasoline sales and has at least 150 feet of frontage may have two two-way driveways); no lot with less than 1,000 feet of frontage shall have more than two two-way driveways; and a lot with frontage of 1,000 feet or more may have driveways as determined on a case-by-case basis by the city manager. 
(e)  Distance from property lines. No curb cut may extend across an extended property line, except a curb cut for a joint driveway; and no curb cut shall be within four feet of an extended property line. 
(f)  Distance from intersections. On a local street, no driveway shall be permitted within 50 feet of an intersection with another street. On a collector street, no driveway shall be permitted within 90 feet of an intersection with another street. On an arterial street, no driveway shall be permitted within 120 feet downstream or 90 feet upstream of an intersection with another street. At signalized intersections on collector or arterial streets, respective distances shall be increased by 100 feet. Exceptions may be granted where the city manager determines that: 
(1)  There is no reasonable alternative; and 
(2)  Traffic capacity and safety would not be significantly affected. 
(g)  Subdivision of arterial street frontage. On an arterial street, where a tract of land is subdivided after the adoption of this provision such that a lot with less than 150 feet of frontage is created, access to such lot shall be from either: 
(1)  A driveway serving the remainder of the tract from which the lot was cut; 
(2)  A joint driveway; 
(3)  A frontage road; or 
(4)  If a corner or double-frontage lot, an adjacent nonarterial street. 
(h)  General location criteria. Unless substantially constrained by topography or the needs of internal traffic circulation on the property, driveways shall be located so as to maximize distance between driveways along the street section, maximize the length of deceleration lanes, and minimize conflict with other features of the street section. 
(i)  Traffic channelizing structures. No median, island, or other traffic channelizing structure may be installed in a driveway entrance without approval of the city manager. Upon approval, the permitted length of the curb cut may be increased to accommodate such structures. 
(j)  Pull-off parking. Limitations on length of curb cut shall not apply to pull-off parking where such parking is otherwise permitted. 
(Code 1972, § 24-74; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 18-110. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  Required. Where there is existing curb and gutter on the public street, curb and gutter shall be constructed for a driveway entrance. Where there is no curb and gutter on the public street, it shall be constructed for a driveway entrance where one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  A new nonresidential use or multifamily (three or more dwelling units) or other residential use utilizing a common driveway entrance for three or more dwelling units is established on previously vacant land. 
(2)  A nonresidential use is established on land previously in residential use. 
(3)  The number of dwelling units on a lot is increased to three or more. 
(4)  Changes to developed property, such as the piping and covering of ditches, result in uncontrolled access to the public street. 
(b)  Length. Where curb and gutter is required by the above conditions, the length of curb and gutter to be constructed shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Curb and gutter shall be used to construct the radii where the driveway intersects the public street and, for street-intersection type tie-ins, shall extend along the driveway to the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Except where tapers for acceleration/deceleration lanes are present, curb and gutter shall be extended by the property owner at least 20 feet in each direction along the public street from the end of each radius section (except that no property owner shall be required to extend curb and gutter along the street beyond an extended property line). 
(3)  Where changes to developed property result in uncontrolled access to the public street, curb and gutter shall be provided along the entire frontage of the property unless a landscaped barrier (e.g., a strip planted in shrubs or trees, a grassed berm, flower beds bounded by railroad ties, etc.) or other onsite barrier (e.g., parking lot curbing) to access is provided. 
(c)  Distance from centerline. Distance from the centerline of the public street to the edge of the curb and gutter shall be adequate for provision of 12-foot travel lanes, including future lanes indicated on official maps or ordinances of the city. 
(1)  Where a left-turn lane to serve both sides of the street will be necessary and the city has adopted plans to construct such lane, an additional six feet of lane width shall be provided by the property owner. 
(2)  Where a median with a left-turn lane will be necessary to serve a particular development, an additional 16 feet of lane width shall be provided by the property owner. 
(d)  Right-of-way dedication. Any additional right-of-way necessary for construction of curb and gutter and the accommodation of utilities shall be dedicated to the city by the property owner. 
(e)  Storm drainage. Storm drainage from curb and gutter sections constructed by a property owner shall be discharged at locations and through structures approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 24-75; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 18-111. - Acceleration, deceleration lanes. 
(a)  Required. At the driveways providing access to a nonresidential use or a multifamily (three or more dwelling units) or other residential use utilizing a common driveway entrance for three or more dwelling units on an arterial street, acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be constructed by the property owner in conjunction with the curb and gutter required above, and the length of curb and gutter shall be increased to the full length of such lanes. 
(1)  An acceleration lane shall not generally be required, but the driveway radius shall turn out as though a lane were to be provided and a taper shall be constructed. 
(2)  An acceleration lane shall be required where: 
a.  The owner's property extends to an intersection with a collector or arterial street within 150 feet of the driveway in the direction of traffic flow; or 
b.  The required taper will merge with the taper of an existing deceleration lane or is within 20 feet of merging. 
(b)  Length. Each such lane shall be 150 feet in length, with an additional tapered transition section 50 feet in length. Lane pavement width shall be 12 feet. Where the taper of a new deceleration lane will merge with the taper of an existing driveway or is within 20 feet of merging, the deceleration lane shall be extended to that driveway. 
(c)  Property lines. Where a lane or taper would merge with a lane or taper provided for adjoining property or would encroach on the corner radius of a street intersection, an altered design may be approved by the city manager. Where a lane or taper would extend across an extended property line, such lane or taper shall be constructed if there is adequate right-of-way in front of the adjoining property. 
(d)  Right-of-way dedication. Any additional right-of-way necessary for construction of a lane and the abutting curb and gutter and the accommodation of utilities shall be dedicated to the city by the property owner. 
(e)  Exceptions. The following land uses are excepted from the requirement for acceleration/deceleration lanes: 
(1)  Warehouse use with less than 10,000 square feet of building area. 
(2)  Manufacturing use with less than 13,000 square feet of building area. 
(3)  Other light industrial use with less than 7,000 square feet of building area. 
(4)  Other heavy industrial use with less than 33,000 square feet of building area. 
(5)  Apartment development with fewer than nine dwelling units. 
(6)  Nursing home with fewer than 19 beds. 
(7)  Medical office use with less than 1,000 square feet of building area. 
(8)  General office use with less than 3,000 square feet of building area. 
(9)  Office park (mixed office uses) with less than 2,000 square feet of building area. 
A mixture of the above uses will require a case-by-case determination of traffic generation by the city manager. Acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be required when sufficient additional development occurs on property previously excepted from the requirement. 
(Code 1972, § 24-76; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 18-112. - Left-turn restrictions. 
On arterial streets, left turns shall be prohibited to and/or from driveways by the construction of approved channelizing structures under the following conditions: 
(1)  Inadequate corner clearance. 
(2)  Inadequate sight distance. 
(3)  Inadequate driveway spacing. 
(4)  Site has a signalized driveway on the same arterial at which left turns can be made. 
(5)  Other capacity, delay or safety conditions make specific left turns dangerous. 
(Code 1972, § 24-77; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 18-113. - Paving. 
Driveways shall be paved to the right-of-way line. Acceleration and deceleration lanes and gaps between existing pavement and new curb and gutter shall also be paved. Pavement structure shall at least match that of the adjoining existing pavement and shall not be less than specified in writing or drawings by the city manager. Materials and construction methods shall meet city standards. 
(Code 1972, § 24-78; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Sec. 18-114. - Administrative standards. 
The city manager may establish standards (in writing or in drawings) for structures and approve driveway access designs permitted by this article but not specified herein; and establish such additional standards (in writing or in drawings) as are necessary to clarify this article and assure traffic safety and protection of traffic capacity on the public streets. 
(Code 1972, § 24-79; Ord. No. 13-88, § I, 8-22-88) 
Secs. 18-115—18-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Permit for exhibition or parade of animals, § 4-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade is a parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind involving one or more persons or one or more vehicles. 
Parade permit is a permit as required by this article. 
Vehicles includes any device which moves on wheels or tracks whether under its own power or otherwise. 
Sec. 18-137. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions, provided the police department is notified of each procession's time and route; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational or school sponsored activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
Sec. 18-138. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. Punishment for violations of this subsection shall be as provided in section 1-14. 
(c)  Parking or parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to the effect. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-139. - Distribution of material during procession prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed from any vehicle participating in a parade or procession or other public demonstration in the public streets or public highways within the city limits any item other than materials protected by freedom of speech, either perishable or otherwise to any bystander or onlooker. It shall also be unlawful for any owner or operator of any vehicle participating in a parade within the city limits to allow or permit any item, perishable or otherwise, to be distributed to any bystanders or onlookers from the vehicle. It shall also be unlawful to litter the parade route with any items including those materials which it is otherwise lawful to distribute. This prohibition shall also apply to gratuities to items offered for sale. 
Secs. 18-140—18-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-151. - Required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the office of the city manager. 
Sec. 18-152. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file application with the office of the city manager on forms provided by the city. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than ten days or more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade; and the applicant, if different. 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
d.  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
e.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
f.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute the parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles. 
g.  The hours when the parade will start and terminate. 
h.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
i.  The location by streets of any assembly and dispersal areas for the parade. 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas and a designation of the assembly area and the dispersal area. 
k.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade. 
l.  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the office of the city business license department a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on its, his behalf. 
m.  Any expenditure of funds by the applicant or his organization for or on behalf of participants in the parade, the amounts thereof and the names and addresses of to whom paid. 
n.  Any additional information which the city business license department shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(3)  Late applications. The city manager, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this division which is filed less than ten days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(4)  Fee. No fee shall be charged for such permit. 
Sec. 18-153. - Standards for issuance. 
The office of the city manager shall issue a permit under this division when, from a consideration of the application and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute. 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(9)  The parade will not unreasonably burden the streets and sidewalks or the city so as to substantially interfere with the normal use thereof by the public. 
(10)  The parade will not interfere with another parade for which a permit has been approved. 
Sec. 18-154. - Notice of rejection. 
The office of the city manager shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the city disapproves the application, there shall be mailed to the applicant within two days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of the action, stating the reasons for the denial of the permit or communicate sooner if the date for the parade requires a quicker response. 
Sec. 18-155. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within two days after notice. The council shall act upon the appeal within two days after its receipt and may grant or deny a permit by a majority vote of the members present. 
Sec. 18-156. - Alternate permit. 
The city business license department may grant the permit conditioned on the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two days after notice of the action, file a written notice of acceptance with the city. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this division. 
Sec. 18-157. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the application for a parade permit, the office of the city manager shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The mayor; 
(2)  The police chief; 
(3)  The fire chief; and 
(4)  The director of the department of streets and sanitation. 
Sec. 18-158. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  Any other information as the city manager shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(8)  Number of participants. 
Sec. 18-159. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade leader or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
Sec. 18-160. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this division upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth under section 18-153. 
Secs. 18-161—18-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
DIVISION 1. - TOURS 

Sec. 18-170. - Tours permitted, frequency, time. 
It shall be lawful for a property owner to permit tours of any residential building, structure or land owned by him for compensation paid either directly or indirectly to the property owner. Tours shall be permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., unless a later time is approved by the city manager or his designee. Effective January 1, 1997, no property owner shall permit a tour of a residential building, structure or land owned by him more than 12 times in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § I, 2-13-96) 
Sec. 18-171. - Tours, permit required. 
No person shall engage in, aid, form or permit tours of any residential building, structure, or land without first obtaining a special events permit from the office of the city manager as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
DIVISION 2. - NONPROFIT GATHERINGS, POLITICAL GATHERINGS. 

Sec. 18-172. - Permissible gatherings. 
It shall be lawful for a property owner to permit gatherings, parties, tours or other similar type entertainments in any residential building, structure or land, without compensation to the property owner (other than reimbursement for expenses), by a nonprofit organization, school, church, group, association, or individual for fund raising purposes so long as the funds raised are for educational or charitable purposes, or to support a political candidate or party. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 18-173. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, aid, form or permit a gathering, party, tour or other similar type entertainment in any residential building, structure or land without first obtaining a special events permit from the office of the city manager as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT 

Sec. 18-174. - Required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, a special events permit shall be required for the activities set forth in Division I and Division II of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 18-175. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of a special events permit shall file application with the office of the city manager on forms provided by the city. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a special events permit shall be filed not less than 10 days or more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the activity. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a special events permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the activity; and the applicant, if different. 
b.  If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the activity leader and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
d.  The date when the activity is to be conducted. 
e.  If the activity is a tour, a map of the route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
f.  The approximate number of persons who will participate in the activity. 
g.  The hours the activity will start and terminate. 
h.  A plan that identifies adequate provisions for parking and transportation of participants in the activity. 
i.  If the activity requires police protection or traffic control, the number of officers to be employed by applicant to provide such protection and control. 
j.  Any additional information which the city manager or his designee shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a special events permit should issue. 
(3)  Late applications. The city manager or his designee where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this division which is filed less than 10 days before the date the special event is proposed to be conducted, but in any event no less than five days before the date of the special event. 
(4)  Fee. A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for such special events permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 18-176. - Standards for issuance. 
The city manager or his designee shall issue a special events permit under this article when, from a consideration of the application and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to the activity. 
(2)  The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of any of the police officers of the city to police the activity, but that adequate provisions for police protection and traffic control have been made by the applicant. 
(3)  The conduct of the special event will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(4)  The conduct of the special event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(5)  The special event is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit except as provided in this article. 
(6)  The special event will not unreasonably burden the streets and sidewalks of the city so as to substantially interfere with the normal use thereof by the public, but that adequate provisions for parking and transportation of participants in the activity have been made by the applicant. 
(7)  The special event will not interfere with another special event for which a special events permit has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 18-177. - Notice of rejection. 
The city manager or his designee shall act upon the application for a special events permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the application is disapproved, there shall be mailed to the applicant within two days after the date the application is disapproved, a notice of the action, stating the reasons for the denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 18-178. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special events permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within two days after receipt of the notice by the applicant. The council shall act upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting after its receipt and may grant or deny a special events permit by a majority vote of the members present. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 18-179. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the application for a special events permit, the city manager or his designee shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city council; 
(2)  The police chief; 
(3)  The fire chief; and 
(4)  The director of the department of streets and sanitation. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 18-180. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The permittee, leader or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the special events permit upon his person during the conduct of the activity. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 18-181. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to revoke a special events permit issued under this division upon a finding that the application filed contains misleading or incomplete information and does not comply with the standards for issuance as set forth under section 18-176. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Secs. 18-182—18-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EXCEPTIONS. 

Sec. 18-190. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to private gatherings, parties, tours, or other similar type entertainments hosted by a property owner in the property owner's own residential building, structure or land for the property owner's own enjoyment and benefit, without compensation, and otherwise permitted under the city's ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Secs. 18-191—18-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-200. - Violations prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or assist another in evading the requirements imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  Any person knowingly violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense against the city, punishable upon citation before the municipal court. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 12 months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 97-20, § I, 8-26-97) 
Secs. 18-201—18-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROCEDURE FOR CHANGING STREET NAMES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-4, § I, adopted February 25, 1997, amended the Code by adding a new Art. VI, §§ 18-180—18-182. In order to avoid duplication of article and section numbers, the editor has redesignated said new provisions as Art. VII, §§ 18-211—18-213. 

Sec. 18-211. - Petition required. 
Should any person or group of persons wish to change the name of any street within the city they shall present a petition signed by a majority of the property owners and the owners of a majority of the street frontage on the street to be affected to the city council. The petition shall contain the following: 
(1)  Statement requesting change of name. 
(2)  An explanation as to why the change is requested. 
(3)  If to be renamed for a person or group of persons, a history of the person stating what part the person played in local, state or national history. 
(4)  Each petition shall contain the signature as well as a typed or printed name along with that person's mailing address/street address. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § I, 2-25-97) 
Sec. 18-212. - Investigation by staff. 
Upon receipt of such a petition, the city council shall refer the petition to the city staff who will investigate the request and shall require the city's department heads to advise if the change would have any bearing on how services are rendered to the citizens of that street and whether or not the change would effect any service. In addition, staff shall send the request to the U.S. post office, each utility, the office of 911 and any other entity that will need to adjust services if the street is renamed. Each of these entities shall be requested to furnish a statement of how the change would effect services if any and be requested to furnish that information in writing to the city. 
Upon receipt of the information above, staff shall develop a recommendation on whether or not the street's name should be changed and submit said recommendation to the city council. 
Simultaneous to this the staff shall advertise the request for a street name change in a newspaper of local circulation and schedule a public hearing for the city council at a regular meeting of the council on the request. Prior to the public hearing the staff shall notify all of the property owners on the street of the request to change the name of the street by U.S. Mail. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § I, 2-25-97) 
Sec. 18-213. - Action by city council. 
Upon hearing the request at the public hearing the city council shall decide whether or not to change the name of the street and shall so notify all of the owners of property on the effected street of the council's action on this request. 
Should the council vote in the affirmative to change the name of any street the effective date of the change shall be on the first day of the next quarter (January, April, July, October), provided that period is at least two months from the date of the decision unless council determines that the date of the change should be at another time. 
(Ord. No. 97-4, § I, 2-25-97) 
Secs. 18-214—18-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREET CLASSIFICATIONS 

Sec. 18-220. - Types of classification. 
Streets in the city shall be classified as either alleys, minor residential, residential, residential collector, collector, subcollector, nonresidential local, minor arterial, major, arterial, or industrial as more fully defined in chapter 3, definitions, of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 00-35, 11-14-00) 
Sec. 18-221. - Table of street classifications adopted. 
Table 18-221, "City of Newnan Street Classifications" attached to Ord. No. 00-35 as Exhibit "A" is hereby adopted establishing the street classification for the city. Table 18-221 is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 00-35, 11-14-00) 
Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Taxation and finance, § 6.1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Excise tax on malt beverages, § 3-31; business license tax on depository financial institutions, § 6-161. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 8; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-2; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1—19-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Property tax, § 6.1. 

Sec. 19-25. - Annual levy generally. 
The city council shall impose, by ordinance, an annual tax, in such amount as it may deem necessary for corporate purposes, subject to constitutional and statutory limitations, on all real estate lying within the corporate limits and including all bonds and stocks of banks and other corporations, and the real estate of churches and school associations from which the churches and school associations draw a revenue or which are intended to be rented out for such purposes, except such as is exempt from taxation under the constitution and laws of this state. Such ordinance shall set forth the amounts levied for the several purposes for which the levies are made. Such tax shall be levied by the city council on property within the city as assessed under current state law and shall take their digest from that prepared by the county tax collector for county taxes for the current year. 
(Code 1972, § 25-1) 
Sec. 19-26. - Taxation of property partly within, partly without, city limits. 
If improved real estate lies partly within and partly without the city, only that part of the real estate and that part of its improvements that lie within the city shall be taxable, unless the owner declares the entire tract to be within the city. The value for taxation of that part of such real estate and that part of the improvements that lie within the city shall be the proportionate value of such real estate and improvements within the city of the total value of such real estate and improvements. 
(Code 1972, § 25-7) 
Sec. 19-27. - Due date for taxes; tax book or notices. 
All taxes shall be due as established by the annual millage ordinance, at which time the city clerk shall furnish the city tax collector with a book showing the amount of tax due, such book containing receipts for such taxes properly made out. In lieu of a book as prescribed above, the city clerk and treasurer is hereby authorized to prepare taxes on individual properties on individual tax notices, such notices to be in consecutive number. 
(Code 1972, § 25-8) 
Sec. 19-28. - Discount for early payment of taxes. 
If city taxes are paid on or before the date established by the annual millage ordinance, a discount as provided in such millage ordinance shall be allowed. 
(Code 1972, § 25-9) 
Sec. 19-29. - Time for payment of taxes without interest. 
The time for payment of city taxes without interest shall be as established by the annual millage ordinance, after which date interest shall be charged and the city clerk shall issue fi. fas. against all taxes unpaid. 
(Code 1972, § 25-10) 
Sec. 19-30. - Penalties for delinquent payment of taxes; issuance of execution. 
Upon all property taxes not paid on or before the date established by the annual millage ordinance, a penalty of one percent per month shall be added and collected by the city clerk and treasurer. If such tax is not paid before the date established by the annual millage ordinance, the city clerk shall issue a tax execution for the tax and penalty and an execution fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges against the property of the defaulting tax payer directed to the chief of police or to any other officer designated by the city council for that purpose, who shall proceed to collect the same according to law. 
(Code 1972, § 25-11) 
Sec. 19-31. - Duties of city clerk as tax collector. 
The city clerk shall be tax collector for the city, and as such he shall give notice to each tax payer by notice by regular mail. Each notice shall contain the amount of taxes due the city, the penalty schedule and whatever else the city council directs. 
(Code 1972, § 25-12) 
Sec. 19-32. - Liens for taxes. 
Liens for taxes due the city shall cover the taxable property of taxpayers from January 1 until such taxes are paid. 
(Code 1972, § 25-13) 
Sec. 19-33. - Levy of fieri facias for taxes. 
Whenever any fieri facias shall issue against any person who has property subject to taxation by the city, or who is subject to taxation by the city, or against any property in the city subject to taxation, when the owner is unknown, for taxes due the city, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or his deputy forthwith to levy the same upon the property of the defendant, or a sufficiency thereof to satisfy the execution and cost, or against the property where the owner thereof is unknown. 
(Code 1972, § 25-14) 
Sec. 19-34. - Sale of property for unpaid taxes generally. 
Whenever the chief of police or his deputy shall levy any execution for unpaid taxes upon any goods, chattels, lands or tenements, he shall advertise the same in the newspaper in the city wherein the sheriff's advertisements for the county are advertised, once a week for four weeks prior to the day of sale; and he shall, on the first Tuesday of the month in which the property was advertised to be sold, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., sell the property levied on, in front of the court house in the county, at public outcry, and shall knock down such property to the highest bidder, execute titles to the same, and place the purchaser in possession of the property sold, as at sheriff's sales in the state. Notice of such levy and sale shall be given to the owner and/or tenant in possession, and any holder of a security interest in the real estate shall receive written notice of such levy as provided by state law. 
(Code 1972, § 25-15) 
Sec. 19-35. - Special provisions as to sale of perishable property for taxes. 
Whenever the chief of police or his deputy shall levy on any personal property by virtue of a tax fi. fa., and the same is of a perishable nature or liable to deteriorate in value from keeping, or there is expense in keeping the same, upon these facts being made to appear to the mayor when the council is not in session, by written statement of the chief of police or his deputy an order may be passed requiring the chief of police or his deputy to advertise the property at two or more public places in the city for at least three days, and at the expiration of that time to sell the same in the same manner as other sales for taxes. 
(Code 1972, § 25-16) 
Sec. 19-36. - Liability of purchaser at tax sale. 
Any person who may become the purchaser of any real or personal property at any sale for taxes made at public outcry by the chief of police or his deputy, and who shall fail or refuse to comply with the terms of such sale when requested so to do, shall be liable for the amount of the purchase money, and it shall be the option of the chief of police or his deputy to proceed against such purchaser for the full amount of the purchase money, or to resell such real or personal property, and then proceed against the first purchaser for the deficiency arising from such sale. 
(Code 1972, § 25-18) 
Sec. 19-37. - Redemption of land sold for unpaid taxes. 
Whenever any land is sold upon execution for unpaid taxes, the owner thereof shall have the privilege of redeeming such land thus sold within one year, by paying the purchaser the amount paid by such purchaser for such land, with 20 percent interest thereon computed from the date of the purchase to the time of payment. 
(Code 1972, § 25-19) 
Sec. 19-38. - Purchase by city of land at tax sale—Generally. 
Whenever at any sale of land by the city for taxes due, no one present shall bid for the property as much as the tax for which it is proposed to sell the same, and the officer's cost if any be due thereon, after such property shall have been cried a reasonable time, any duly appointed officer or agent of the city may bid off such property for the city, and the officer making such sale shall make to the city a deed to the property so sold, and deliver the same to the officer designated by the city to receive it, and the title acquired by the city at such sale and by such deed, shall be perfect, valid and binding, after the period provided for redemption by the owner in section 19-37 shall have elapsed, and there is no redemption by the owner, as if purchased by an individual or corporation, other than such city so purchasing; and the officer making the sale shall put the city, through any officer or person it may designate, in possession of the property so sold. 
(Code 1972, § 25-20) 
Sec. 19-39. - Same—City clerk designated as city's purchaser. 
The city clerk is hereby designated as the officer to buy any property described in section 19-38 under the circumstances mentioned therein and to receive the deed for the city and take possession thereof from the chief of police for the city. 
(Code 1972, § 25-21) 
Cross reference— City clerk and treasurer, § 2-136 et seq. 
Sec. 19-40. - Sale of land purchased by city at tax sale. 
Neither the city council, during whose term of service any sale provided for in section 19-39 shall take place, nor any subsequently elected governing board, shall be capable of diverting or alienating the title of the corporation to any property so purchased, except by a public sale of the same to the highest bidder unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 25-22) 
Sec. 19-41. - Garnishment for taxes. 
(a)  When the tax collector can find no property of the defendant on which to levy any tax execution, it shall be his duty to have an entry to that effect made on such execution; and such tax collector may then issue summons of garnishment against any person whom he may believe is indebted to the defaulting taxpayer, or who may have property, money or effects in his hands, and such summons of garnishment shall be served by the tax collector as aforesaid, or by the sheriff, or his deputy, or any constable of the county in which the garnishee may reside, at least 15 days before the sitting of the court to which the same is made returnable, and when so served shall be returned to the superior court of the county as aforesaid. 
(b)  Such tax collector shall enter on the execution the name of the person garnished, and return such execution to the superior court, and all subsequent proceedings shall be the same as now provided by law in relation to garnishment in other cases when judgment has been obtained or execution issued. 
(c)  When the tax collector desires to enforce the payment of taxes due the city by garnishment, as above provided, it shall not be necessary for the said tax collector to make the affidavit or give the bond required by law in other cases of garnishment. 
(Code 1972, § 25-24) 
Secs. 19-42—19-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX ON HOTELS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-13, § I, adopted Sept. 9, 2014 , repealed the former Art. III, §§ 19-51—19-56, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to special taxes and derived from Ord. No. 16-94, § I, adopted Nov. 22, 1994; Ord. No. 05-15, § I, adopted May 10, 2005. 

Sec. 19-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Newnan, Georgia, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City clerk. The duly appointed city clerk, or his designee. 
Due date. The 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period. The calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-52. - Tax rate and use. 
(a)  There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption [exception] is provided under section 19-54. 
(b)  The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4.6)(A). 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-53. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 19-54. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this sub-section shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-54. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant who has occupied any guest room in a hotel for more than 30 continuous days; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-55. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city manager on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective September 9, 2014. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by this article. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city manager shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-56. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city manager monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific civil penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a civil penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-57. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 19-56. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-58. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 19-57(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 19-56. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-59. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-60. - Administration of ordinance; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Sec. 19-61. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any lodging provider to willfully fail to make a return and pay the taxes due under this article by the due date provided. If the tax liability is $10,000.00 or less, any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If the tax liability is more than $10,000.00, any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a felony. 
(b)  Any lodging provider who fails, neglects, or refuses to collect the tax as provided this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed three months, or both. 
(c)  Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by this article, to keep adequate records, or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the city manager shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed three months, or both. 
(d)  Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months in the county jail, or both. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any lodging provider to violate any other provision of this article for which punishment is not otherwise provided. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation under this section is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
( Ord. No. 14-13, § I, 9-9-14 ) 
Secs. 19-62—19-70. - Reserved. 
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 of the Uniform Rules of the Road Act, speed limits within the city have been established. A schedule listing the street locations and applicable speed limits has been compiled by the city, an official copy of which is on file in the city clerk's office where it is available for reference during normal business hours. 
Charter reference— Authority of city to regulate operation of motor vehicles, § 1.4(30). 
Cross reference— Emergency services, Ch. 9; law enforcement, Ch. 12; municipal court, Ch. 13; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 14; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Traffic law adopted. 
(a)  By reference. Pursuant to authority vested in the city, there is hereby adopted that certain act known as "The Uniform Act Regulating Traffic On Highways," O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., and all amendatory acts thereto, known further as the uniform rules of the road; and also all provisions of chapters 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13 and 14 of O.C.G.A., title 40, Motor Vehicles and Traffic; are hereby adopted as a part of the traffic ordinances of the city with like effect as if the same were cited at length in this chapter except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Conflicts. If any conflict between provisions of "The Uniform Act Regulating Traffic On Highways" and traffic ordinances of the city exist, the traffic ordinances of the city shall prevail. 
(c)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1972, § 15-01) 
Sec. 20-2. - Scope of traffic regulations. 
(a)  Obedience to regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(b)  Obedience to police, fire department personnel. No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or member of the fire department. 
(Code 1972, § 15-1) 
Sec. 20-3. - Applicability of traffic regulations. 
(a)  Persons propelling pushcarts, riding or driving animals. Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(b)  Public employees. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 1972, § 15-2) 
Sec. 20-4. - Applicability of provisions to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Definition. The term "authorized emergency vehicle" shall include vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the city. 
(b)  Applicability of regulations. The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles except as set out in this section. A driver when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may: 
(1)  Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(c)  Siren, bell, light required. The exemptions granted in subsection (b) in reference to the movement of an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle sounds a siren, bell or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary and the vehicle displays a lighted lamp visible from the front as a warning to others. 
(d)  Duty. The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Code 1972, § 15-3) 
Sec. 20-5. - Hitchhiking. 
(a)  Thumbing ride. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to thumb or solicit by thumb a ride in a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Soliciting ride. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to stand on the streets in the city with the intent and purpose of soliciting a ride in a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 15-4) 
Sec. 20-6. - Operation of bicycles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle at any time on any sidewalk located within the first fire district of the city. It shall be lawful for persons to ride bicycles in other sections of the city; however, pedestrians on the sidewalks have the right-of-way on the sidewalks. Operators of bicycles on sidewalks outside the first fire district shall grant the right-of-way and yield to pedestrians. It is further ordained that no bicycles shall be operated on any sidewalk after dark unless equipped with proper lighting. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to do so without regard to the right-of-way of pedestrians and vehicular traffic, or to ride in a reckless, boisterous or disorderly manner. 
(Code 1972, § 15-5) 
Sec. 20-7. - Riding bicycle without light. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle in the city after dark, without a light so attached to the bicycle as to cast a light in the direction in which the rider is traveling. 
(Code 1972, § 15-6) 
Sec. 20-8. - Skating on roadways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to skate on any of the roadways within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-7) 
Sec. 20-9. - Skating on sidewalks in first fire district. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to skate on the sidewalk within the first fire district. 
(Code 1972, § 15-8) 
Secs. 20-10—20-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS AND DEVICES 

Sec. 20-36. - Authority to place and maintain signs, signals and devices. 
The chief of police as traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances and regulations of the city, to make effective the provisions of such regulations, and shall place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as are deemed necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic regulations of the city or under state law, or to guide and warn traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 15-19) 
Sec. 20-37. - Traffic signs; effect of provisions requiring same. 
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such erection shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1972, § 15-20) 
Sec. 20-38. - Applicability to drivers of vehicles. 
The driver of a vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 15-21) 
Sec. 20-39. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
Electric traffic signals shall be a green, a red and an amber light. When a green traffic light is flashed or illuminated, the driver of a vehicle shall drive or proceed in the direction in which the green light is pointing. When an amber light is flashed or illuminated, the driver of a vehicle must observe caution and bring his automobile to a stop, and not proceed until a green light is again flashed or illuminated. When a red light is flashed or illuminated, the driver of a vehicle must stop and not proceed or drive in the direction in which the red light is pointing until the green light is flashed or illuminated. 
(Code 1972, § 15-22) 
Sec. 20-40. - Compliance with traffic signals required. 
It shall be the duty of every person driving or in charge of a moving vehicle in the city to observe and comply with the traffic signals in the city, at and where the signals are installed. 
(Code 1972, § 15-23) 
Sec. 20-41. - Pedestrians to obey electric traffic-control signals. 
It shall be the duty of pedestrians in the city to observe the green, amber and red electric traffic lights in the city. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian in the city to cross or attempt to cross any street in the city against any electric traffic signal. Pedestrians in the city shall be privileged to cross the streets of the city at crossings where electric traffic signals are installed only when the green light is flashed or illuminated and shall then cross the street in the direction in which the green light, when illuminated or flashed, is pointing. 
(Code 1972, § 15-24) 
Sec. 20-42. - Applicability of provisions regarding electric traffic-control signals. 
The terms of this article shall not apply or be enforced when electric traffic signals are not illuminated and being used to give the signals outlined in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 15-25) 
Sec. 20-43. - Signs permitting right turn on red light. 
Signs shall be installed on all traffic lights on streets in the city, reading as follows: "After full stop, right turn on red light." 
(Code 1972, § 15-26) 
Sec. 20-44. - Authority as to changing of traffic lights. 
The changing of traffic lights shall be left to the police chief and the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 15-27) 
Sec. 20-45. - One-way streets and alleys; signs required. 
Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley the chief of police as traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1972, § 15-28) 
Sec. 20-46. - Operation upon one-way streets. 
When appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, traffic upon one-way streets or parts of streets shall proceed only in the direction indicated. 
(Code 1972, § 15-53) 
Sec. 20-47. - Through streets; traffic boulevards; signs required. 
Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street or traffic boulevard, it shall be the duty of the chief of police as traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or traffic boulevard or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as a through street or traffic boulevard by such ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-29) 
Sec. 20-48. - "Stop" intersections; designation, signs required. 
Whenever any ordinance or regulation of the city designates intersections as "stop" intersections, the chief of police as traffic engineer shall erect stop signs at every intersection so designated. 
(Code 1972, § 15-30) 
Sec. 20-49. - Duty when entering "stop" intersections. 
When appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, vehicles approaching a "stop" intersection shall be brought to a complete stop before proceeding into or across the same. 
(Code 1972, § 15-55) 
Sec. 20-50. - Hazardous intersections; designation, signs required. 
Whenever an ordinance or regulation of the city designates intersections as having particular hazards, upon other than through streets, the chief of police acting as traffic engineer shall determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. 
(Code 1972, § 15-31) 
Sec. 20-51. - Turning markers, buttons, signs. 
(a)  Placement. The chief of police as traffic engineer shall place markers, buttons or signs within or approaching intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated shall conform to that prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)  Duty of driver. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within or approaching an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1972, § 15-32) 
Sec. 20-52. - Restricted turn signs. 
(a)  Placement. Whenever an ordinance or regulation of the city shall determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn, the chief of police as traffic engineer shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)  Duty of driver. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1972, § 15-33) 
Sec. 20-53. - Crosswalks, safety zones, traffic lanes; designation. 
The chief of police as traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic regulations of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-34) 
Sec. 20-54. - Play streets; establishment, designation. 
(a)  Placement of signs. Whenever any ordinance or regulation of the city declares any street or part thereof a play street, the chief of police as traffic engineer shall place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(b)  Duty of driver. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 15-35) 
Secs. 20-55—20-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 20-76. - Careless, reckless operation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver or person in charge of an automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle, to operate the same in a careless or reckless manner. Such automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle must be operated with due regard to the safety of persons upon the streets and public places, and in such manner as to avoid collision therewith. 
(Code 1972, § 15-46) 
Sec. 20-77. - Vehicles to be properly equipped. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle upon the streets of the city which is not equipped in conformity to and compliance with applicable provisions of state law. 
(Code 1972, § 15-47) 
Sec. 20-78. - Drivers to observe rules of road, drive on right-hand side of roadways. 
Every person operating a motor vehicle must observe the rules of the road, keep to the right-hand side of the street or roadway and drive to the right of the guides or signposts maintained by the city in such streets or roadways. 
(Code 1972, § 15-48) 
Sec. 20-79. - Drivers with ability impaired by alcohol or drugs. 
(a)  A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any moving vehicle while: 
(1)  Under the influence of alcohol. 
(2)  Under the influence of any drug to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving. 
(3)  Under the combined influence of alcohol and any drug to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use a drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. 
(c)  Every person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than ten days nor more than one year, or by fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. On a second or subsequent conviction within three years, he shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than 90 days nor more than one year, and, in the discretion of the court, a fine of not more than $1,000.00. The foregoing limitations on punishment also shall apply when a defendant has been convicted of violating by a single transaction more than one of four provisions of subsection (a) of this section; provided, that no provision of this section shall be construed so as to deprive the court imposing the sentence of the power given by law to the court to stay or suspend the execution of such sentence or to place defendant on probation. 
(d)  Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, evidence of the amount of alcohol or drug in a person's blood at the alleged time, as determined by a chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance, shall be admissible. Where such a chemical test is made, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance to be considered valid under the provisions of this section shall have been performed according to methods approved by the state crime laboratory and by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the state crime laboratory for this purpose. The state crime laboratory is authorized to approve satisfactory techniques or methods, to ascertain the qualifications and competence of individuals to conduct analyses, and to issue permits which shall be subject to termination or revocation at the discretion of the state crime laboratory. 
(2)  When a person shall submit to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-5-55 only a physician or registered nurse (or other qualified person) may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content therein. This limitation shall not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. 
(3)  The person tested may have a physician, or a qualified technician, chemist, registered nurse, or other qualified person of his own choosing administer a chemical test in addition to any administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer. The justifiable failure or inability to obtain an additional test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer. 
(4)  Upon the request of the person who shall submit to a chemical test at the request of a law enforcement officer, full information concerning the test shall be made available to him or his attorney. The arresting officer at the time of arrest shall advise the person arrested of his rights to a chemical test according to this section. 
(5)  Percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per 100 cubic centimeters of blood. 
(e)  Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a moving vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance shall give rise to the following presumptions: 
(1)  If there was at that time 0.05 percent or less by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, it shall be presumed that the person was not under the influence of the alcohol. 
(2)  If there was at that time in excess of 0.05 percent but less than 0.08 percent by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, such fact shall not give rise to any presumption that the person was or was not under the influence of alcohol, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining whether the person was under the influence of alcohol. 
(3)  If there was at that time 0.08 percent or more by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, it shall be presumed that the person was under the influence of alcohol. 
(Code 1972, § 15-49) 
State Law reference— Chemical tests for alcohol or drugs in blood, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-392. 
Sec. 20-80. - Applicability of speed regulations to emergency vehicles. 
The provisions of the city's traffic schedule with respect to speed limits shall not be applicable to authorized emergency vehicles being operated in response to emergency conditions, nor to automobiles of physicians, nor to ambulances responding to emergency calls. 
(Code 1972, § 15-52) 
Sec. 20-81. - Duty to stop upon entering traffic boulevard. 
Any person operating a vehicle from any intersecting street into or onto that portion of a street designated a traffic boulevard shall, before driving such vehicle into or onto such boulevard, bring his vehicle to a full and complete stop. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle from any intersecting street into that portion of a street designated a traffic boulevard without bringing his vehicle to a full stop before driving the same from such intersecting street onto or into such street. 
(Code 1972, § 15-54) 
Sec. 20-82. - U-turns prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to make a complete or U-turn at any point in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-56) 
Sec. 20-83. - Left turns in business district. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a left turn at any of the intersections in the business district of the city when an appropriate sign has been erected by the police department prohibiting left turns. 
(Code 1972, § 15-57) 
Sec. 20-84. - Noisy vehicles; operation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unusual or unnecessary noise in the operation or use of any motor vehicle in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-58) 
Sec. 20-85. - Adequate muffler required; "gutted," "cut-out" muffler prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle in the city with a muffler that is not in good repair or with a muffler that has been "gutted, cut-out" or has been so altered so as to make it produce noises or sounds. It shall also be unlawful for any person to sell within the city any muffler that is not in good repair or that has been "gutted, cut-out" or has been so altered so as to make it produce noises or sounds. 
(Code 1972, § 15-61) 
Sec. 20-86. - Sounding horns on automobiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, operating an automobile in the city, or any occupant of any automobile in the city, to blow or sound the horn on the automobile except in a reasonable manner for the purpose of warning persons of the approach of such vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 15-59) 
Sec. 20-87. - Use of signal device on automobile, different from horn. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of any automobile in the city, or the occupant of any automobile in the city, equipped with a signal device or horn different from the signal device or horn customarily installed on automobiles or that is equipped with a musical horn device to sound, blow or play the device in the city, except to warn persons of the approach of the automobile; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles of the police and fire departments or to ambulances. 
(Code 1972, § 15-60) 
Sec. 20-88. - Driving on sidewalks; prohibited, exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or place any motor vehicle on any sidewalk or crossway, or in any street which intersects any sidewalk in such manner as to prevent the free passage of persons; provided, that draymen may, subject to the direction of the chief of police, temporarily use the sidewalks in loading or unloading merchandise. 
(Code 1972, § 15-62) 
Sec. 20-89. - Duty of vehicle operator in event of accident. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle in the city to fail to stop and render aid if and when the driver of any such vehicle collides with any person, vehicle or animal in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-63) 
Sec. 20-90. - Operation of motor scooters, minibikes, go-carts and similar vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  The operation of motor scooters, minibikes and go-carts or similar motorized vehicles which do not conform to the standards of motor vehicles and which are not duly licensed by the state and the driver of which is not licensed to operate a motor vehicle by the state is hereby prohibited upon the streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(b)  The finding of any person so operating shall be charged with a misdemeanor and dealt with according to statutes of the city and the state. 
(Code 1972, § 15-64) 
Sec. 20-91. - Right-of-way rules. 
(a)  The vehicle to the right shall have the right-of-way at any unmarked street intersection. All motor vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the right. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway. 
(c)  When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(d)  When the intersection is designated as a "Yield" intersection, the driver of a vehicle approaching a "Yield" sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable under existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving within and across the intersection; provided, however, that a driver approaching a "Yield" sign and driving past same without stopping and becoming involved in a collision with a vehicle moving within and across such intersection shall be deemed prima facie to have failed to yield the right-of-way. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this law, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from such opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(f)  The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this section at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from such through highway or which are approaching so closely on such through highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on such through highway shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the through highway. 
(g)  The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop sign as required in this article at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through highway and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed. 
(h)  The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such highway. 
(i)  Any motor vehicle existing from any parking space or area from any street or on the square in the city shall yield the right-of-way to any oncoming vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 15-65) 
Sec 20-92. - Speed limit generally; school zones. 
A speed limit of 25 miles per hour is hereby established for all streets within the city with the exception of those streets indicated in section 20-93 of this code with the further exception of areas of certain streets designated as "School Zones." Speed limits within "School Zones" are hereby established at 20 miles per hour during school hours. 
(Ord. No. 14-93, § I, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 20-93. - Speed limits on specific streets. 
(a)  Established. Pursuant to Georgia Code 40, Article 9, section 40-6-183, of the Uniform Rules of the Road Act, for local authorities to alter lawful speed limits, the following speed limits within the city are established: 
ON-SYSTEM  Signs to be Erected by Georgia Department of Transportation 

 
OFF-SYSTEM  Signs to be Erected by City of Newnan 

 
(b)  Violations. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 14-93, § II, 6-21-93; Ord. No. 95-24, 10-10-95; Ord. No. 96-23, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 00-15, § I, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 00-40, § 12-26-00; Ord. No. 04-03A, 2-24-04; Ord. No. 06-4, § I, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 12-6, § I(Exh. A), 5-22-12) 
Sec. 20-94. - Speed limit restrictions; construction sites. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the speed limits set forth in section 20-92 or section 20-93 herein, either the department of transportation or the city street superintendent are hereby authorized to establish a maximum speed limit through any construction site located on or adjacent to any street or highway within the city limits. 
(b)  Whenever speed zones are established pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove by the department of transportation or the street superintendent, there shall be erected or posted a sign of adequate size at the beginning point of such speed zone designating the zone, the speed limit to be observed therein, and the minimum fine for exceeding such speed, and there shall be erected or posted at the end of such speed zone an adequate sign indicating the end of such speed zone, which sign shall also indicate such different speed limit as may then be observed. Where the speed limit established pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove is at least ten miles per hour less than the established speed limit on the street or highway, there shall be erected at least 600 feet in advance of the beginning of the speed zone a sign of adequate size which shall bear the legend "Reduce Speed Ahead." 
(c)  A person convicted of exceeding the speed limit in any speed zone established pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 95-22, § I, 9-26-95) 
Sec. 20-95. - Definitions. 
(a)  Truck/trailers: A motorized vehicle having ten wheels or more and/or tandem axles which generally has attached thereto a trailer for the purposes of hauling. 
(b)  Designated truck route: Specific streets authorized for truck/trailer traffic within the corporate limits of the city. Those streets or roads are designated as: 
(1)  Georgia Highway 34, from its intersection with Interstate 85 to its intersection with Georgia Highway 34 By-Pass; and 
(2)  U.S. Highway 29 North from its intersection with the city limits to its intersection with Georgia Highway 34 By-Pass; and 
(3)  Georgia Highway 34 By-Pass. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 1, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 20-96. - Prohibited truck trailer travel; exceptions; signage. 
(a)  Through truck trailers not stopping for pick up or deliveries in the city are prohibited from traveling along any streets within the city limits, except along the designated routes as set forth in this section. Truck/trailer deliveries or pick ups within the corporate boundaries of the city are permitted. 
(b)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public. 
(c)  The chief of police shall cause those streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly sign-posted to give notice that section 20-96 is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 1, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 20-97. - Violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to the provisions of section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-09, § 1, 3-9-99) 
Secs. 20-98—20-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Standing or parking vehicles containing livestock, § 4-8. 

Sec. 20-111. - Establishment of parking restrictions in designated areas. 
(a)  Placement of signs. When an ordinance or regulation of the city so provides, the city engineer, as traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of police shall designate those streets or parts of streets in the city upon which parking shall be prohibited, or parking time limits established, or parking is otherwise restricted, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Effect of signs. When such signs are erected and in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the directions of such signs. 
(Code 1972, § 15-74; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-112. - Signs required to regulate parking. 
Whenever by the provisions of this chapter or any other regulation of the city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited or restricted on designated streets or parts of streets, it shall be the duty of the city engineer, as traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of police to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1972, § 15-75; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-113. - Parking parallel, on right-hand of street unless otherwise indicated; exception for one-way streets. 
Except where otherwise indicated by appropriate signs, markings or other devices, all parking in the city shall be parallel to the curb, and along the right-hand side of the street facing in the direction of travel; provided, however, that upon one-way streets, vehicles may park along the left-hand side of the street facing in the direction of travel, unless such parking is otherwise prohibited. 
(Code 1972, § 15-76) 
Sec. 20-114. - Engine to be stopped, brakes set when vehicle is parked. 
The person in charge of a motor vehicle shall not park the same upon a street with the engine running, but in departing therefrom shall stop such engine and set the brakes. 
(Code 1972, § 15-77) 
Sec. 20-115. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
No motor vehicle shall be left standing on the streets of the city between sunset and sunrise unless there is displayed from the front and rear thereof appropriate illuminating devices. 
(Code 1972, § 15-78) 
Sec. 20-116. - Parking on sidewalk, prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked on any sidewalk in the city any automobile, truck or motor vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 15-80) 
Sec. 20-117. - Parking between curb and sidewalk adjacent to street, prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked in that area between the curb and the sidewalk adjacent to any street in the city any automobile, truck or other motor vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 15-79) 
Sec. 20-118. - Parking restrictions; first fire district; city property; other restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile or motor vehicle on a public street within the first fire district of the city for more than 24 hours in any one place. Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall also be unlawful for any person to so park any automobile or motor vehicle on a public street outside the first fire district of the city for more than 72 hours in any one place. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile or motor vehicle on city property or within a city parking lot for more than 24 hours. This restriction shall not apply to city-owned vehicles. 
(c)  No motorized vehicle in excess of 7,000 pounds (empty weight), trailer, boat, vehicle not in operating condition or currently licensed, vehicle with more than four wheels or a total number of vehicles in excess of four as set forth in the zoning ordinance shall be permitted to be parked in front of or at the side of the main dwelling on a lot in a residential area or neighborhood, unless same is parked or stored completely within an enclosed garage or roofed carport. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the limitation set forth in paragraph (a) of this section, no motorized vehicle in excess of 7,000 pounds (empty weight) or trailer, boat or vehicle with more than four wheels shall be permitted to be parked or left standing along any street or roadway in any residential zoned area or neighborhood. The provisions of this subparagraph (c) shall not apply to vehicles making deliveries of goods or merchandise to residents or businesses located in such residential zoned area or neighborhood or to vehicles temporarily parked for the purpose of loading or unloading household or business goods and furnishings (moving van type vehicles). 
(Code 1972, § 15-81; Ord. No. 96-14, 7-9-96; Ord. No. 99-06, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 20-119. - Fire lanes, police and handicapped parking zones; designated, use restricted. 
(a)  Unless expressly authorized, by permit or otherwise, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city where the curbing is marked by yellow lines. Excepted from the terms of this section are properly marked or licensed emergency or law enforcement vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city designated and marked as a fire or emergency lane, access or alleyway. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city designated as a handicapped zone unless identification as a handicapped vehicle is properly displayed. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city designated 15-minute zone for any time exceeding 15-minutes. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle of any kind within any area in the city designated commercial loading zoning unless actively loading or unloading and in no event for any time exceeding one hour. 
(Code 1972, § 15-82; Ord. No. 14-92, 5-11-92; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-120. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  Placement of signs. The city engineer, as traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of police shall erect signs prohibiting parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when it has been determined such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous condition. 
(b)  Effect of signs. When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(c)  Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful for any person to park on Water Works Road and Sewell Road where such roads adjoin the premises of Newnan High School on any school day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. It shall further be unlawful for any person to park on LaGrange Street and Armory Road, where such street or road adjoins the premises of Newnan High School between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any school day. Excepted from these restrictions are students, teachers and administrators attending Newnan High School and persons having legitimate business to transact at Newnan High School. 
(Code 1972, § 15-83; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-121. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  Placement of signs. The city engineer, as traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of police shall erect signs prohibiting parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not permit free and unobstructed passage of vehicles. 
(b)  Effect of signs. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1972, § 15-84; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-122. - Parking, standing on one-way roadways. 
(a)  Signs required. If a roadway includes two or more separate lanes and traffic is restricted to the same one-way direction upon each lane of any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. 
(b)  Placement of signs. The city engineer, as traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of police shall determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 15-85; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-123. - Hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  Placement of signs. The city engineer, as traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of police shall designate by proper signs placed in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  Effect of signs. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this section no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1972, § 15-86; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-124. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
The city engineer, as traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of police shall determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones. hereinafter in this chapter referred to as commercial loading zones, and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or other devices indicating the same and stating the hours during which the restrictions thereof shall apply. 
(Code 1972, § 15-87; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-125. - Bus zones; designation, use restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle except a bus within those areas where the curbing is marked by yellow lines and where there is a sign denoting the same as a parking space for buses, such areas being reserved for the use of buses only. 
(Code 1972, § 15-88) 
Sec. 20-126. - Taxicab zones; designation, use restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle except a taxicab within those areas where the curbing is marked by yellow lines and where there is a sign denoting the same as a parking space for taxicabs only, such areas being reserved for the use of taxicabs only. 
(Code 1972, § 15-89) 
Sec. 20-127. - Taxicab parking regulated. 
(a)  Use of zones is exclusive. The taxicab companies of the city shall have the exclusive privilege of parking taxicabs in the spaces marked for such purposes. 
(b)  Manner of parking. Taxicabs must and shall park in the space at the points marked off for such taxicabs and must be parked within the lines so marked. 
(c)  Privilege is revocable. The privilege to park in the designated spaces is permissive only and can be revoked at any time by the mayor and city council. 
(d)  Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab to park a taxicab at any place except the spaces designated for taxicabs. 
(Code 1972, § 15-90) 
Sec. 20-128. - Parking permits. 
No permits for parking in the city shall be issued except to the county commissioners for their use while on official business and disabled persons holding doctor's certificates attesting to such disability. 
(Code 1972, § 15-91) 
Sec. 20-129. - Parking, making deliveries by certain vehicles restricted in first fire district. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked on any street within the first fire district of the city a truck and trailer or a trailer exceeding an overall length of 26 feet, for a period of more than one hour at a time in any one place. 
(b)  It shall further be unlawful to make more than one daily delivery to more than one business establishment or to daily pick up or receive goods, wares or merchandise from more than one business establishment with a tractor-trailer within the first fire district of the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked on any street outside the first fire district of the city a truck and trailer or a trailer exceeding an overall length of 26 feet, for a period of more than 12 hours at a time or overnight. 
(Code 1972, § 15-92; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-130. - Enforcement of parking regulations. 
(a)  Scope of section. Any and all vehicles parked on any public street or alley in the city shall at all times be subject to the supervision and control of the police force of the city and any officer thereof. This section shall also apply to parking of vehicles in an area where the curbing is marked by yellow lines, in an area designated as fire or emergency lane or in an area designated as a handicapped zone. 
(b)  Duty of enforcement. It shall be the duty of every member of the police department of the city and/or employee clothed with police powers to exercise supervision and control over vehicles parked on the public streets or alleys in the city and to prohibit as far as possible parking that obstructs such streets or alleys. This duty shall apply to enforcement of the parking restrictions set forth in section 20-119; in addition, the chief of police and the fire inspector shall have the duty and authority to issue citations for violations of the restrictions set forth therein. Reasonable discretion shall be exercised in the enforcement of this section. 
(c)  Obedience required. Every person who parks a vehicle on any public street or alley in the city shall park the vehicle subject to the supervision and control of the policeman and/or employees with police power in the city, and every such person shall, when requested or directed by any member of the police department and/or employee clothed with police powers, immediately move his automobile and park it in such place as shall be designated, or if a parking place is not designated to remove it from where it is parked at the time such owner is requested or directed to do so. 
(d)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to move any vehicle parked in the city on streets or alleys after requested or directed to move the vehicle by any member of the police department and/or any employee clothed with police powers. 
(Code 1972, § 15-93) 
Sec. 20-131. - Vehicle owner not to cause or permit parking violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to countenance, cause, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stop, stand or park upon any of the public streets or public places in the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter. However, in no case shall two persons be penalized for any one parking violation. 
(Code 1972, § 15-94; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-132. - Penalty for parking violations. 
(a)  The charge for violation of a 15-minute parking restriction in any designated parking area shall be established by resolution of city council. If the violation is unpaid within seven days, the fine shall be doubled. 
(b)  The charge for violation of a designated handicapped parking space shall be established by resolution of city council. If the violation is unpaid within seven days, the fine shall be doubled. 
(c)  The charge for violation of a designated commercial loading zone shall be established by resolution of city council. If the violation is unpaid within seven days, the fine shall be doubled. 
(d)  Habitual offenders of parking regulations shall be assessed an additional charge as established by city council. Habitual offense shall be defined as conviction of five or more violations of section 20-134 or 20-135 within a calendar year. The habitual offender charge shall be assessed to violators on the fifth and each subsequent violation during the calendar year. 
(e)  If the fine is not paid within 30 days from the date of issuance, a warrant shall be issued for such person commanding such person to appear before the city recorder, and such person, if found guilty of willfully failing to pay the ticket within the prescribed time limit, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Code 1972, § 15-95; Ord. No. 02-92, 1-6-92; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-133. - Towing away of certain illegally parked vehicles. 
Subject to state law requirements, the police chief is hereby authorized to tow away and store any vehicle parked in any of the following situations: 
(1)  In a 15-minute zone illegally for more than 30 minutes. 
(2)  In a commercial loading zone illegally for more than one hour. 
(3)  In a designated handicapped space without proper authorization. 
(4)  In the first fire district for more than 24 hours. 
(5)  Outside the first fire district within the city for more than 72 hours. 
(Code 1972, § 15-96; Ord. No. 20-90, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-134. - Restricted parking in central business district. 
(a)  The city engineer, as traffic engineer, in consultation with the chief of police shall have the authority to determine the location of restricted parking within the city limits. Parking restrictions shall be placed to optimize the use of parking facilities while maintaining adequate traffic flow and safety. 
(b)  The following types of restricted parking shall be allowed: 
(1)  Fifteen-minute zones; 
(2)  Commercial loading zones; 
(3)  Handicapped spaces. 
(Code 1972, § 15-97; Ord. No. 13-89, 4-10-89; Ord. No. 21-90, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-135. - No parking areas. 
(a)  Temple Avenue. No parking is permitted on Temple Avenue within the corporate limits of the city as described as follows: 
Beginning at a point 1,065 feet (0.2 mile) east of mile post 8, south side of State Route 16 (Temple Avenue), which point is the west boundary line of Bank of Coweta, point marked by curb delineating west driveway of Bank; thence 159 feet east of point of beginning to east property line of Bank of Coweta; also, north side of State Route 16, between points directly opposite the points described above. 
(b)  Greenville Street. No parking is permitted on Greenville Street (SR 14) at M.P. 14.10 to 14.12, within the city as described as follows: 
State Route 14, 16. Begin no parking on the east side of State Route 14 at M.P. 14.10 and continue to the north for a distance of 110 feet, M.P. 14.12. 
(c)  State Route 14 (US 29, Jackson Street). No parking is allowed any time on State Route 14 (US 29, Jackson Street), west side only, as follows: 
Beginning at a point 75 feet north of Wesley Street (M.P. 0.25) and continuing south to Wesley Street (M.P. 0.26), a distance of 0.01 mile. 
(d)  State Route 14 (US 29, Jackson Street). No parking is allowed anytime on State Route 14 (US 29, Jackson Street) east side only, as follows: 
Beginning at a point 75 feet north of Wesley Street (M.P. 0.25) and continuing south to Wesley Street (M.P. 0.26), a distance of 0.01 mile. 
(Code 1972, § 15-98) 
Sec. 20-136. - Use of parking spaces when doing work at building. 
Persons doing temporary construction work at a building in the city and using trucks or other vehicles therefore, and desiring to occupy a parking space without being required to move the vehicles each two hours may apply for and obtain a parking permit, the same to be issued upon payment of a fee set forth in the city's schedule of fees per space to be occupied by the applicant for permit. Such permit shall allow the permit holder to occupy the number of spaces designated in the permit without regard to 24 hour and 72 hours limitations set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 15-99; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 9-26-11) 
Sec. 20-137. - Handicapped parking—Law adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 20-1 of this Code and pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-220 through 40-6-227, such sections of state law are hereby incorporated in this section by reference as and for the handicapped parking laws of this city with the like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  The sign designations for handicapped parking places shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-221. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the failure of the property owner to properly mark and sign handicap parking places in accordance with law, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in any area on public or private property which has been clearly designated and reserved for use by handicapped persons in vehicles displaying a valid handicapped parking permit, unless such vehicle clearly displays a valid unexpired handicapped parking permit or unless there is attached to the vehicle a specifically designated license plate for disabled veterans or other disabled persons authorized under O.C.G.A. § 40-6-222(d). 
(Ord. No. 20-92, § 15-101, 8-24-92) 
Sec. 20-138. - Same—Enforcement. 
(a)  In addition to the enforcement authority set forth in section 20-130, the chief of police, or his designee, shall have the authority to appoint any person who is a citizen of the United States, is of good moral character, has not been previously convicted of a felony, and is a handicapped person as defined under state law, to enforce the provisions of the handicapped parking laws of the city. 
(b)  Each person appointed pursuant to this section shall complete an application, satisfactorily complete a course of training on handicapped parking enforcement, and take and subscribe an oath of office as prescribed by the appointing authority. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police or his designee shall cause a complete and thorough investigation to be made of the applicant to determine his moral, physical and mental qualifications. 
(d)  Any person appointed under this section and sworn shall have the power to serve citations for violations for failure to comply with the handicapped parking laws of this city, in the manner as any law enforcement officer of the city, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  No person so appointed shall be deemed a peace officer, nor have the general powers of a police officer, nor an employee of the city, nor receive any compensation therefrom. 
(2)  No person appointed shall be required to complete training or be certified as a peace officer. 
(3)  No person appointed shall have the power or duty to enforce any other traffic or criminal laws. 
(4)  No person appointed shall have the power to possess and carry firearms and other weapons for the purpose of enforcing the handicapped parking laws. 
(5)  No person appointed shall be entitled to any indemnification from the city for any injury or property damage sustained as a result of enforcement activities. Each authorized person shall specifically acknowledge that such person has no rights to any claim of injury or property damage resulting from handicap enforcement activities. 
(6)  The city shall not be liable or accountable for or on account of any act or omission of any person appointed pursuant to this section in connection with such person's enforcement of the handicapped parking laws. Each authorized person shall specifically hold harmless the city, its employees and agents, from liability for any such act or omission by such authorized person. 
(e)  Every person appointed under this section shall be required to wear a lapel badge for identification purposes while in the performance of his duty. 
(Ord. No. 20-92, § 15-102, 8-24-92) 
Secs. 20-139—20-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RAILROADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Railroad companies, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-156. - Maintenance of crossings, bridges, trestles. 
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies entering the city to make, keep and maintain good and suitable crossings at all streets where their roadbeds cross; and they shall also keep and maintain all bridges and trestles in good and secure condition. 
(Code 1972, § 22-1) 
Sec. 20-157. - Notice of needed construction, repair. 
In all cases in which a railroad company is required or liable by law to build bridges in the city or to keep bridges or crossings in the city in repair, on or across a street crossed by the tracks of such railroad company when the building of a new bridge, or the repair of the bridge already built is declared by the city council to be necessary or proper, railroad company shall be notified by the city council to commence the building or repair of such bridge within ten days and to prosecute the same in good faith to completion. 
(Code 1972, § 22-2) 
Sec. 20-158. - Service, contents of notice to construct, repair. 
The notice provided for in section 20-157 shall be in writing, and shall be served by any policeman of the city, or the principal officer of such railroad company in the city, or by leaving the same at the principal office of the company in the city. Such notice shall contain a general plan or character of the bridge to be built or repaired and material of the same, or a description of the work to be done at a crossing, and also where the bridge to be built or repaired, or the crossing to be improved, is located. 
(Code 1972, § 22-3) 
Sec. 20-159. - Construction, repair by city in lieu of railroad. 
(a)  Authority. Should any railroad company fail or refuse to commence in good faith the building or repairing of a bridge or the repairing of a crossing within the time specified in the notice provided for in section 20-157 and in accordance with the provisions of sections 20-156, 20-157 and 20-158, or to notify the city of a refusal to comply with the notice served, then and in that event the city will proceed to do such work of building or repairing such bridge or crossing at the charge of such railroad company. 
(b)  Collection of cost. Within five days after the completion of such work the street superintendent shall report under oath in writing to the city clerk the amount and value of the services performed or expense incurred in such work, whereupon the clerk shall issue execution for the amount of such value or expense against such defaulting railroad company, to which execution a defense may be made and filed, on oath to the city council and heard by the city council on ten days' notice to such railroad company by the city, such notice to be in writing and served in the manner prescribed in section 20-158. If the issue of the illegality be found against the company filing the same, then the execution shall proceed, and shall be levied on any property of such company in the city and after advertising, as in cases of land sold for taxes, the same may be sold to satisfy the execution. 
(Code 1972, § 22-4) 
Sec. 20-160. - Failure to maintain bridges, crossings. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company whose road crosses any streets in the city, to fail, neglect or refuse to have suitable crossings erected and kept in good repair at the different points on such roads where they cross the streets and public roads; or for any railroad company to refuse, neglect or fail to put in good order, all roads turned for the benefit of such railroad, or for any railroad company to neglect or refuse to build and keep in good repair, bridges of a proper width across their respective roads rendered necessary by excavation in building such road across the city streets. 
(Code 1972, § 22-5) 
Sec. 20-161. - Obstructions at railroad crossings. 
The several railroad companies whose roads are in the city shall not allow any street to be obstructed by any cars or other things left at any of the crossings, and if it shall become necessary in loading or unloading freight to stop longer than five minutes, it shall be the duty of the conductor of such train of cars to uncouple his cars at the point of crossing to allow vehicles to pass without unnecessary delay or inconvenience. 
(Code 1972, § 22-6) 
Sec. 20-162. - Laying, repairing railroad track. 
(a)  Application to do work. Any railroad company that may desire to lay any railroad track, or to repair any track already laid with the city, shall, before doing so, present in writing to the city council an application to do such work, which application shall show the location of the proposed track or the proposed work to be done on the track already laid. The city council may authorize, modify or reject and refuse such application as may in their judgment be for the best interest of the public. 
(b)  Restoration of street and sidewalk. Any company to whom permission is given to do such work shall restore the sidewalk or street where any such work is done to the same condition that existed before such work was done, and in repairing any such street or sidewalk shall use material similar to that already installed. 
(c)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any work, either by excavating earth or by laying crossties, stringers or rails, or to remove cross ties, for the purpose of laying or repairing railroad tracks, within the city without first making application to and obtaining the consent of the city council thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 22-7) 
Sec. 20-163. - Report of additional track laid. 
It shall be the duty of each railroad company owning or operating trains in and through the city, to report the number of additional feet of track laid in the city, to the city clerk within ten days from the time that the work of laying additional track is completed. 
(Code 1972, § 22-8) 
Sec. 20-164. - Locomotive, railroad cars; maximum speed prescribed. 
It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any locomotive or railroad car within the city, at a greater rate of speed than 25 miles per hour. The provisions hereof shall apply both to the railroad company and to the employee of such company in charge of such locomotive or railroad car. 
(Code 1972, § 22-9) 
Sec. 20-165. - Blowing whistles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a locomotive engine to blow the whistle thereof within the city, except in cases of emergency to prevent injury to persons or property. 
(Code 1972, § 22-10) 
Sec. 20-166. - Flagmen at designated crossings. 
(a)  Duty of railroad. At those railroad crossings in the city not equipped with mechanical devices to indicate the approach of a train, it shall be the duty of the railroad company responsible for such crossing to place a flagman on duty at such crossing, between the hours from 6:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. each day. 
(b)  Duty of flagman. It shall be the duty of the flagman during such hours to flag such crossing at the approach of any railroad car or locomotive so that persons attempting to cross such tracks at such point will be warned of the approaching railroad car or locomotive. 
(c)  Police authority of flagman. The flagman while on duty shall be vested with all the authority of a police officer of the city and upon being employed shall appear before the mayor and take and subscribe the oath of a police officer. 
(Code 1972, § 22-11) 
Chapter 21 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Act Nos. 262 and 263, passed by the Georgia General Assembly and approved Mar. 27, 1985, provide that Ga. Laws 1972, p. 1410, which authorized the City of Newnan and its board of water, sewerage, and light commission to operate the city's water, sewerage and electricity systems; and Ga. Laws 1974, p. 1700, which designates the board of water, sewerage, and light commission of the City of Newnan as the sole operational governing authority of the utility systems of the city; and Act No. 58 passed by the Georgia General Assembly and approved February 24, 1987, provides that Ga. Laws 1978, p. 2347, which provides that the board of water, sewerage and light commission is not empowered to discontinue utility services to the city or change the city any fee therefor, nor empowers the board to take title to and hold real property in its own name, or to set salaries of the persons serving as commissioners on the board, shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the State Constitution, but are specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the State Constitution. 
Charter reference— Extension of police jurisdiction beyond corporate limits for protection of water supply, § 1.5; extension of water, sewerage and electrical distribution systems beyond corporate limits, § 1.6; control of municipal utilities, § 1.4(a); water, sewerage and light commission, § 3.8(3). 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; planning, Ch. 16; solid waste, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Power of city or county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Water, sewerage and light commissioners—Organization. 
(a)  Present commissioners continued. The water, sewerage and light commissioners holding office in the city shall continue in office until the expiration of their respective terms of office and until their successors shall be elected and qualified. 
(b)  Terms of office. The term of office of any water, sewerage and light commissioner shall be three years, except that those elected to fill unexpired terms shall hold office only for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Eligibility and compensation. No person holding a commission as an officer of the city shall be eligible to election as a water, sewerage and light commissioner. Such commissioners shall receive such compensation as shall be determined by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1972, § 26-1) 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.2. 
Sec. 21-2. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  Powers. The water, sewerage and light commission shall have complete control and management of the water, sewerage and light works of the city. They are hereby empowered to charge such sum as they deem just and proper for the use of water, sewerage and lights. They shall have authority and power to make all rules and regulations as in their discretion are necessary for the proper management and control of water, sewerage and lights, and shall have power to enforce such rules and regulations by refusing to supply, or by discontinuing the supply to any person who fails or refuses to comply with the rules and regulations. 
(b)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the water, sewerage and light commission to take charge of the water, sewerage and light works of the city, and to manage and control them for the best interest of the city, and the citizens thereof. They shall formulate rules for their own government, and for the government of employees and the management and control of the water, sewerage and light works of the city. They shall elect all employees who work for the commission, and fix their compensation. They shall purchase all material and supplies necessary for the operation and maintenance of the water, sewerage and light works. They shall lay such water mains and install such lights as shall be directed by the city council. They shall make or cause to be made to the city council a monthly statement showing the expenditures and revenues of each department; and at the end of the year they shall make to the city council a detailed statement for the year, which statement shall show all expenditures, and all revenues for the year. 
(Code 1972, § 26-2) 
Sec. 21-3. - Same—Scope, effect of rules. 
All rules and regulations of the water, sewerage and light commission shall have all the force and effect of ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 26-3) 
Sec. 21-4. - Right of entry, right to terminate service. 
The water, sewerage and light commission shall have the right at all reasonable hours to enter upon the premises where city water or lights are used or taken, for the purpose of inspecting pipes, wires or fixtures, setting and repairing meters, commencing or discontinuing service, and enforcing the rules generally. Each and every denial of this right will render the offending parties liable to the penalties imposed for the violation of this Code of Ordinances. The water, sewerage and light commission may terminate service in cases of emergency, and for repair or extension of the systems, they being the judges of the times and the necessity, reasonable notice to be given when practicable. 
(Code 1972, § 26-4) 
Sec. 21-5. - Liability for insufficient service. 
Neither the water, sewerage and light commission nor the city shall be liable for insufficient or inadequate service. 
(Code 1972, § 26-5) 
Sec. 21-6. - Unauthorized receipt of utility services. 
If any person after being notified by representatives of the water, sewerage and light commission that any utility service has been discontinued to such person, nevertheless continues to use or receive such service, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to the penalties imposed by section 1-14. Each day that the offending party continues to use or receive such unauthorized utility service shall be deemed a new offense of this section and shall render such person liable for the additional penalties imposed therefor. 
(Code 1972, § 26-6) 
Sec. 21-7. - Delivery of suit or action against water, sewerage and light commission. 
If any suit or action of any nature is brought against the Newnan Board of Water, Sewerage, and Light Commission, service of the summons and complaint shall be made by delivering a copy of the summons attached to a copy of the complaint to the chairman of the commission, who is the chief executive officer, or to the secretary of the commission, who is the clerk thereof, and a copy to the city clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 26-7) 
Sec. 21-8. - Defense of commissioners by city. 
Pursuant to the grant of authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 45-9-21, the water, sewerage and light commission shall undertake to defend any civil, criminal or quasi-criminal actions brought or maintained against the water, sewerage and light commission, any elected or appointed official, or any employees of the water, sewerage and light commission in their individual capacity which arise out of the performance of their duties or are in any way connected therewith, whether based upon negligence, violation of contract rights, or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or statutory rights. However, no defense shall be furnished to any person charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement or other like crime with respect to the property or money of or in which the water, sewerage and light commission has an interest. Such costs of defense shall include but not be limited to attorney's fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation, and all other like costs, expenses and fees. 
(Code 1972, § 26-8) 
Secs. 21-9—21-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 21-36. - Tapping electric wires. 
No electric wires shall be tapped except by an authorized employee of the water, sewerage and light commission under the supervision of the superintendent. 
(Code 1972, § 26-16) 
Sec. 21-37. - Application for service required. 
Electrical current shall not be introduced into any building without application having been first made at the office of the water, sewerage and light commission, and permission to do so has been granted. 
(Code 1972, § 26-17) 
Sec. 21-38. - Installation, maintenance, replacement of meters. 
Meters shall be installed in all premises where electric current is to be used. After the purchase of the first meter the city shall keep the same in repair and replace it with a new one when necessary, except in case of loss by fire, without any further expense to the property owner. No one but an authorized employee of the water, sewerage and light commission shall be allowed to install, remove or handle the meters. Should a meter become out of repair and fail to register, or register improperly, the consumer shall be charged at the average daily rate of consumption as was shown by the meter when the same was in order. 
(Code 1972, § 26-18) 
Sec. 21-39. - Service wires, wiring, etc.; cost, ownership. 
Service wires from the mains to the premises shall be the property of the city, but the cost of all wiring, fixtures, lamps, etc., shall be paid for by the owner of the building or by the consumer. 
(Code 1972, § 26-19) 
Sec. 21-40. - Wiring to conform to rules, minimum standards. 
All wiring shall be done according to the rules and minimum standards prescribed by the city, and no current shall be introduced into any premises until such rules and minimum standards have been complied with. 
(Code 1972, § 26-20) 
Sec. 21-41. - Due date for payment of installation charges. 
All construction work, installation of lights and supplies for the same furnished by the water, sewerage and light commission shall be paid for on or before the first day of the month following the date when the work was completed and materials therefor furnished. 
(Code 1972, § 26-21) 
Sec. 21-42. - Charges for electric service. 
Charges for consumption and use of electricity shall be fixed by the water, sewerage and light commission. 
(Code 1972, § 26-22) 
Sec. 21-43. - Notice of amount of electric bill. 
Notice shall be given to consumers monthly of the amount of such consumers' electric bills for the preceding month. 
(Code 1972, § 26-23) 
Sec. 21-44. - Charge, payment for unauthorized use of electricity. 
If current is used without the knowledge of the water, sewerage and light commission by any person, and it should in any way come to their knowledge that the current had been used, a bill will be made against the user for the time the current has been used or the quantity shown by the meter to have been used, and service shall be discontinued and not resumed until the bill is settled. 
(Code 1972, § 26-25) 
Secs. 21-45—21-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS 

Sec. 21-66. - Determination of meter location. 
The location of the gas meter for any location shall be determined by the gas company. 
(Code 1972, § 26-36) 
Sec. 21-67. - Provision for meter connection. 
(a)  Duty of gas company. In connection with the piping of any structure or building for gas service, provision shall be made at the location designated by the gas company for connecting the gas meter. 
(b)  Drawings. The gas company shall furnish to each fitter applying for same, one copy of a drawing showing the dimensions for such meter connection and shall keep on file at its offices and available for inspection by fitters complete dimension drawings for same, and the fitter shall conform thereto. 
(c)  Stopcock, fittings, etc., on outlet side of meter. The stopcock on the meter riser and all fittings, pipe and appliances from the stopcock to and including a threaded connection on the outlet side of the meter shall be furnished and installed by the gas company and shall be and remain the property of the gas company. 
(Code 1972, § 26-37) 
Sec. 21-68. - Meters to be set, connected by gas company. 
The gas meter will in all cases be connected by the gas company who may refuse to connect to gas piping which does not conform to this chapter. No other person shall connect, disconnect, adjust, alter or tamper with any gas meter, nor with the connection thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 26-38) 
Sec. 21-69. - Service line; installation from main to property line, from property line to meter. 
The service line from the street main to the meter cock may be installed by the consumer, subject to the approval and inspection by the utility, or by the utility at the expense of the consumer. That portion of the service line from the main to the property line shall be and remain the gas company's property, but that portion of the service line from the property line to the meter cock shall be the property of the consumer, and the consumer shall reimburse the gas company for the construction thereof in accordance with an agreement to be made in advance of the construction thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 26-39) 
Secs. 21-70—21-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-91. - Application, permit to tap water, sewer mains. 
No water or sewer mains shall be tapped unless application is made by the owner of the property, or by his authorized agent, according to the form prescribed by the water, sewerage and light commission. After the applicant has complied with this article, a permit will be issued to a plumber to make proper connections inside the premises for which an application was made. 
(Code 1972, § 26-53) 
Sec. 21-92. - Persons who may tap water or sewer mains. 
No water or sewer mains, or distributing pipes, shall be tapped except by an authorized employee of the water, sewerage and light commission under the supervision of the superintendent. 
(Code 1972, § 26-54) 
Sec. 21-93. - Power to revoke permit to connect with water or sewer mains. 
The water, sewerage and light commission shall have the power to revoke or annul any permit to connect with water or sewer mains, and no party interested shall have the right to claim damage in consequence of such permit being revoked or annulled. 
(Code 1972, § 26-55) 
Sec. 21-94. - Stopcock or cutoff between meter and building. 
(a)  A stop and waste cock or cutoff valve must be placed by the property owner between the building and meter, if permissible and possible, not nearer than 20 feet to or 40 feet away from the meter; such cock or valve to be under the control of the tenant or owner, to be used in case of break or other necessity when the pipe to be repaired can be cut off without the necessity of using the city's cutoff. 
(b)  If it becomes necessary for the city's stopcock to be cut off for purposes stated in subsection (a), the same shall be done only by legally authorized personnel of the water, sewerage and light commission, and the charge for cutting off and cutting on the water shall be that reasonable charge which shall be set by the water, sewerage and light commission. A duly licensed plumber may cut on or off water at the city's stopcock to an occupied building or dwelling only, provided the plumber notifies the water, sewerage and light commission prior to using the city's cutoff and further provided the plumber operates the city's cutoff pursuant to water, sewerage and light regulations. 
(Code 1972, § 26-56) 
Sec. 21-95. - Ownership of stopcock, box and meter, of pipe into premises. 
The stopcock, box and meter at or near the curb are the property of the water, sewerage and light commission. The pipe from the property line or meter into the premises of the consumer are his property, and all plumbing and repairs to the same must be made at his expense. 
(Code 1972, § 26-57) 
Sec. 21-96. - Application prerequisite to use of water. 
Water shall not be introduced into any premises without application having first been made at the water, sewerage and light commission office and granted officially. 
(Code 1972, § 26-58) 
Sec. 21-97. - Installation, use of meters. 
Meters shall be attached to all premises wanting water service supply where city water mains are available and in use, and in no case shall two or more houses receive water through the same meter. It shall be unlawful for any person to run or extend water or sewer lines from one lot across lot lines on private property for the purpose of serving more than one house through any water meter without obtaining the approval of the superintendent. Meters shall be set on the sidewalk back of the curbline whenever this can be done, and when this is impracticable, at such locations as may be approved by the superintendent. No one but an authorized employee on the water, sewerage and light commission shall be allowed to install, remove or handle meters. 
(Code 1972, § 26-59) 
Sec. 21-98. - Meter changes by plumber. 
A licensed plumber before making any meter changes, shall obtain a permit from the water, sewerage and light commission and must state plainly in his application the work to be done. This application must be made to the superintendent, who will issue the permit if the location is practicably accessible to a water or sewer line. Under no circumstances shall work be done without such permit. The plumber shall report all uses of water which may come to his notice that are contrary to the rules. 
(Code 1972, § 26-60) 
Sec. 21-99. - Turning water supply on or off. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone, unless authorized by the water, sewerage and light commission, to turn on or off water at meter, sidewalk or alley, anywhere city water lines are used to furnish water. A duly licensed plumber is authorized to turn on or off water at meter, sidewalk or alley to any occupied building or dwelling in the city, provided the plumber notifies the water, sewerage and light commission prior to turning on or off the water and further provided the plumber does so pursuant to water, sewerage and light regulations for turning on or off water at meters. 
(Code 1972, § 26-61) 
Sec. 21-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-17, § II, adopted June 20, 2000, amended the Code by repealing former § 21-100 in its entirety. Former § 21-100 pertained to use of water for certain purposes, and derived from the Code of 1972, § 26-63. 
Sec. 21-101. - Charges for water and sewer service. 
Charges for the consumption and use of water and for sewer service shall be fixed by the water, sewerage and light commission. 
(Code 1972, § 26-64) 
Charter reference— Power of city to levy sewer service charges, etc., § 1.4(25). 
Sec. 21-102. - Interfering with distribution of water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or interfere with the public founts, hydrants, aqueduct, pipe, conduit, machinery or other property used or required for procuring and distributing water within the city, or between the city and the waterworks, or at the waterworks, or for any person maliciously and wilfully to divert the water, or any part thereof, from the waterworks or to corrupt or render the water impure or unwholesome. 
(Code 1972, § 26-66) 
Sec. 21-103. - Maintenance of water meters; charges when meter is out of repair. 
After the purchase of the first water meter by the property owner, the city shall keep the same in repair, and replace it with a new one when necessary, without any further expense to the property owner. Should a meter become out of repair and fail to register or register improperly, the consumer shall be charged at the average daily consumption as had been shown by the meter when the same was in order. 
(Code 1972, § 26-67) 
Sec. 21-104. - Notice of amount of water account. 
Notice shall be given to all water customers on a monthly basis of the respective amounts of their water accounts. 
(Code 1972, § 26-68) 
Sec. 21-105. - Buildings occupied by two or more tenants; responsibility for water charges. 
When any building is occupied by two or more tenants using water through one meter, the owner of such building shall be liable for the payment of water used by such tenants. In case the owner of a building occupied by two or more tenants shall refuse to be liable for water used by the tenants, then each tenant shall be required to have a separate water meter installed. 
(Code 1972, § 26-69) 
Sec. 21-106. - Landlords, agents renting property; notice as to use of water required. 
Landlords or their agents renting property shall in every case give the water, sewerage and light commission written notice of the renewal of the tenant, or of nonuse of water, and shall be liable for water charges until such notice is given. 
(Code 1972, § 26-70) 
Sec. 21-107. - Charge, payment for unauthorized use of water. 
If water is used without the knowledge of the water, sewerage and light commission by any person and it should in any way come to their knowledge that water had been so used, a bill will be made against the premises for the time the water had been used, or the quantity shown by the meter to have been used, and water service shall be discontinued and not resumed until the bill is paid. 
(Code 1972, § 26-72) 
Sec. 21-108. - Watershed protection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a slaughterhouse or slaughter pen, or stockyard or stock pen on any ground in the city draining into the waterworks reservoir, or on any land held for the purpose of enabling the city to preserve the purity of such waterworks water. 
(Code 1972, § 26-74) 
Sec. 21-109. - Interfering with city sanitary sewer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tap, interfere with or molest any city sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1972, § 26-75) 
Sec. 21-110. - Regulations for use of sewerage system. 
(a)  Use is permissive. The right to connect with and use the sanitary sewerage mains or system shall be permissive only and no person shall acquire any vested right to use such mains or system by prescription or long uninterrupted use of same. 
(b)  Permission revocable. Permission to any person to connect with and use the mains or system shall be subject to the right of the water, sewerage and light commission and/or the city council to revoke any such permission to any person at any time and for any cause in their discretion, that renders the revoking of such permission for the best interest of the city. 
(c)  Misuse. No person permitted to use the mains or system shall empty into the same any refuse water or matter that creates a nuisance, either at the source, at any point along such main, at the outflow thereof or on lands beyond the outflow, and if any person permitted to connect with and use such mains or system shall in connection with the use thereof, create a nuisance, the water, sewerage, and light commission or city council, or either, may, without notice, revoke the permit to such person, and if such person creates such nuisance or is suspected of creating such nuisance either of such authorities shall break the connection at the source thereof or at any point along such mains or system to prevent its use. 
(d)  Responsibilities of city. Permission shall be granted only on the express condition that if the use thereof creates a nuisance neither the water, sewerage and light commission nor the city council nor the city shall be required to extend its system to obviate the nuisance, or provide disposal plants to avoid the results of any such nuisance created by such person. Permission shall be granted only upon the agreement that neither the water, sewerage and light commission, the city council nor the city shall be liable for damage to any person whose permission to connect with and use such mains or system is revoked for any cause. 
(e)  Effect of pollution. After any applicant has connected with and is using the system or any part thereof for the purpose of caring for and disposing of any water that is mixed, polluted and/or contaminated with dyes, chemicals or any other things used in manufacture and complaint is made by any person that the outflow or discharge from the sanitary system of the city creates a nuisance, then the applicant shall discontinue the use of the system for the purpose of disposing of such water for a sufficient time for the city to determine whether the nuisance complained of is created by the use of the system for such purpose, and the applicant shall pay the cost incurred by the city to determine whether the applicant's use creates such nuisance, including any and all expense the city may incur to analyze the contents of the outflow or that may be paid to any expert to determine the origin of the nuisance complained of. 
(f)  Burden on system. Any permission to use the system shall be revoked if the use thereof becomes a burden to the system. 
(Code 1972, § 26-76) 
Sec. 21-111. - Pretreatment of industrial waste prior to discharge into sewerage system. 
It shall be unlawful for any industrial or business establishment to discharge into the sewerage system of the city any industrial waste for treatment unless and until such waste shall have been pretreated by the industrial or business establishment in compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations and cleared for treatment by appropriate federal and state agencies. 
(Code 1972, § 26-77) 
Sec. 21-112. - Supervision of the installation of utility systems in new subdivisions and multifamily developments located in the city. 
(a)  Prior to the installation of any water or sewerage system (hereinafter referred to as "utility system") in any subdivision or multifamily development hereafter developed or constructed in the city, the plans for such system shall be submitted to the superintendent or inspector of the water, sewerage and light commission. Once the approval of the superintendent or inspector is obtained, the owner/developer of the proposed subdivision or multifamily development shall be permitted to begin construction of such utility system; provided, however, the developer and/or owner must either: 
(1)  Elect for the water, sewerage and light commission to supervise the construction of the utility system by requesting the commission to take charge of all facets of the construction project from the invitation for bids to the final approval, all on behalf of the owner/developer. If this alternative is selected, the following procedure shall be adhered to: 
a.  The owner/developer shall ask that the commission make an estimate of the total cost of the project; 
b.  Once such an estimate is obtained, the owner/developer will deposit in an escrow account approved by the commission an amount of funds sufficient to pay such estimated costs; 
c.  The commission will then publicly advertise for bids for the construction of such project; 
d.  When the bids are received, the commission shall select the lowest and best bid; 
e.  If the estimated cost is not sufficient to pay the bid price selected, the owner/developer will deposit such additional funds into escrow as are necessary to cover the bid price and all other costs of construction including supervision, if any; 
f.  The bidder chosen will then be awarded the contract and will perform the construction of the project under the supervision of the commission until the utility system is installed in accordance with the approved plans and final approval of system is given by the commission; or 
(2)  Elect that the construction of the utility system will be done by a contractor selected, paid and supervised by the owner/developer, but with additional direct supervision by a representative of the water, sewerage and light commission, the total cost of which supervision shall be paid by the owner/developer to the commission. The owner/developer may elect this alternative (2) in lieu of alternative (1) prior to any of the steps enumerated in alternative (1) above, but shall pay all costs incurred by commission up to that point prior to being allowed to utilize this alternative (2). 
(b)  In either event, no person shall be allowed to occupy or inhabit subdivision or the multifamily development until such time as the final approval of the utility system as installed is given by the proper representative of the water, sewerage and light commission. 
(Code 1972, § 26-78) 
Sec. 21-113. - Floodproof design of water supply and sanitary sewerage systems. 
Within areas determined by the city to be subject to periodic flooding, new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(Code 1972, § 26-79) 
Sec. 21-114. - Backflow and cross connections prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause to be made or knowingly to allow to exist any cross connections for any purpose whatsoever between any water line of the water, sewerage and light commission and any other line or source of supply or potential supply, or to cause to be made, or knowingly to allow to exist any connection between any water line of the water, sewerage and light commission and any other piping system capable of transporting liquid emanating from any other source of supply. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause to be made or to knowingly allow to exist any connection or cross connection between any water line of the water, sewerage and light commission and any storage tank, standpipe, reservoir, pool or any other tank or container which contains, or which may be subject to contamination of any kind. No person shall cause or knowingly allow to exist the passage of any water line supplied by the water, sewerage and light commission through or into any tank, storage tank, standpipe, reservoir, pool, vat, or any other tank or container that may contain, or which may be subject to contamination of any kind. No water connection shall be made by any person unless it be in such manner as to prevent back siphoning into the water supply system of the water, sewerage and light commission. 
(b)  Prior to the commencement of work on any pipe, connection or plumbing to any system to which water is supplied from the supply of the water, sewerage and light commission, plans must be presented to and approved by the building department of the city, and by the water, sewerage and light commission. Such plans must include provisions for a backflow preventer. 
(c)  Any person whose premises now supplied with water from the water, sewerage and light commission in which there exists a condition in violation of this section shall correct such condition within the time designated by the building department of the city and the water, sewerage and light commission. If the violation consists of water lines passing through or into tanks, storage tanks, standpipes, reservoirs, pools, vats or any other tank or container that may contain, or which may be subject to contamination of any kind, such condition shall be corrected by causing such line to be removed from such tank, storage tank, standpipe, reservoir, pool, vat or any other tank or container. 
(d)  Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the water, sewerage and light commission shall, at the request of the water, sewerage and light commission and the building department of the city, install or cause to be installed at their own expense a back-flow preventer approved by American Water Works Association and water, sewerage and light commission. 
(e)  Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be given notice in writing by the building department of the city and the water, sewerage and light commission that unless full compliance of this section as described in such notice is made within ten days from date therein, the water, sewerage and light commission may discontinue its water supply to the premises covered by such notice. 
(f)  Any person whose meter is connected with a backflow preventer shall have such device inspected each 12 months following installation, and shall furnish the water, sewerage and light commission and the building department of the city with proof in writing that the device is in proper working order. Failure to do so shall be sufficient reason for the water, sewerage and light commission to discontinue service until such test is completed. All costs in connection with testing and repair shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(g)  The building department of the city and the water, sewerage and light commission shall have the authority to go upon the premises of any person to inspect any and all plumbing or piping to check for violations of this section. 
(h)  Any person violating this section shall be liable to the penalties imposed by section 1-14. 
(i)  Any plumber who violates any subsection of this section by his work shall be subject to having his license revoked. 
(Code 1972, § 26-80) 
Sec. 21-115. - Use of phosphates. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local governmental entity is required by the environmental protection division to reduce phosphorus in its wastewater being discharged into the waters of the state, such local government entity shall pass an ordinance mandating the retail sale of low phosphorus household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorus reduction process. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight. The city finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the city that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablets, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
a.  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes. 
b.  A detergent used in dairy, beverage or food processing cleaning equipment. 
c.  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner or metal conditioner. 
d.  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics or health care facilities or in agricultural production. 
e.  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning. 
f.  A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside of the state. 
g.  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory and engineering laboratory. 
h.  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospital, health care facilities, or veterinary hospital. 
(2)  Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(c)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. 
(d)  Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Civil remedy. In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (d) of this section, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this section. 
(f)  Right to damages. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right to any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this section and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding thereof. 
(Ord. No. 8-90, § 26-81, 1-22-90) 
Sec. 21-116. - Fat, oils, and grease management. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Food service facility or facility, means any food service facility which prepares and/or packages food or beverages for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences. Food service facilities shall include, but are not limited to; food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, grocery stores, bakeries, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches, schools and all other food service facilities not listed above. 
Garbage disposal, means a device which shreds or grinds up waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the city's wastewater collection system. 
GMP official, means a member of the staff of Newnan Utilities grease management program, appointed by the GMP official of public utilities to implement a grease management program. 
Gray water, means all of the liquid contained in a grease interceptor that lies below the floating grease layer and above the food solids layer. 
Grease, means a material either liquid or solid, composed primarily of fat, oil and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms "fats oils and grease" (FOG), "oil and grease" or "oil and grease substances" shall all be included within this definition. 
Grease hauler, means a person who collects the contents of a grease interceptor or trap and transports it to an approved recycling or disposal facility. A grease hauler may also provide other services to a food service facility related to grease interceptor maintenance. 
Grease interceptor, means a device located underground and outside of a food service facility designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the wastestream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. Interceptors shall have at least two inspection hatch on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning and maintenance by a grease hauler. Grease interceptors will be a minimum of 1,500 gallons. 
Grease trap, means a device located in a food service facility or under a sink designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the wastestream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. Traps shall have a removable lid on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning and maintenance. 
(b)  Purpose and applicability. 
(1)  Purpose. This section establishes uniform registration, maintenance and monitoring requirements for controlling the discharge of grease from food service facilities discharging into the city's wastewater collection system and commercial grease haulers. The objectives of this section are: 
a.  To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of grease into the city's wastewater collection system; 
b.  To prevent clogging or blocking of the city's sewer lines due to grease buildup causing backup and flooding of streets, residences and commercial buildings, resulting in potential liability to the city; 
c.  To implement a procedure to recover the costs incurred in cleaning and maintaining sewer lines and disposing of grease blockages; 
d.  To implement a procedure to recover costs for any liability incurred by the city for damage caused by grease blockages resulting in the flooding of streets, residences or commercial buildings; and 
e.  To establish fees for the recovery of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(2)  Applicability. This shall apply to all food service facilities that are connected to the Newnan Utilities collection system. 
(c)  Grease traps and interceptors. 
(1)  Requirements. All food service facilities are required to have a grease trap or grease interceptor. The requirements in this section are in addition to any applicable requirements of the Georgia Plumbing Code and the Standard Plumbing Code. 
a.  New facilities. On or after the effective date of this section, food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to install, operate and maintain a grease interceptor or grease trap according to the requirements contained in this section. Grease interceptors or grease traps shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Existing facilities. For the purposes of sizing and installation of grease interceptors, all food service facilities existing within the city prior to the effective date of this section shall be permitted to operate and maintain existing grease interceptors or grease traps provided their grease interceptors or grease traps are in efficient operating condition. 
On or after the effective date of this section, the city may require an existing food service facility to install, operate and maintain a new grease interceptor or trap that complies with the requirements of this section or to modify or repair any noncompliant plumbing or existing interceptor or trap within 90 days of written notification by the city when any one or more of the following conditions exist. 
1.  The facility is found to be contributing oils and grease in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the wastewater collection system. 
2.  The facility does not have a grease interceptor or trap. 
3.  The facility has an undersized, irreparable or defective grease interceptor or trap. 
4.  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the city. 
5.  The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership. 
6.  The existing facility does not have plumbing connections to a grease interceptor or trap in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Plumbing connections. Grease interceptors or traps shall be located in the food service facility's lateral sewer line between all fixtures which may introduce grease into the sewer system and the connection to the city's wastewater collection system. Such fixtures shall include but not be limited to, sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixture which is determined to be a potential source of grease. Wastewater from sanitary facilities and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the grease interceptor or trap under any circumstances. 
(3)  Grease traps. Grease traps shall be prohibited for new food service facilities, except for those facilities where inadequate space is available for the installation of a grease interceptor. Approval of the installation of a grease trap instead of a grease interceptor at a new food service facility shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Trap design and location. Grease traps shall conform to the standards in the state plumbing code. Grease traps shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Grease traps shall be equipped with a cover that can be opened for inspection and sampling and a mechanism for a secure closing. 
b.  Trap capacity. The capacity of the grease trap shall be related to the flow rate as indicated in Table 1 and the appendix of the PDI Standards G101 document. 
c.  Flow-through rate. Flow-through rates shall be calculated in accordance with the procedures in the PDI Standard G101. 
d.  Flow control device. Grease traps shall be equipped with a device to control the rate of flow through the unit. The rate of flow shall not exceed the manufacturers rated capacity recommended in gallons per minute for the unit. 
e.  Venting. The flow-control device and the grease trap shall be vented in accordance with the state plumbing code current edition. The vent shall terminate not less than six inches above the flood-rim level or in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
f.  Inspection, cleaning and maintenance. Newnan Utilities will be responsible for inspection and cleaning of grease traps. This will be performed at a frequency deemed appropriate by representatives of Newnan Utilities. All repairs and maintenance of grease traps are the responsibility of the owner. A written notice to repair will be issued by Newnan Utilities. Once this notice has been issued the owner has 30 days to complete repairs. 
g.  Inspection. Grease traps shall be inspected by Newnan Utilities as necessary to assure proper efficiency of the grease trap is being achieved. 
h.  Repairs. The food service facility shall be responsible for the cost and scheduling of all repairs to its grease trap(s). Repairs required by a GMP official shall be completed within 30 calendar days after the date of written notice of required repairs is received by the facility, unless the city approves in writing of a different schedule. 
i.  Disposal. Grease and solid materials removed from a grease trap shall be disposed of in the solid waste disposal system. 
j.  Location. Grease traps must be located at the furthest possible point from the sink in order for the trap to work at a high degree of efficiency. 
(4)  Grease interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be installed at all new food service facilities except where physical space is limited. All new and existing grease interceptors shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Interceptor design and location. Grease interceptors shall have a minimum of two compartments and shall be capable of separation and retention of grease and storage of settled solids. Interceptor design shall conform with the requirements of the state plumbing code. A control manhole over each compartment for monitoring purposes shall be required and installed at the owner/operator's sole expense. Covers shall have a gas tight fit. The grease interceptor shall be designed, constructed and installed for adequate load-bearing capacity. Flow control devices shall be required where the water flow through the interceptor may exceed its rated flow. Interceptors shall be installed in a location outside of the building which provides easy access at all times for inspections, cleaning and proper maintenance, including pumping. 
b.  Interceptor capacity. The owner/operator of the facility shall furnish definite and complete information on the facility as set forth herein. The owner/operator shall be responsible for the accuracy thereof. If the size of the initially installed grease interceptor fails, in Newnan Utilities' opinion, to adequately perform, the owner/operator shall install a grease interceptor which in Newnan Utilities opinion will adequately perform. Grease interceptor capacity calculations shall then be performed by Newnan Utilities based on size and type of operation according to the state plumbing code. Minimum capacity of any one unit shall be 750 gallons. Where sufficient capacity cannot be achieved with a single unit, installation of grease interceptors in series is required. Interceptor capacity calculations shall be performed by the GMP official prior to the installation of the interceptor(s). The capacity of the grease interceptor required for food manufacturing or processing facilities which are not covered by the state plumbing code shall be approved by the GMP official according to the mass and type of food prepared, the wastewater volume produced from food preparation or manufacture, total hours of operation per day and a load factor depending on the installed equipment. 
Grease interceptor sizing formula: 
(# of seats)(gallons of water/meal)(Hours/2)(loading factor) 
# of seats: The total seating capacity of the restaurant gallons of water/meal: estimated # of gallons of water used per meal served. 
5 if full service restaurant 
2 if take out restaurant only 
Hours/2: # of hours restaurant is open for business divided by 2. 
Loading factor: 
1.25: Interstate highway 
1.0: Freeways and recreational areas 
0.8: Main highway 
0.5: Other roads/streets 
c.  Inspection, pumping and maintenance. Newnan Utilities shall be responsible for pumping, cleaning, and inspection of all grease interceptors. The food service facility will be responsible for installation and repairs of grease interceptors. Pumping services shall include the initial complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom sludges and solids from the interceptor. 
Waste haulers must have written permission from Newnan Utilities, in order to return any gray water back into the grease interceptor. This permission will be granted on a case by case basis and will depend upon the methods by which the solids and grease are separated in order to assure that clear water is the only material returned to the grease interceptor. 
d.  Interceptor pumping frequency. Each facilities' grease interceptor will be pumped at least once every 12 weeks. Newnan Utilities also has the right to pump a facilities' grease interceptor more frequently pumping if Newnan Utilities determines it to be necessary or prudent. 
e.  Variance procedure. If a food service facility determines that pumping once every 12 weeks is excessive then the facility may make written application for a variance from the above described pumping schedule. 
1.  The food service facility will submit an application on a form provided by Newnan Utilities. 
2.  The food service facility will also be required to pay a variance fee of $300.00 plus any sampling done by Newnan Utilities. 
3.  At the time which the grease interceptor is due to be pumped a representative of Newnan Utilities will collect a sample from the discharge point of the grease interceptor. After the sample is collected it will be analyzed for fats, oils, and grease content by a laboratory chosen by Newnan Utilities. 
4.  For the variance to be considered, the sample must show a fats, oils, and grease content of less than 100 mg/l. If the sample does show a level below this then a sample will be taken once a week until the sample exceeds the 100 mg/l mark established. Thus the time elapsed between the last pumping and the time at which the sample exceeds the above mentioned mark will then be the frequency at which that particular trap is pumped. 
5.  If at any time the food service facility changes ownership or does any type of renovation the schedule will revert to the original schedule established by Newnan Utilities. 
6.  If the initial sample taken from a grease interceptor is not below the 100 mg/l mark then the variance will not be considered. 
f.  Inspection. Grease interceptors shall be inspected by a GMP official as necessary. 
g.  Repairs. Each food service facility shall be responsible for the cost and scheduling of all repairs to its grease interceptor(s). Repairs required by a GMP official shall be corrected within 30 calendar days after the date a written notice requiring the repairs is received by the facility or unless notice from Newnan Utilities establishes a different compliance date. 
h.  Disposal. Wastes removed from each grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Chapter of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to receive such wastes or at a location designated by Newnan Utilities for such purposes. Neither grease or solid materials removed from interceptors shall be returned to any grease interceptor, private sewer line or to any portion of Newnan Utilities wastewater collection system or water reclamation facilities without prior written permission GMP official. 
i.  Interceptor additives. Any chemicals, enzymes, emulsifiers, live bacteria or other grease cutters or additives are not permitted by Newnan Utilities unless authorized by a GMP official. MSDS sheets and any other applicable information concerning the composition, frequency of use and mode of action of the proposed additive shall be sent to the city together with a written statement outlining the proposed use of the additive(s). Based upon the information received and any other information solicited from the potential user or supplier, the city shall permit or deny the use of the additive in writing. Permission to use any specific additive may be withdrawn by the city at any time. 
j.  Alternative grease removal devices or technologies. Alternative devices and technologies such as automatic grease removal systems shall be subject to written approval by a GMP official prior to installation. Approval of the device shall be based on demonstrated (proven) removal efficiencies and reliability of operation. The city may approve these types of devices depending on manufacturer's specifications on a case by case basis. 
(d)  Food service facility application procedure. 
(1)  Application form. Newnan Utilities shall provide an registration form for all food service facilities. The appropriate form shall be sent to all food service facilities identified by Newnan Utilities. All food service facilities identified by Newnan Utilities shall submit a completed registration form to Newnan Utilities at the address shown on the form within 30 calendar days of receipt of the form. Each application form submitted shall include the following information: 
(2)  Entry. Each food service facility shall allow the GMP official and other duly authorized employees or agents of Newnan Utilities bearing proper credentials and identifications access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this section. The refusal of any food service facility to allow the GMP official entry to or upon the facility's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling effluents or inspecting and copying records or performing such other duties as shall be required by this section shall constitute a violation of this section. The GMP official may seek a warrant or use such other legal procedures as may be advisable and reasonably necessary to discharge his duties pursuant to this section. 
(3)  Inspection. All food service facilities shall be inspected as follows: 
a.  Inspections. The GMP official shall inspect food service facilities on both a scheduled and unscheduled basis. If any deficiencies are recorded by the GMP official during an inspection, the GMP official shall provide the food service facility a written notice to correct the deficiency within 30 calendar days, and a tentative date for a first reinspection. 
b.  Re-inspections. The GMP official shall re-inspect food service facilities which received deficiency notices after the original inspection. The GMP official shall inspect any repairs or other deficiencies and shall provide written notice of compliance or noncompliance as the case may be. In the event that the food service facility has returned to compliance with all of the deficiencies, there shall be no charge for the re-inspection. 
In the event of continuing noncompliance, successive re-inspections will be scheduled and appropriate fees shall be charged to the food service facility concerned for the first and all successive re-inspections. A first re-inspection shall be performed after a minimum of 30 calendar days have elapsed to allow for corrective action by the food service facility to be completed. 
(4)  Monitoring. The city shall have the right to sample and analyze the wastewater from any food service facility at any time to determine levels of grease contained within a facilities discharge. 
(e)  Grease haulers. 
(1)  Spill reporting. Any accident, spill, or other discharge of grease or gray water which occurs within the city shall be reported to Newnan Utilities by the grease hauler as soon as possible but not longer than 24 hours after the incident. The grease hauler shall comply with all procedures contained in federal, state and local regulations. The grease hauler shall be responsible for all clean-up procedures and costs. 
(2)  Record keeping. Grease haulers shall retain and make available for inspection and copying, all records related to grease interceptor pumping and grease disposal from businesses connected to Newnan Utilities wastewater collection service system. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. Newnan Utilities may require additional record keeping and reporting, as necessary, to ensure compliance with the terms of this section. 
(3)  Vehicle inspection. Grease haulers shall permit the city to inspect grease hauler's registered vehicles. 
(f)  Fees. 
(1)  Fees and billing. The fees provided for in this section are separate and distinct from all other fees chargeable by the city. All fees shall become immediately due and owing to the city upon receipt of invoice(s) for rendition of services or expenditure by the city and shall become delinquent if not fully paid within 45 days after receipt. Any delinquent amount shall be subject to a late charge of 15 percent. Fees applicable to this section are as follows: 
a.  Food service facility registration. A fee of $100.00 will be charged to all food service facilities discharging into Newnan Utilities collection system upon completion of the food service facility registration form. 
b.  Variance fee. A food service facility applying for a variance shall submit an application fee of $300.00. 
c.  Failure to repair fee. Any food service facility failing to adhere to repair request within the allotted 30 days will be charged $50.00 per day over and beyond 30 days. 
d.  Pumping fees. Facilities shall be charged $0.23 per gallon pumped and a $75.00 entry fee for pumping traps/interceptors located inside a facility. 
e.  All fees provided for herein may be adjusted by the city water, sewerage and light commission as it deems to be appropriate. 
(g)  Legal proceedings. 
(1)  Search warrant. Newnan Utilities, through the city attorney may seek to obtain a search warrant from the appropriate authority to gain access to a food service facility for the purposes of inspection and monitoring if such lawful entry has previously been denied by the food service facility. 
(2)  Injunctive and other relief. The city, through the city attorney, may file a petition in the name of the city in the municipal court, the superior court of the county or such other courts as may have jurisdiction seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages, or other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of this section or other applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought to recover any and all damages suffered by the city as a result of any action or inaction of any person who causes or suffers damage to occur to the city's wastewater collection system, or for any other expense, loss or damage of any kind or nature suffered by the city. 
(3)  Criminal mischief. No person shall maliciously, willfully or deliberately break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part Newnan Utilities sewer system or utilities department. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of destruction of public property. 
(4)  Citations. Violators of the provisions of this section shall be subject to be issued a citation to appear in the city municipal court to answer to the charge. 
(5)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this section are not mutually exclusive. The GMP official may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliance person. 
(h)  Penalties—Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this section, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this section or shall violate any other provision of this section, shall be subject to be issued a citation to appear in the city municipal court and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty in an amount not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(i)  Administrative enforcement and abatement. 
(1)  Service revocation. Any services provided by Newnan Utilities may be suspended for the following reasons: 
a.  Falsification of any information submitted as part of the registration. 
b.  Failure to comply with any requirements or regulations concerning discharges to the Newnan Utilities wastewater collection system. 
c.  Failure to comply with any requirements or regulations concerning grease interceptors. 
d.  Failure to pay required fees, or any assessed surcharges in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 03-22, § I, 7-22-03) 
Secs. 21-117—21-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWERAGE IMPACT FEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, adopted February 27, 2001, amended the Code by repealing former div. 2, §§ 21-126—21-138, and added a new div. 2, §§ 21-126—21-141, to read as herein set out. Former div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 9-89, adopted February 28, 1989. 

Sec. 21-126. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Sewer Impact Fee Ordinance of the City of Newnan, Georgia." 
(b)  The city has the authority to adopt this division pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 71. 
(c)  This division shall apply to the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 9-14-04) 
Sec. 21-127. - Intents and purposes. 
(a)  This division is intended to implement and be consistent with the city comprehensive land use plan adopted in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 70 and pursuant to the minimum standards and procedures established by the department of community affairs. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements necessary to provide wastewater treatment capacity and transmission and required facilities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-128. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this division, unless otherwise stated in this division, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this division: 
(1)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this division and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(6)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or evens shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(7)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like, kind or character. 
(8)  The land-use types listed in section 21-131, computation of the amount of development impact fees, of this division shall have the same meaning as under the zoning ordinance. 
(9)  All wastewater terms used herein shall have the same meaning as in the city comprehensive land use plan and the development regulations unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-129. - Definitions. 
Building permit means the document issued by the city authorizing the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure, or authorizing the installation of a mobile home or recreational vehicle. For the purposes of this division, a building permit also means a change of use permit. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the wastewater treatment and transmission facilities of the city. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the comprehensive land use plan, which sets out projected needs for system improvements during a planning horizon established in the Newnan Comprehensive Land Use Plan, a schedule of capital improvements that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. 
Commission means the water, sewerage and light commission of the city, the city water sewerage and light commission or city utilities. 
Comprehensive plan means the city comprehensive land use plan as it is not adopted or as it may be further amended. 
Developer means any person who engages in development activity and may include the owner, occupant, tenant or other entity responsible for payment of the development impact fee. 
Development activity means any construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
Development impact fee district means a geographic area identified by the city and described in section 21-137. 
Development impact fee(s) means a payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition of development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve new growth and development. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the city. 
Feepayor means that person who pays a development impact fee or his successor in interest with the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this division and which has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. In the absence of an express transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees, the right or entitlement shall be deemed "not to run with the land." 
General manager means the general manager of the commission or his designee. 
Individual fee calculation study means the economic documentation prepared by a feepayor to allow determination of the development impact fee other than by use of the fee schedule in section 21-131, computation of the amount of development impact fees, of this division as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(g). 
Individual fee determination means the development impact fee determined by the general manager pursuant to an individual fee calculation study. 
Level of service is a qualitative measure that represents the collective factors of wastewater treatment capacity and transmission services, taking into account the type, use, and capacity of existing facilities. 
Living unit is any temporary or permanent unit utilized for or designed or intended to be utilized for human habitation. 
Present value means the current value of past, present or future payments, or contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money. 
Project or development project means a particular development on an identified parcel of land. 
Project improvements means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience for the occupants or users of the project and are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or system improvement and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement. If an improvement or facility provides or will provide more than incidental service or facilities capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements which is reasonably related to the demands and needs of a project. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are implemented to provide wastewater treatment capacity and transmission and required facilities which are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide additional wastewater treatment capacity and transmission needed to serve new growth and development for planning, design and construction, land acquisition, land improvements, design and engineering related thereto, including the cost of constructing or reconstructing system improvements or facility expansions, including but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court award and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees) and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvement element, and administrative costs equal to three percent of the total amount of the costs. System improvement costs shall also include projected interest charges and other finance costs if the development impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the city or commission to finance the capital improvement elements. Such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-130. - Imposition of development impact fee. 
(a)  Any person who engages in development activity shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  No building permit for any activity requiring payment of a development impact fee pursuant to this article shall be issued by the city's building department unless and until the required development impact fee has been paid. 
(c)  The development impact fee shall be paid at the office of the general manager of the commission and evidence of such payment presented to the city's building department at the time application is made for a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-131. - Computation of the amount of development impact fees. 
(a)  At the option of the developer, the amount of the development impact fee may be determined by the schedule set forth below. 
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE  NEWNAN, GEORGIA 
(1)  $12.00 per gallon of annual average daily use of treated water for all uses. 
(2)  In the case of change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing use which requires the issuance of a building permit, the development impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the fee for the new use as compared to the previous use. 
(b)  If a developer shall elect not to have the development impact fee determined according to paragraph (a) of this section, then pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(g) the developer may apply for individual fee determination. A developer applying for an individual fee determination shall prepare and submit to the general manager an individual fee calculation study for the development activity for which a building permit is sought. The individual fee calculation study shall follow the prescribed methodologies and formats for the study established by the general manager, or subject to approval of the general manager, such other professionally accepted methodology that identifies a project's proportionate share. This documentation shall be prepared and presented by qualified professionals in their respective fields and shall follow best professional practices and methodologies. 
The general manager shall provide the developer with the individual fee determination within 30 days after presentation of the individual fee calculation study. 
(c)  (1)  Upon application to the general manager, any person contemplating engaging in development activity requiring payment of a development impact fee may apply for and shall receive from the general manager a certification of the development impact fee schedule or a certification of an individual fee determination. 
(2)  Applications shall include the following information and items: 
a.  A full and complete description of the project; 
b.  A full and complete description of the proposed land use and development activity; 
c.  A complete set of final engineering drawings stamped by an engineer registered in the state; 
d.  A statement as to whether the applicant seeks a certification of the development impact fee schedule or a certification of the individual fee determination; and 
e.  If the applicant seeks a certification of an individual fee determination, an individual fee calculation study complying with the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section 21-131. 
(3)  The general manager shall provide an applicant with a written certification of the development impact fee schedule within a minimum of 15 business days after the general manager's receipt of a completed application. The fee schedule certified by the general manager shall establish the development impact fee schedule for the proposed development activity for a period of 180 days from the date of certification. The general manager shall provide the applicant with a written certification of an individual fee determination within 30 business days after receipt of a completed application. The individual fee determination certified by the general manager shall establish the development impact fee for the 180-day period immediately following the date of such certification. Notwithstanding the issuance of any such certification, any changes in or additions to the proposed development activity different from the development activity identified in the original application shall be subject to increased or additional development impact fees to the extent that such changes or additions require capital improvements or facilities expansions. The additional development impact fees shall be based upon the most current development impact fee schedule. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, prior to engaging in development activity, and in addition to any other applicable requirements, the developer shall certify in writing to the general manager: 
(1)  A full and complete description of the project; 
(2)  A full and complete description of the proposed land use or uses; and 
(3)  A statement of the gross square footage applicable to each category of land use. 
Prior to the completion of the project, and as a condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer shall recertify in writing to the general manager the actual land use or uses of the project, and shall present an architect's certificate of the actual gross square footage attributable to each use. In the event that the actual land use or uses and/or the actual gross square footage applicable to the actual use or uses differs from that originally certified, and in the event that the impact fee applicable to the actual use or uses and/or gross square footage exceeds the impact fee previously paid, the developer shall be required to pay the amount of the excess as a condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The amount of the excess shall be based upon the most current development impact fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-132. - Payment of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any person required to pay development impact fees pursuant to this ordinance shall pay such fees to the general manager prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  All funds collected pursuant to this article shall be properly identified as development impact fees and promptly transferred for deposit into the development impact fee trust fund to be held as a separate account as determined in section 21-133, development impact fee trust fund established, of this article. Funds shall be used solely for the purpose specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-133. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Funds collected from development fees shall be used for system improvements, by the commission for such purpose. No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance or for any purpose not in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-8. 
(b)  Development impact fees shall be used exclusively for system improvements in the development impact fee district in which the project for which the fees were paid is located. 
(c)  Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are collected. 
(d)  Each fiscal period the general manager of the commission shall present to the mayor and council an annual report describing the amount of development impact fees collected, encumbered and used during the preceding year. Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the development impact fee trust fund until the next fiscal period except as provided in section 21-136, refunds, of this division. 
(e)  The commission shall be entitled to retain up to three percent of all development impact fees it collects as an administrative fee to offset the costs of administering this division. 
(f)  Development impact fees may be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the commission to finance wastewater treatment, capacity and transmission facilities. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-134. - Credits. 
Due to the nature of the development impact fees provided for in this division there are no credits available hereunder, specifically: 
(1)  Project improvements costs shall not be credited against the development impact fees due. 
(2)  No pre-ordinance credits shall be credited against the development impact fees due. 
(3)  No post-ordinance credits shall be credited against the development impact fees due. 
(4)  No system improvement credits shall be credited against the development impact fees due. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-135. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempted from payment of development impact fees: 
(1)  The replacement of a building, home or structure that was constructed prior to the adoption of a development impact fee or for which the correct development impact fee had been paid if constructed after the adoption of an impact fee or otherwise provided for, with a new building, home or structure of the same use. 
(2)  All or part of a particular project if and to the extent the commission determines such project to create extraordinary economic development and employment growth and provided that such project's proportionate share of system improvements is funded through a revenue source other than development impact fees. 
(3)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures on a lot where a building, home or structure was in place on the effective date of this division. 
(b)  A person claiming exemption(s) pursuant to paragraphs (a)(1), (2) or (3) above shall submit to the general manager information and documentation sufficient to permit the general manager to determine whether such exemption claimed is proper, and, if so, the extent of such exemption. A person seeking exemption under paragraph (a)(2) above shall submit to the commission information and documentation sufficient to permit the commission to determine whether such exemption claimed is proper, and, if so, the extent of such exemption. 
(c)  Exemptions must be applied for at the time of the application for a building permit. Any exemptions not so applied for shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-136. - Refunds. 
Refunds of development impact fees shall be made only in the following instances and in the following manner: 
(1)  Upon application to the general manager by the feepayor, the commission shall refund 97 percent of the development impact fee paid if capacity is available and service is denied. The commission shall retain three percent of the fee paid as an administrative fee. 
(2)  a.  Upon application to the general manager by the feepayor, the commission shall refund 97 percent of the development impact fee paid and not expended or encumbered if the commission, after collecting the fee when service is not available, has failed to encumber the fee or commence construction within ten years from the date the development impact fee was paid. The commission shall retain three percent of the fee paid as an administrative fee. In determining whether development impact fees have been expended or encumbered, fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
b.  When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber development impact fees, the commission shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval, or to a feepayor's successor in interest who has given the commission notice of the transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to a refund and who has provided the commission a mailing address. The commission shall also publish such notice within 30 days after the expiration of the ten-year period from the date development impact fee was paid. The published notice shall contain the heading "notice of entitlement to development impact fee refund." 
(3)  A refund application shall be made to the general manager within one year from the date such refund becomes payable under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section or within one year from the date of publication of the notice of entitlement of a refund under paragraph (2) of this section, whichever is later. Any refund not applied for within said time period shall be deemed waived. 
(4)  A refund application shall include information and documentation sufficient to permit the general manager to determine whether the refund claimed is proper, and, if so, the amount of such refund. 
(5)  A refund shall include a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess development impact fee paid. 
(6)  All refunds shall be paid within 60 days after the general manager determines that such refund is due. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-137. - Development impact fee district established. 
The development impact fee district hereby established shall include the incorporated areas of the city, as it now exists or as it is hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-138. - Development impact fee trust funds established. 
(a)  There is hereby established one development impact fee trust fund for the development impact fee district described in section 21-137. 
(b)  Funds shall be deposited and maintained in an interest bearing account. Interest earned on funds shall be subject to all restrictions imposed by section 21-133, use of funds, of this division. 
(c)  Funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance with the provisions of section 21-133, use of funds, of this division. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-139. - Review of fee structure. 
The development impact fees structure shall be reviewed by the commission annually; provided, however, the failure to review such structure shall not invalidate this division. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-140. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Any person directly aggrieved by a decision of the general manager with respect to any of the following determinations shall have the right to appeal to the commission: 
(1)  The imposition of a development impact fee; 
(2)  The amount of a development impact fee; 
(3)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of credits to a development impact fee; 
(4)  The entitlement to an exemption from a development impact fee; and 
(5)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of a refund of a development impact fee. Prior to any appeal to the commission, the aggrieved party shall file a request for reconsideration with the general manager, who shall act upon the request within 15 days. 
(b)  All appeals shall be taken within 15 days of the general manager decision on the request for reconsideration by filing with the general manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. The general manager shall forthwith transmit to the commission all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. The commission shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give due notice thereof to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable period of time following the hearing. Any party taking an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the commission may take an appeal to the superior court of county within 30 days after the decision of the commission is rendered. 
(c)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a building permit, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from: 
(1)  Exercising this right of appeal provided in this section, or 
(2)  Receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 21-141. - Penalty and enforcement provision. 
A violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the commission shall have the power to sue for relief in civil court to enforce the provisions of this division. Knowingly furnishing false information to the general manager on any matter relating to the administration of this division shall constitute a violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Secs. 21-142—21-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 21-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of any existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 06-92, § 1, 3-23-92) 
Sec. 21-152. - Enforcement. 
This section shall be enforced by designated officials of the water, sewerage and light commission, the city's building official, building inspectors, code enforcement officer, officers of the police department and any other city employee designated by the city manager. Citations for violations may be issued by such commission designated officials, the city's building official, building inspectors, code enforcement officer, officers of the city police department and any other city employee designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 06-92, § 6(a), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 10-20, § II, 11-23-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 21-153. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of any section of this division shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this ordinance may be punished in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  It shall be a separate offense under this division for each day that a person or entity knowingly violates any section of any provision of this division, or continues to violate any section of any provision of this division. 
(2)  Persons committing offenses under this division, within a calendar year, shall: 
a.  On the first violation, receive a verbal notice of violation; 
b.  On the second violation, receive written notice of violation; 
c.  On the third violation, be fined $100.00; 
d.  On the fourth violation, be fined $250.00; 
e.  On the fifth violation, the Newnan Utilities may disconnect water services to customer and assess reconnection fees and additional monetary penalties to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 06-92, § 6(b), 3-23-92; Ord. No. 17-21, § 1, 10-24-17 ) 
Sec. 21-154. - Residential construction. 
On or after April 1, 1992, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank type, flushometer-valve or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. No. 06-92, § 2, 3-23-92) 
Sec. 21-155. - Commercial construction. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 21-154(1) through (5). 
(Ord. No. 06-92, § 3, 3-23-92) 
Sec. 21-156. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this division when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this division were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse of installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets of juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building official for the city. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 06-92, § 5, 3-23-92) 
Sec. 21-157. - Water conservation measures; power of commission to declare state of water emergency; imposition of sanctions for violation of conservation measures. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the water, sewerage, and light commission of the city to monitor the available water supplies of the city water system (hereafter referred to as the "system") to assure an adequate supply of water for customers and users of the system, whether located within or without the municipal boundaries. Whenever the commissioners determine that supplies have reached a level where future water usage should be conserved, they shall issue an advisory against nonessential water usage by imposing such measures as they deem appropriate. Compliance with such advisory shall be strictly voluntary and shall be designed to alert customers and users of the system that failure to conserve future water usage may result in the imposition of mandatory water restrictions. 
(b)  The water, sewerage and light commission is hereby authorized and empowered to declare a state of water emergency upon findings that conditions exist with the available water supply which endanger the public health, safety, and sanitation of the city, its water system, and customers and users thereof or are so informed or directed as to a state of water emergency by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources of the state. The declaration shall set forth the facts upon which its findings are based and a copy of the declaration shall be filed in the office of the general manager of the water; sewerage and light commission and the office of the city manager of the city for public inspection and copying. During such state of emergency, all nonessential water usage shall be strictly prohibited; provided, however, the commission shall promulgate specific restrictions which may be progressive based upon first limiting nonessential outdoor water usage (e.g., watering grass, trees and plants, filling swimming pools, washing cars), next limiting nonessential commercial and industrial water usage, and finally, rationing of water for residential consumption (drinking and bathing). Thereafter, restrictions may be modified, as necessary, depending upon the severity and length of conditions necessitating the state of water emergency, provided notice of such modification is given. 
(c)  Notice of the declaration of a state of water emergency shall be given by placing a display notice in the legal organ of the county and by public service announcements with other local news media. Additional notice may be given by placing an announcement on the customer or user's next water bill, if generated by the city or a jurisdiction under contract therewith. 
(d)  Persons served by water meters within the city violating the mandatory restrictions on nonessential water usage imposed during a state of water emergency shall be subject to having their water disconnected subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the commission as part of its formal drought plan and shall be subject to being cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in paragraph (f) of this section for each day such violation was found to exist or have continued; provided, however, for the first violation during each state of water emergency, only a written warning shall be given and no citation issued. Each day a violation exists or continues after actual notice is given shall be deemed a separate offense under this section. Any fine imposed under this section shall be in addition to rates and charges owed for water consumption and usage. Persons convicted for three or more violations during any state of water emergency shall be permanently disconnected as customers or users of the system. 
(e)  This section shall be enforced by designated officials of the water, sewerage and light commission, the city's building official, building inspectors, code enforcement officer, officers of the police department and any other city employee designated by the city manager. Citations for violations may be issued by such commission designated officials, the city's building official, building inspectors, code enforcement officer, officers of the city police department and any other city employee designated by the city manager. 
(f)  Any person violating this section shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this ordinance may be punished in accordance with section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 07-18, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 21-158. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(c)  Enforcement of this section and penalty for violation of the provisions of this section shall be as provided in sections 21-152, 21-153, and 21-157(e) and (f) of this division. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to the authority granted in section 21-157 of the City's Code of Ordinances to the Newnan Water Sewerage and Light Commission to provide for water conservation measures as provided for therein. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, § I, 11-23-10, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 21-159. - Outdoor water use guidelines. 
In addition to the authority to restrict water usage in section 21-157 hereinabove and specifically with regard to outdoor watering of landscape and outdoor use of water for residential and commercial uses set forth in section 21-158, hereinabove, the rules for outdoor water use provided by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-30, require Georgians to follow schedules for outdoor water use during both non-drought periods and during periods of declared drought. The rules apply to any entity, and its customers, permitted by the Environmental Protection Division for water withdrawal or for the operation of a public drinking water supply system. Such schedules for outdoor watering use during both non-drought periods and during a declared drought shall be as set by water, sewerage and light commission of the city. 
( Ord. No. 17-21, § 2, 10-24-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-21, § 2, adopted Oct. 24, 2017 , set out provisions intended for use as § 21-158. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as § 21-159. 
Sec. 21-160. - Potable water waste prohibitions. 
(a)  In addition to the restrictions on use of water set forth in the other sections of this division 3, the following uses are a waste or unreasonable use or method of use of potable water and are prohibited: 
(1)  Allowing water from an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device to escape from any premises onto public right-of-way, such as streets and sidewalks, or upon any other person's property. 
(2)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device during any form of precipitation. 
(3)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device that has any broken or missing sprinkler heads. 
(4)  Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, or a leaking valve, or a leaking outdoor faucet, or a service line leak, or any other visible outside water leaks, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, within 30 days. 
(b)  The restrictions in paragraph (a) do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities; 
(2)  Water applied as a dust control measure; 
(3)  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, where water is the appropriate methodology; 
(4)  Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety. or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available; 
(5)  Flow resulting from routine inspection, operation, or maintenance of traffic flow control devices; 
(6)  Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the application of water is appropriate methodology and where no other practical alternative exists. 
(7)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced as provided in sections 21-152, 21-153, 21-157(e) and (f) of this division 3. 
( Ord. No. 17-21, § 3, 10-24-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-21, § 3, adopted Oct. 24, 2017 , set out provisions intended for use as § 21-159. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as § 21-160. 
Secs. 21-161—21-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as Div. 3, §§ 21-150—21-165. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as Div. 4, §§ 21-170—21-185. 

Sec. 21-170. - Short title, authority, and applicability. 
(a)  Short title. This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of the City of Newnan, Georgia." 
(b)  Authority. 
(1)  This division has been prepared and adopted by the City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided in Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(2)  The provisions of this division shall not be construed to limit the power of the City of Newnan, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this division. 
(3)  This division shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of the City of Newnan, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-150), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-171. - Findings, purpose and intent. 
(a) Findings. The City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia, finds and declares: 
(1)  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Newnan, and 
(2)  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
(3)  That it is fair and equitable that new land development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this division is to impose those impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this division to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in the City of Newnan and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(c)  Intent. This division is intended to implement and be consistent with the City of Newnan Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.) and the Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-151), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-172. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
The provisions of this division shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Newnan. 
(1)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this division, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this division: 
a.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this division and as used in this division and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of the City of Newnan, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this division. 
b.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this division and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
c.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
d.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
e.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
f.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
g.  The conjunction "or" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
h.  The use of "either....or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
i.  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
j.  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this division are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this division. 
(2)  Definitions. As used in this division, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
Administrator means the community development director of the city, or his/her designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this division. 
Building permit is the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable Building Code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling; rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the City of Newnan Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, improvements, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. 
City means the City of Newnan, Georgia, a legal subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
City council means the City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Code enforcement officer means the employee or official who is designated and empowered to enforce the building codes of the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Commencement of construction, for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project. 
Completion of construction means the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. The date of completion is the date on which such certificate is issued. 
Comprehensive plan means the City of Newnan Comprehensive Plan as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.) and the Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
County means Coweta County, a legal subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any action, which creates demand on, or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; and any change in use of land, a building, or structure, or use; and any change in use of land, a building or structure. 
Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, approval for connection to public utilities, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction or connection of public utilities. 
Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Development impact fee appeals board means the Planning Commission of the City of Newnan to hear appeals or waiver requests. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities, which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Fee payer means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this division has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this division or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a fee payer or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by the City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specified location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. 
Property owner means that person or entity that holds a majority interest in legal title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities means: (a) Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights of way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any local components of municipal, state or federal highways; (b) Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; and (c) Public safety facilities, including police, fire, and rescue facilities. 
Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
System improvements costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contract to "project" improvements. 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based. Such term includes but is not limited to, "housing unit," "acre of land," and "square feet of floor area." 
Unused or excess impact fee means any individual measure fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended to the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-152), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-172.5. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who after the effective date of this division engages in development as defined in this division shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount as set forth in this division. 
(1)  Construction not subject to impact fees. The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this division, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
a.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this division that were destroyed by fire or other catastrophe on the same lot or property. 
b.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
c.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
d.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
e.  Constructing an additional to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
f.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(2)  Grand fathered projects. Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this division shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(3)  Method of calculation. 
a.  Any development impact fee pursuant to this division shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this division, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of the present value of ad valorem tax or other revenues, if any, which: 
1.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new development; and 
2.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
c.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this division shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of the City of Newnan and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
d.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee shall also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities. 
e.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Newnan. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-152), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-173. - Fee assessment and payment. 
Fee schedule: 
(1)  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule incorporated into this division as Appendix A shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(2)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
(3)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
a.  The development impact fee appeals board shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee as an appeal. 
b.  In making such determination, the development impact fee appeals board may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
c.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this division, then the board may add an appropriate new category. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-153), 9-28-04; Ord. No. 10-2, § I, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 16-16, § I, 11-22-16 ) 
Editor's note— Appendix A, referenced above, is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the city offices. 
Sec. 21-174. - Timing of assessment. 
(a)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit, as applicable. 
(b)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-154), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-175. - Individual assessment determinations. 
Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(1)  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the development impact fee appeals board for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source or engineering or planning data; or 
b.  Based on actual, relevant, and credible studies of surveys of facility demand conducted in the City of Newnan or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and 
c.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the city council from time to time. 
(3)  The city council in its sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this division. 
(4)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-155), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-176. - Timing of fee payment. 
(a)  All development impact fees shall be collected no later than the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-156), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-177. - Fee certification. 
Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certified schedule of development impact fees for categories of development or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule of fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-157), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-178. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
(a)  Maintenance of funds. 
(1)  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this division shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
(2)  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
(3)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this division. 
(b)  Expenditures; restrictions. 
(1)  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
(2)  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this division, the following shall be considered general revenue of the system, and may by expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the City of Newnan for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and, 
c.  Any portion of an impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Annual report. The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the city council as part of the annual audit or financial report describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
(d)  Credits. When eligible, fee payers shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees due under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(e)  Credits; restrictions. 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this division. 
(2)  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his predecessor in title or interest) for system improvements to public facilities as defined herein, prior to the effective date of this division, for which impact fees would otherwise be imposed, is greater than the impact fee which would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this division, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of the City of Newnan and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
(3)  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements. 
(f)  Granting of credits. 
(1)  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that the city council shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
(2)  If approved by the city, developers, who construct system improvements, privately or in conjunction with the City of Newnan for which impact fees would otherwise be imposed, shall be entitled to a credit unless such improvements were a condition of development. The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall be equal to the present value of the cost of construction of the system improvement, up to a maximum of the impact fee due for such system improvement. In the event that a developer enters into an agreement with the City of Newnan to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements such that the amount of the credit created is in excess of the impact fee which would otherwise have been paid for the development project, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess construction, funding, or contribution from impact fees paid by other development located in the service area which is benefited by such improvements. 
(g)  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credit under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the City of Newnan the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the city council of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
(1)  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the City of Newnan, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
(2)  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer of his predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the City of Newnan, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that the City of Newnan, would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
(3)  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his predecessor in title or interest accepted by the City of Newnan, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, for which present value may be calculated. 
(4)  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned to the State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the board of commissioners in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(h)  Credits; application. 
(1)  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the city council. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the city council at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
(2)  The city council, in its sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determination regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
(3)  Any credit approved by the city council shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(4)  In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the City of Newnan, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-158), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-179. - Establishment of development impact fee appeals board. 
(a)  Development impact fee appeals board, duties. There is hereby created a development impact fee appeals board which shall be the members of the Planning Commission of the City of Newnan. Said board shall hear appeals concerning the disputed amount of the impact fee and an individual assessment as set forth in section 21-183 herein. 
(b)  Waivers and appeals. 
(1)  The development impact fee appeals board shall make recommendations to the administrator as to whether the fee payer may be entitled to a waiver, in whole or in part of the impact fee; 
(2)  The decision of the development impact fee appeals board as to whether the fee payer may be entitled to a waiver in whole or in part of the impact fee shall be final; 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the development impact fee appeals board may take an appeal to the Superior Court of Coweta County within 30 days after the decision of the development impact fee appeals board is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-159), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-180. - Refunds. 
(a)  Eligibility for a refund. 
(1)  Upon the request of a fee payer or an owner of property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facility for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or 
b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected, whichever first occurs. 
(2)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(b)  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the fee payer who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in the City of Newnan within 30 days after the expiration of the six year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
(c)  Filing a request for a refund. All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. Such funds together with the accrued interest thereon shall be transferred to the general revenue account of the City of Newnan. 
(d)  Payment of refunds. 
(1)  All refunds shall be made to the fee payer within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
(2)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(3)  In no event shall a fee payer be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, or to recover the amount of funds expended by the City of Newnan for system improvements for which the impact fee was collected, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-160), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-181. - Private contractual agreements. 
(a)  Private agreements; authorized. Nothing in this division shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the City of Newnan and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project. 
(b)  Private agreements; provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the City of Newnan to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this division. 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this division, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable Letter of Credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit or other development approval. 
(c)  Private agreements; procedure. 
(1)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the city council. 
(2)  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the City of Newnan prior to the issuance of a building permit or other development approval. 
(3)  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the Clerk of Superior Court for recording. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-161), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-182. - Periodic review and amendments. 
(a)  Amendments. 
(1)  This division may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. Any such amendment to this division, including an amendment to the development impact fee schedule attached hereto as Appendix A, shall follow the procedures for adoption of an ordinance imposing a development impact fee as set out and required under the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). 
(2)  As part of its annual capital improvements program review process or at any other time, the city council may review the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, and may amend the capital improvement element, fee calculation methodology, or development impact fee schedule as deemed appropriate and necessary. 
(b)  Capital improvements element update. 
(1)  No less often than once each year, the city council may update the Capital Improvements Element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The Capital Improvements Element Update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The Capital Improvements Element Update shall be submitted to the Regional Development Center for their records, in accordance with the Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the city council may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
b.  Add new impact fee service areas or change the boundaries of existing impact fee service areas; or 
c.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area. 
(c)  Continuation of validity. Failure of the city council to undertake a periodic review shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to review such data shall not invalidate this division. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-162), 9-28-04) 
Editor's note— Appendix A, referenced above, is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the city offices. 
Sec. 21-183. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Eligibility to file a waiver or appeal. Only applicants or fee payers who have already been assessed an impact fee by the City of Newnan, Georgia, or who have already received a written determination of refund or credit amount shall be entitled to file for a waiver or an appeal. 
(b)  Appeals and waiver process. 
(1)  The aggrieved applicant or fee payer may file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the receipt of written determination of the amount of the development impact fee due, or entitlement to an amount of a refund or credit. Such written appeal shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought. 
(2)  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the development impact fee appeals board shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time to hear such appeal, it shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give written notice thereof to the applicant or fee payer, and decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. The date for the hearing shall be no later than 45 days from the date of receipt of the appeal. 
(3)  Requests for waiver of development impact fees, in whole or in part, shall be made to the development impact fee appeals board for a determination. The development impact fee appeals board may recommend a waiver of said fees, in whole or in part, upon a finding that a development project is determined to create extraordinary economic development and employment growth or encourage affordable housing. The development impact fee appeals board shall make a written decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for determination. Upon acceptance of a waiver of fees, in whole or in part, the development impact fee appeals board shall then allocate from fund sources, the necessary funds to the impact fee program to provide for the fee so waived. 
(c)  Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
(1)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of a building permit or other development approval. 
(2)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a building permit or other development approval, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-163), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-184. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement authority. 
(1)  The enforcement of this division shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
(2)  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this division and shall have the right to issue cease or desist orders and citations for violations. Refusal of written notice of violation under this division shall constitute legal written notice of service. 
(3)  The administrator may withhold the issuance of any building permit or other development approval if the owner of his assigns have violated the provisions of this division. 
(4)  For any violation, the administrator shall have the authority to issue a citation. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person of by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 working days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. If the required corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the administrator may use any available civil or criminal remedies to secure compliance, including revoking a permit. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this division shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(2)  A violation of this division shall be punishable as contained in section 1-14 of the City of Newnan Code of Ordinances and as according to state law. However, in addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the city council shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this division, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this division and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-164), 9-28-04) 
Sec. 21-185. - Repealer, severability, and effective date. 
(a)  Repeal of conflicting laws. Any and all ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this division are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Severability. If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this division is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the division as a whole or any other part hereof, shall not be affected. 
(c)  Incorporation by reference of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71. It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Newnan, Georgia, that the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of the City of Newnan, Georgia" comply with the terms and provisions of the "Georgia Development Impact Fee Act," O.C.G.A. § 36-71. Therefore, Chapter 36-71 of the Official Code of Georgia is incorporated by reference into this division. To the extent that any provision of this division is inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this division is silent as to any provision of Chapter 36-71 that is otherwise deemed mandatory by law, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the city. 
(d)  Effective date. 
(1)  This division shall take effect on the 29 th day of September, 2004. 
(2)  Any building for which a valid application for a building permit has been received by the building official (does not include subdivision plans, site development plans, application for site preparation, land disturbance or grading) prior to the effective date of this division may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this division, provided that: 
a.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of this division shall be or have been paid in full; and 
b.  Said building permit is issued within 90 calendar days of the effective date of this division; and 
c.  Said construction or connection to public utilities shall have been completed within the time established by the building permit and/or the city's building codes. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 1(21-165), 9-28-04) 
Secs. 21-186—21-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 21-201. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program." 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-202. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-203. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply 1 []: 
City means the City of Newnan, Georgia and its utility service provider, the Newnan Water, Sewerage and Light Commission. 
Commission means the Newnan Water, Sewerage and Light Commission of the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Covered account means (i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, a government or governmental subdivision or agency, a trust, an estate, a partnership, a cooperative, or an association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information or driver's license information, and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth or maiden name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Other than "City," "Commission" and "Personal identifying information" definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR § 681.2. 

Sec. 21-204. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, waste water, electric, and solid waste. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: Within the past three years, there were a few attempts made to open a utility account with forged social security cards. Information about the attempts was immediately given to law enforcement. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, handling existing covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-205. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer which shall be a valid government-issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer, or, for customers who are not natural persons, the same type identification card of the customer's agent who is opening the account and proof of the agent's authority to do so. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the city to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to generate randomly assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-206. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the manager of the information technology department or his designee on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-207. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base and shall not be otherwise recorded. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of any credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-208. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account, handling a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft. Such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the creditor. 
d.  Other questionable information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as one submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the address or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in the pattern of use of provided city services; 
c.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
d.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
e.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-209. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account, handling an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the director of finance who will notify the city manager or assistant to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the director of finance who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the director of finance in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the director of finance: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  close the account. 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(5)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the director of finance who will notify the city manager or assistant to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the director of finance, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the director of finance in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the director of finance: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-210. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as recommended by the staff and deemed necessary by the commission, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-211. - Program administration. 
The director of finance is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued covered types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The director of finance will report to the city manager at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The director of finance and his or her direct supervisor are responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The director of finance shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-212. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the director of finance, the city manager and the city attorney shall exercise their discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of their ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures agreed upon by contract which are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 10-28-08) 
Secs. 21-213—21-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 21-226. - Short title. 
[This article shall be known and may be cited as the] "Treatment of Address Discrepancies." 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-227. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-228. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Commission means the Newnan Waters, Sewerage and Light Commission of the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 2 [] 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 10-28-08) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
See 16 CFR § 681.1(b). 

Sec. 21-229. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-230. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-231. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-232. - Designee. 
(a)  The city manager, in the absence of an assistant to the city manager, may designate another employee of the city to fulfill the city manager's duties under the city's identity theft prevention program; 
(b)  The director of finance may designate another employee of the finance department to fulfill the director of finance's duties under the city's theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 2, 10-28-08) 
Secs. 21-233—21-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - APPLICABILITY TO NEWNAN WATER, SEWERAGE AND LIGHT COMMISSION 

Sec. 21-251. - Short title. 
[This article shall be known and may be cited as the] "Applicability to Newnan Water, Sewerage and Light Commission." 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 3, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-252. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to extend the applicability of the Newnan Water, Sewerage and Light Commission to authorize the Newnan Water, Sewerage and Light Commission to adopt an identity theft prevention program not inconsistent with the city's identity theft prevention program or 16 CFR § 681.1. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 3, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-253. - Definitions. 
City means City of Newnan, Georgia 
Commission means the Newnan Water, Sewerage and Light Commission of the City of Newnan, Georgia 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 3, 10-28-08) 
Sec. 21-254. - Applicability. 
The requirements of the city's identity theft prevention program is hereby extended to the commission and the commission is hereby authorized to adopt an identity theft prevention program, not inconsistent with the city's identity theft prevention program or 16 CFR§681.1. 
(Ord. No. 08-16, § 3, 10-28-08) 
Chapter 22 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, Ch. 6; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Certificates required. 
No person shall operate or permit a taxicab or any other automobile owned or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for hire in the city without having first obtained a certificate from the city council authorizing such operation. 
(Code 1972, § 27-1; Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 22-2. - Place of business required. 
No taxicab or any other automobile for hire shall operate in the city unless the owner thereof shall maintain a place of business from a building located on property within a commercially zoned district in which vehicles for hire is a permitted use in accordance with the most recently adopted zoning map and have first obtained certification of compliance from the city zoning administrator. 
(Code 1972, § 27-2; Ord. No. 96-6, § I, 3-13-96; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1, 11-23-99; Ord. No. 01-19, § I, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 03-06, § II, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 22-3. - Operation of vehicles for hire. 
No person shall operate a taxicab or any other vehicle for hire unless such person possesses the proper driver's license as required under the laws of the state and is not less than 18 years of age and has obtained a permit as set forth herein. 
(Code 1972, § 27-4; Ord. No. 03-06, § III, 3-11-03) 
Secs. 22-4—22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means an individual registering a business authorized herein. 
Application means a form supplied by the city for the purpose of registering a business authorized herein. 
Business means the business of operating or owning a taxicab business. 
Certificate means certificate issued or approved by the city council authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business within the city. 
City means City of Newnan, Georgia. 
Closely held corporation means a corporation not traded or listed on any stock exchange and which has fewer than 25 shareholders. 
Convicted or conviction shall include a plea of nolo contendere. 
Driver, operator means any person in charge of or driving or operating a taxicab, as defined herein, whether as owner, agent, employee or otherwise. 
Driver's permit means the permission granted by the governing body to a person to drive a taxicab within the city. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Highway means any of the public streets, alleys, lanes, boulevards, avenues, drives, circles, or roads of the city. 
Individual means a natural person. 
Interest in a business means an interest held by an owner or co-owner of a registered business; by a partner of a general or limited partnership which owns or co-owns a registered business; a stockholder of five percent or more shares in any closely held corporation which owns or co-owns a registered business; or anyone sharing in the income or corpus of any trust or estate having such an interest; or a person having subscriptions, options, and/or warranty for purchase of five percent or more of a closely held corporation's stock or 50 percent or more of any corporation's stock. 
Memorandum certificate means the card issued to a taxicab owner to display within the taxicab indicating that such taxicab has been issued a certificate. 
Owner means a person having an interest in a business, including a stockholder and to whom a certificate for operating a taxicab has been or is to be issued. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business, trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public, or any entity. 
Taxicab means any motor vehicle seating six or fewer persons and the driver, operating upon any street on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for hire between such points along such streets as may be directed by the passengers being so transported. 
Traffic officer means the chief of police or the officer the chief has designated to hold responsibilities as set forth in this article. 
Vehicles for hire means taxicab as defined herein or limousine as defined in section 22-101. 
(Code 1972, § 27-19; Ord. No. 03-06, § IV, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 22-22. - Compliance with laws, due regard for safety required. 
All taxicabs operating within the city shall comply with all laws of the United States of America, the state and the city regulating the speed, the operation of motor vehicles and the requirements for safety equipment and devices. All passengers, whether adult, children or infants shall use the required passenger restraint devices including child restraints as necessary. Drivers shall show due regard for the safety, comfort and convenience of passengers, for the safe and careful transportation of property and for the safety of the general public. 
(Code 1972, § 27-33) 
Sec. 22-23. - Identification of vehicles as taxicabs. 
(a)  Information required. All motor vehicles operated as taxicabs in the city shall be marked on the outside with the following information with respect thereto: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the taxicab. 
(2)  The word "taxicab" or "taxi." 
(3)  If a fleet of more than one taxicab is operated by one company or owner, a number shall be assigned to each vehicle, prominently displayed and identifying. 
(4)  Any other information which may be deemed necessary to identify such vehicle as required by the traffic officer. 
(b)  Affixing information. The above markings or identification shall be prominently displayed on both sides of the vehicles operated as taxicabs in letters of not less than three inches in height and must be printed so that the identification may be easily read at a distance of at least 50 feet. Such information may be displayed on vehicle with paint, by stencil, by decals or with magnetic signs. 
(Code 1972, § 27-34) 
Sec. 22-24. - Riding on exterior of vehicle. 
No person shall be permitted to ride on the fender, hood, roof or any other exterior portion of a taxicab. 
(Code 1972, § 27-55) 
Sec. 22-25. - Refusal to pay fare. 
Any person using a taxicab in the city without paying the amount of fare or charges requested by the taxicab driver, within the limits prescribed in this article, shall be guilty of violation of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 27-59) 
Secs. 22-26—22-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION OF BUSINESS 

Sec. 22-41. - Certificate—Application. 
All persons applying for a certificate provided for in section 22-1 shall do so in writing to the traffic officer on the form provided by him. Such applicant shall furnish all information required by such form in complete detail and shall certify under oath to the correctness of the information. 
(Code 1972, § 27-20; Ord. No. 03-06, § V, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 22-42. - Same—Action upon application. 
The traffic officer shall investigate the application provided for in section 22-41 and shall make a recommendation to the city council on whether such applicant should be granted a certificate. 
(Code 1972, § 27-21; Ord. No. 03-06, § VI, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 22-43. - Same—Issuance. 
After receiving approval of the application provided for in section 22-42 from the city council, the certificate shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of the required license fee. The clerk shall also issue to the applicant a memorandum certificate for each taxicab authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 27-22) 
Sec. 22-44. - Same—Expiration, reinstatement. 
All certificates shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reinstated by the city clerk for the following year, provided that there has been no revocation thereof and further provided that all license fees required to be paid have been paid. 
(Code 1972, § 27-23) 
Sec. 22-45. - Registration of vehicles—Required. 
(a)  Duty of operator. Prior to placing a taxicab in service, any operator shall register that vehicle with the traffic officer, providing a complete and true description of such vehicle to include the serial number, make, model and color. 
(b)  Duty of traffic officer. The traffic officer shall maintain a file on each operator, including the description of each vehicle registered as required by this section, and he may issue identification numbers for each registered vehicle. The officer may make inspections at any time to assure that the taxicabs in operation are registered and in full compliance with this article. 
(Code 1972, § 27-31) 
Sec. 22-46. - Same—Identification numbers to be affixed to vehicle. 
Should the traffic officer issue identification numbers, these numbers shall be affixed by decal or similar means in the rear window of the vehicle on the driver's side. 
(Code 1972, § 27-32) 
Sec. 22-47. - Insurance of vehicle; required. 
Every person operating a taxicab in the city or the owner of any such taxicab shall provide the traffic officer with a copy of the insurance certificate showing that such vehicle is properly insured in accordance with the laws of the state, and such insurance company shall be properly licensed to do business in the state and the city. 
(Code 1972, § 27-35) 
Sec. 22-48. - Cancellation of insurance, notice required. 
The city shall be given a minimum of ten days' written notice of cancellation of vehicular insurance covering the operation of taxicabs. 
(Code 1972, § 27-37) 
Sec. 22-49. - Suspension of unsafe vehicle from service. 
The traffic officer or the city council may suspend from operation any taxicab found to be unsafe, and any vehicle so suspended shall not be permitted to again operate until repaired and put in proper condition for use. Prior to returning to service, such taxicab shall be inspected and approved by the traffic officer. 
(Code 1972, § 27-38) 
Sec. 22-50. - Sale, trade, exchange of vehicle. 
(a)  Notice required. If any owner or operator of a taxicab in the city shall sell, grade or exchange any taxicab being operated in the city and substitute another car therefor, it shall be the duty of the seller to notify the traffic officer within 24 hours of the sale, trade or exchange of the vehicle, and such owner or operator shall provide the officer with the identification number of such vehicle under which the vehicle is identified on the insurance policy on file. 
(b)  Transfer of insurance required. It shall be the duty of such owner or operator of the car substituted to furnish the traffic officer written endorsement of the insurance company issuing the vehicular insurance policy showing that the additional vehicle is properly insured under the terms of the policy. 
(Code 1972, § 27-39) 
Sec. 22-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-06, § VII, adopted March 11, 2003, amended the Code by repealing former § 22-51 in its entirety. Former § 22-51 pertained to right of licensee to furnish additional service; and derived from the Code of 1972, § 27-40. 
Sec. 22-52. - Rates and charges—Contents of schedule, posting required. 
Each taxicab operator licensed in the city shall post, at a conspicuous place in his taxicabs, a schedule of rates, such schedule clearly showing distances and prices therefor. Each such operator shall furnish a similar copy of such rates so posted in his taxicabs to the traffic officer. 
(Code 1972, § 27-57) 
Sec. 22-53. - Same—Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab owner or operator to fail to post or publish the rates as required in section 22-52 and, by himself or through his drivers, to charge rates in excess of those published. If the rates are not posted and/or there is an excessive charge, the city council may call for a hearing in which the owner or operator is allowed to appear and be heard and present evidence on the matter. If it is determined that this section or section 22-52 has been violated, the council may revoke or suspend such owner's or operator's license. 
(Code 1972, § 27-58) 
Sec. 22-54. - Maintenance of taxicabs, records by owners. 
Every owner of a taxicab or taxicab company shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Condition of taxicab. All taxicabs shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition at all times. 
(2)  Record of calls. He shall keep a record of all telephone calls for taxicabs service for a minimum of 30 days for use, if needed, by the police department. 
(Code 1972, § 27-61) 
Sec. 22-55. - Offices below street level prohibited. 
Taxicab companies shall not be permitted to have their offices below street level. 
(Code 1972, § 27-63) 
Secs. 22-56—22-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVERS 

Sec. 22-71. - Permit—Required, application fee. 
Before any person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city, he shall first pay to the traffic officer a registration fee as set by the city council and shall make a written and signed application to such traffic officer which shall contain the following information: name, residence, telephone number, age, date of birth, height, weight, hair color, color of eyes, number of years experience driving motor vehicles, whether he has been convicted of any felonies, misdemeanors or traffic ordinance violations, and if so, giving the dates and details and any other information requested by the traffic officer. The applicant shall also provide the names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two references who can answer questions related to the background investigation which will be conducted by the traffic officer. If the applicant desires a permit to drive for the owner of a taxicab business, the applicant shall include the name of such owner. Such permit shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis. 
(Code 1972, § 27-24) 
Sec. 22-72. - Same—Action upon application. 
(a)  Issuance of permit; contents. After receipt of the application for permit provided for in section 22-71, the traffic officer shall consider the same, and if satisfied from such application and other evidence that applicant is a fit and proper person to safely drive a taxicab in the city, and that application complies with the provisions of this article and the traffic ordinances of the city, the permit shall be granted the applicant and signed by the traffic officer. The permit shall contain the name and description of the applicant and such other data as the traffic officer deems proper. 
(b)  Denial of permit. The chief of police shall investigate each applicant for a taxicab license. He shall also check the record of each applicant for felony convictions and/or traffic violations. Any person who has been convicted of, pled guilty to or forfeited bonds as being in violation of traffic offenses totalling more than 20 points, as provided by state law within the five years immediately prior to his application for a license, shall not be entitled to a permit to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 27-25) 
Sec. 22-73. - Same—Posting inside taxicab. 
The name and picture of each taxicab driver, with his signature appearing thereon, shall be attached to the permit issued to such driver, and such permit, picture and signature shall be prominently displayed inside each taxicab such driver operates. 
(Code 1972, § 27-26) 
Sec. 22-74. - Same—Suspension, revocation. 
Each permit granted for the privilege of driving a taxicab upon the streets of the city is subject to suspension or revocation, or both, by the traffic officer whenever the holder of such permit violates or fails to comply with a provision of this article, whether or not there has been a trial of such driver before any court. The traffic officer shall notify such driver in writing of the suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1972, § 27-27) 
Sec. 22-75. - Same—Appeal from denial, suspension, revocation. 
Any person to whom the traffic officer has denied a permit to drive a taxicab, and any person whose permit has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the city council, which may, by resolution, grant or deny relief as may appear proper to the council and in accordance with the terms and intent of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 27-28) 
Sec. 22-76. - Same—Extent of authority of traffic officer. 
Because of the necessity of providing for the public safety and the public health, and because the driving of taxicabs upon the streets of the city is a mere privilege and not a right, a wide discretion shall be vested in the traffic officer in granting of refusing permits, suspending and revoking such permits and carrying out the provisions and intent of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 27-29) 
Sec. 22-77. - Same—Extent of authority of council. 
The city council shall not be limited in the control over permits to operate taxicabs to cases appealed from the action of the traffic officer, nor to cases arising because of violations of the terms of this article. The council shall have the power to suspend or revoke any permit granted for the driving of a taxicab on city streets whenever it finds that such suspension or revocation would be in the public interest. 
(Code 1972, § 27-30) 
Sec. 22-78. - Health generally. 
(a)  All persons applying for permits to drive or already driving taxicabs on city streets shall be in good health and be capable of physically performing the work as a driver. 
(b)  No person shall drive a taxicab when on account of poor eyesight not corrected by glasses, or on account of bodily or mental infirmity, or being afflicted by infectious or contagious disease or for other reasons, he is unable safely to drive a taxicab upon such streets. 
(c)  Should the traffic officer have concerns about the capability of any applicant to comply with this section, he may require that such applicant, at his own expense, undergo a physical examination by a licensed physician. Refusal of the applicant to undergo the examination shall constitute grounds for denial of the permit. 
(Code 1972, § 27-42) 
Sec. 22-79. - Fingerprinting. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city until he has had his fingerprints taken by the police department of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 27-43) 
Sec. 22-80. - Effect of felony conviction. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city who has been convicted or pled guilty to an offense constituting a felony; however, if such person has had his civil and political rights restored and/or been given a pardon, such felony conviction will not bar such person from receiving a permit authorizing him to drive a taxicab in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 27-44) 
Sec. 22-81. - Appearance. 
All taxicab drivers shall be neat in appearance while on duty, clean in person and dress. No person shall operate a taxicab without shoes and each driver must wear a shirt, blouse or top. 
(Code 1972, § 27-45) 
Sec. 22-82. - Familiarity with ordinances required. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city until he has shown, upon examination by the traffic officer, a familiarity with the provisions of this article, the same to be furnished by the traffic officer to each driver. 
(Code 1972, § 27-46) 
Sec. 22-83. - Obedience to police. 
A person driving a taxicab upon the streets of the city shall bring the vehicle to a full stop immediately upon command of a member of the police department of the city or any other law enforcement officer, and shall proceed only as lawfully directed by such officer. 
(Code 1972, § 27-47) 
Sec. 22-84. - Driving while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or narcotics. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or who habitually uses alcoholic beverages or narcotics. 
(Code 1972, § 27-48) 
Sec. 22-85. - Transporting alcoholic beverages, narcotics. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a licensed taxicab service in the city or any driver operating a taxicab in the city under such license, knowingly to haul any form of alcoholic beverages or narcotics in such taxicab. 
(b)  Revocation of operator's license. If the driver of any taxicab in the city knowingly allows or permits alcoholic beverages or narcotics to be hauled in the taxicab operated by him, the holder or owner of the license issued by the city, under which such taxicab is being operated, shall forfeit his license and the license shall be automatically revoked. If any license is forfeited and revoked because a driver is guilty of hauling alcoholic beverages or narcotics, the licensee shall have the right of a hearing before the city council at such time and place as the city council may designate. Pending such hearing before the city council, the owner or holder of such license shall not operate the taxicab service under and by virtue of any such license. 
(c)  Forfeiture of driver's rights. It shall be unlawful for any driver guilty of knowingly hauling alcoholic beverages or narcotics in any taxicab driver by him to again drive a taxicab in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 27-49) 
Sec. 22-86. - Transporting prostitutes. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city transporting prostitutes or soliciting or transporting persons for the purposes of prostitution. 
(Code 1972, § 27-50) 
Sec. 22-87. - Cruising. 
No driver of a taxicab shall cruise in search of passengers at any time but shall proceed from an origin by the most convenient and direct route to the required destination. When a taxicab is empty of passengers it shall, if awaiting a radio call for another trip, remain parked at a convenient location in the general area of the last destination, or proceed directly to its headquarters or to a designated cab stand without soliciting passengers in route. 
(Code 1972, § 27-51) 
Sec. 22-88. - Number of passengers restricted. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city when such vehicle contains passengers in excess of the maximum number for which the vehicle was designed. 
(Code 1972, § 27-52) 
Sec. 22-89. - Front seat passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab to permit a person to ride with him upon the front seat of the taxicab while operating in the city, unless the rear seat of such taxicab is fully occupied by passengers; however, the driver may require a passenger to ride in the front seat if the driver feels a concern for his personal safety. The driver may also allow a physically incapacitated person to ride in the front seat. In making charges under this section, the investigating officer shall consider all circumstances including weather conditions and the health and infirmity of passengers or other valid reasons for the driver to allow passengers in the front seat. 
(Code 1972, § 27-53) 
Sec. 22-90. - Refusal to transport orderly passengers. 
No driver of a taxicab shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly persons upon request unless such taxicab is previously engaged or is unable or forbidden to do so by provisions of city ordinances or by state law. 
(Code 1972, § 27-54) 
Sec. 22-91. - Receipt, discharge of passengers. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall drive to the sidewalk or curb on the right-hand side of such roadway to receive and discharge passengers. 
(Code 1972, § 27-56) 
Sec. 22-92. - Inspection of taxicab, driver. 
Every person applying for a permit to drive or who drives a taxicab upon the streets of the city must submit himself and the taxicab driven by him to the inspection of the traffic officer whenever so directed by such officer. 
(Code 1972, § 27-60) 
Secs. 22-93—22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIMOUSINES 

Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for a luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than ten passengers and with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle, and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designated to allow passenger entry or exit; further, no vehicle shall be permitted to operate both as a taxicab and a limousine. 
Limousine carrier means any person operating a service regularly rendered to the public by furnishing transportation as a motor common carrier for hire, not over fixed routes, by means of limousines, or extended limousines, on the basis of verbal contract or written contract. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, or joint-stock association, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or personal representative thereof. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § VIII, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 22-102. - Occupational taxes. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.11, limousine carriers shall be subject to the occupational taxes set forth in article I of chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Newnan. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § VIII, 3-11-03) 
Sec. 22-103. - Regulatory fee. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.11, the state having preempted the regulation of limousine carriers, no regulatory fees or requirements for operation shall be imposed on limousine businesses except as otherwise provided by law, and the provisions of articles I and II of this chapter, if not so pre-empted, shall then apply. 
(Ord. No. 03-06, § VIII, 3-11-03) 
Secs. 22-104—22-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES 

Sec. 22-120. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except, where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal warden shall mean the animal control officer of the city. 
Chief of police shall mean the chief of police of the city. 
City shall mean the City of Newnan, Georgia. 
City clerk shall mean the city clerk of the city. 
City manager shall mean the city manager of the city. 
Company means the holder of a license to operate a horse-drawn carriage business under the provisions of this article whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Draft animal means a horse, mule or other beast of burden, used for the drawing of horse-drawn carriage. 
Draft animal permit means the written document issued by the city identifying a draft animal drawing a horse-drawn carriage for a designated licensed company within the city. 
Driver means any person who drives or operates a horse-drawn carriage on the streets of the city for a licensed company. 
Driver's permit means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a horse-drawn carriage within the city. 
Horse-drawn carriage means any hack or carriage, which is operated by being drawn by a horse, mule or other beast of burden, for the transportation for hire of passengers. 
Inspector (chief of police or his designee) means the individual employee or organizational unit of the city charged with the responsibility for enforcing this article, except for specific responsibilities otherwise provided in this article. 
License means the right and privilege granted by the city for the operation of a business incorporating the use of one or more horse-drawn carriages within the corporate limits of the city. 
Stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere, which has been designated by the mayor and council, as reserved exclusively for the use of horse-drawn carriages. 
Street shall mean and include any street, alley, lane, avenue, court of public place within the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-121. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Violation of this article may be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued under this article. Penalties for violation of this article are as follows: 
(1)  First offense, a fine of ..... $250.00 
(2)  Second offense, a fine of ..... 750.00 
(3)  Third offense ..... license revoked 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-122. - Licensing of horse-drawn carriage companies. 
(a)  License. 
(1)  Required. No person shall operate a business involving the use of one or more horse-drawn carriages on the streets of the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city. The license shall be effective only for the calendar year stated in the license, unless suspended or revoked sooner as provided by ordinance. The annual license fee shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and council. In addition, the licensee shall file and pay annually the occupational tax fee due the city. 
(2)  Application. Application for the license shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk and shall provide such information as is required for other business license applications, and such additional information as may be necessary to define completely the business operation. 
(3)  Certification of EIA. Each applicant must produce, if demanded by the animal warden, inspector or city manager, a valid equine infectious anemia (EIA) certification for each animal. 
(b)  Operating regulations. In addition to the license requirements imposed in this section, no license shall be issued to any carriage operator unless the operator complies with the following operating regulations: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian shall certify, after due and proper inspection, the good health of each draft animal before it is placed into service. One such health inspection shall be required for each animal within six months of the application for a license and annually thereafter upon renewal of license, if requested by the animal warden, inspector or city manager. 
(2)  Unless written approval is given by a licensed veterinarian, no animal having open sores or wounds or any disease or ailment shall be permitted to be in service on the streets of the city. 
(3)  Each draft animal shall have its hooves properly trimmed and shod for street surfaces. 
(4)  Each animal shall be groomed daily and not have fungus, dandruff, or a dirty coat. 
(5)  Harnesses shall be properly fitted, maintained, and oiled so that no irritating material will come in direct contact with the animal. 
(6)  No driver may use more than a light touch of the whip upon any animal, and no driver or other persons may forcefully strike an animal, and make movements or noise intended to frighten or harm an animal. 
(7)  No driver shall permit an animal to pull a carriage at a speed faster than a slow trot, except in extreme emergency situations. 
(8)  No animal shall be subject to any condition or treatment, whether in service or out of service, which will impair the good health and physical condition of that animal. 
(9)  Adequate water shall be provided. 
(10)  Ventilation adequate to ensure the health and comfort of animals shall be provided. 
(11)  Food shall be free of contamination. 
(12)  All laws as cited as the "Humane Care for Equines Act" (O.C.G.A. § 4-13-1 et seq.), as well as all other state and federal laws governing equines. 
(13)  No one animal may be worked for more than eight hours per day. The driver must keep a log of starting and ending times for each animal. Such log should be kept in a bound book form and stored on the carriage being pulled. 
(14)  No driver shall work an animal pulling a horse-drawn carriage when the outside temperature exceeds 90 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(15)  No sound device will be used that transmits volume more than 25 feet from the carriage. 
(c)  Inspection of operating practices. The inspector shall be empowered to inspect all operating practices of any carriage company to ensure continuous compliance with this article. 
(d)  Failure to comply with article provisions; non-issuance. Any applicant who refuses or fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall not be issued a business license until proof of compliance is presented by the applicant and certified by the inspector. The licensing requirements of this section shall be ongoing as requirements for continuous operation. 
(e)  Suspension. The chief of police and/or city manager may, upon recommendation of the inspector, temporarily suspend any carriage company license for violation of the provisions of this article, subject to license revocation action. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-123. - Insurance. 
(a)  Indemnity for benefit of city. Any horse-drawn carriage company operating under this article shall hold the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees, harmless against any and all liability, loss, damages or expenses which may accrue to the city by reason of negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company under this article. Nothing this article shall be considered to make the city, its officers, agents, servants or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any horse-drawn carriage company, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees, during the operation by the company of a horse-drawn carriage business or service, either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(b)  Insurance for benefit of passengers. Any horse-drawn carriage company desiring a license to do business shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a horse-drawn carriage. The minimum coverage shall be $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person, which are sustained in the same accident, and $50,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. The indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of a horse-drawn carriage company, its servants or agents. 
(c)  Blanket policy. Any company or person operating a horse-drawn carriage in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance for each separate horse-drawn carriage for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one horse-drawn carriage, in which event such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all the horse-drawn carriages actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning horse-drawn carriages who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed horse-drawn carriage name. 
(d)  Notice when avoided. Before any policy of insurance required by this article is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice shall be given by the licensee in writing, to the city clerk at least five days before the policy shall take effect. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-124. - Driver's permits. 
(a)  Driver's permits. 
(1)  Required. No person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or operates a horse-drawn carriage company shall permit a horse-drawn carriage to be driven, and no horse-drawn carriage operating under a horse-drawn carriage company licensed by the city shall be driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of the horse-drawn carriage shall first have obtained and shall have then in force a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Application. Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall submit an application in writing to the chief of police on a form to be furnished by the chief of police. The application shall be made under oath and shall state the age of the applicant, date of birth, his address, and whether he has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state or of this article or other ordinances of the city, and, if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. 
(3)  Qualifications of applicant. An applicant for a driver's permit under this article must not be less than 18 years of age, with no physical infirmities which might make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory horse-drawn carriage driver. The applicant shall not have been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs within two years prior to the date of the application for such permit, or have been convicted of reckless driving within one year prior to the date of the application for such permit, or been convicted of any of these offenses three or more times within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit. Nor shall a permit be issued to any person who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of any crime relating to transporting persons for immoral purposes (prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or any sex related offense), or who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit have been convicted, of, been on probation, parole, or served time on a sentence for a felony. A plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses set out in this section shall be deemed a conviction. [The applicant shall] be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Services. 
(4)  Fee. Before any permit is granted under this article, a driver's permit fee, in the amount of $35.00 shall be paid by the applicant. This fee shall include the cost of a criminal history background check. 
(5)  Current state driver's license required. Any person applying for a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit under this article must show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the state, and that the license is not under suspension or revocation. Applicant must furnish at least a five-year driver's history upon application. 
(6)  Examination of applicant. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to examine the applicant, criminal and traffic record, and other vouchers, and thereafter recommend to the chief of police or his designee to grant or refuse the permit. In the event of a refusal by the chief of police or his designee to grant a permit, the applicant shall have the right to enter an appeal to the city manager. Such appeal shall be filed in writing to the city manager within ten calendar days from the date of refusal to grant the permit. The city manager must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from receipt of the written appeal. Within ten calendar days from the appeals hearing, the city manager shall render a written decision as to the city manager's decision on the appeal. 
(7)  Displayed in horse-drawn carriage. The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed in the horse-drawn carriage to be operated by the holder of the permit. 
(8)  Alteration. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit, or cause or allow the same. 
(9)  Transfer. Any horse-drawn carriage driver's permit issued under this article is not transferable, and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued. 
(10)  Duration. Any horse-drawn carriage driver's permit shall be valid for that calendar year. Permits may be renewed upon application and payment of the required fee, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. 
(11)  Suspension. The inspector shall recommend to the chief of police to suspend the driver's permit for the following reasons: 
a.  Making any false statement in the application for the person; or 
b.  Operating a horse-drawn carriage in violation of any provision of this article or of state law. 
The suspension by the chief of police shall be lifted upon dismissal or dropping of the charges described upon correction of the violation of any provision of this article, upon ruling in favor of the driver in any appeal hearing before the city manager, or at the expiration of 60 days from the date of suspension. From the decision to suspend a permit, the holder of such permit shall have the right to appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city manager within ten calendar days from the date of suspension, and the city manager must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from receipt of the filing by the city clerk of the written appeal. Within ten calendar days from the appeals hearing, the city manager shall render a written decision on the appeal. 
(12)  Revocation. If any driver holding a permit under this article at any time ceases to meet the qualifications described in subsection (c) of this section or fails to operate his horse-drawn carriage in accordance with the provisions of this article, the city manager shall be empowered to permanently revoke the permit. The holder of such permit shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city manager to the mayor and council in the manner prescribed in subsection (14) of this section. 
(13)  Driving after revocation or suspension. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire for the carriage of passengers during any period in which his permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(14)  Appeals. Any appeal of a decision made by the chief of police to revoke a horse-drawn carriage driver's permit, pursuant to this section, shall be made in writing to the city manager within ten calendar days of the ruling. The city manager must convene an appeals hearing within 20 calendar days from the filing with the chief of police of the written appeal. The appellant shall have the right to be represented by counsel. Within ten calendar days from the appeals hearing; the city manager shall render a written decision on the appeal. 
(b)  Animal permits. 
(1)  Permits required. No draft animal shall be allowed to draw a horse-drawn carriage for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who holds a horse-drawn carriage license pursuant to this chapter shall permit any draft animal to draw a horse-drawn carriage at any time for hire, unless the license holder of the horse-drawn carriage has obtained and have in force a horse-drawn carriage draft animal permit issued under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Application. Any person desiring a permit required by this section shall submit an application in writing to the chief of police on a form furnished by the chief of police. The application shall be made under oath and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The name and description of the draft animal; 
b.  Date of birth of the draft animal; 
c.  Name and address of the owner of the draft animal; 
d.  The name and license number of the horse-carriage company for whom the draw animal shall labor; and 
e.  A photograph of the draft animal. 
(3)  Draft animal's permit fee. Before any permit is granted under this section, an administrative fee for the draft animal permit in the amount of $10.00 shall be paid by the applicant. 
(4)  Permit to be displayed in horse-drawn carriage. The permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be placed in the horse-drawn carriage then being drawn by the permitted draft animal. 
(5)  Alteration of permits prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a horse-drawn carriage draft animal permit, or cause or allow the same. 
(6)  Permit not transferable. Any horse-drawn carriage draft animal's permit issued under this section is not transferable, from draft animal to draft animal, and is to be used solely by the draft animal for which it is issued. 
(7)  Duration of permit. Any horse-drawn carriage draft animal's permit shall be valid for that calendar year. Permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-125. - Identification and marking generally. 
Every horse-drawn carriage shall have a sign plainly painted or affixed in an acceptable manner on the rear of each vehicle. The sign shall contain the full name of the horse-drawn carriage company operating the vehicle. Additionally, the sign shall conform with all sign standards for the city and be approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-126. - Safe mechanical condition of required. 
Every horse-drawn carriage operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is in service. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-127. - Cleanliness required. 
Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted and in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris, and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-128. - Vehicle inspections required. 
Each horse-drawn carriage may be inspected by the inspector for compliance with the provisions of this article and shall pass the inspection before the vehicle may be used as a horse-drawn carriage in the city. Each horse-drawn carriage involved in an accident shall be inspected by the inspector before it may be returned to service transporting passengers for hire. Inspections of the horse-drawn carriages may be done at any time by the inspector. Company is required to notify the chief of police anytime a carriage used in the city is involved in an accident. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-129. - Authority for removal from streets. 
The inspector shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a horse-drawn carriage that is in violation of this article, and to prohibit operation of the horse-drawn carriage until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the inspector to remove a vehicle from the streets may be appealed to the chief of police. The appeal must be made in writing to the chief of police no later than ten calendar days after the inspector has exercised his authority in removing a horse-drawn carriage from the street for violation of this article. The chief of police must convene a hearing within ten calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and must render a written decision to the appellant within ten calendar days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the chief of police may be appealed to the city manager, as provided for in section 22-124(a)(14). 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-130. - Rates of fare; rate cared required. 
No owner or driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall charge a greater sum for the use of the horse-drawn carriage than in accordance with the published and advertised rates, which shall be placed in or near each horse drawn carriage. Rates shall be displayed in such place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers, in or near the horse drawn carriage. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-131. - Driver not to leave vehicle while waiting to be hired. 
It is unlawful for any driver of any horse-drawn carriage to leave the vehicle or the immediate premises of the vehicle, while the vehicle is parked and while waiting to be hired. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-132. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a horse-drawn carriage as passengers than the seating capacity of the horse-drawn carriage, not to exceed ten people, including the driver. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-133. - Refusal to carry orderly passengers. 
No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-134. - Weight restrictions. 
The aggregate weight of the carriage, passengers and driver shall not exceed two times the body weight of the horse. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-135. - Movement of carriage prohibited under certain circumstances. 
No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his horse-drawn carriage is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-136. - Property left in carriage by passenger. 
Any horse-drawn carriage driver or operator, discovering in any horse-drawn carriage under his control, personal property which was lost or left by a passenger of such horse-drawn carriage, shall report the loss, and deliver all the property to the police department within two hours after the discovery of the property. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-137. - Safety equipment required. 
(a)  Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with electrically powered lights or lanterns and reflectors. Such lights shall be in use when operating during the hours of darkness and when raining. The lights and reflectors shall be mounted so that they are visible from a distance of 500 feet in all directions. Each horse-drawn carriage shall have on board at all times a first aid kit. 
(b)  Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with a suitable friction braking system, which will enable the carriage to stop. Such braking system shall be functional and operative at all times. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-138. - Area of operation. 
The inspector or chief of police or his designee may elect to set a route for horse-drawn carriages, to include a designated site for a loading and unloading stand. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-139. - Sanitation requirements. 
Manure and urine must be immediately treated with a chemical deodorizing solution, and manure must be removed immediately from the street by the carriage operator. Each carriage must be equipped with a suitable scoop shovel and airtight container. Horse diapers, which prevent excrement from being deposited on the street surface, may be used in lieu of a scoop shovel and an airtight container at the option of the operator. In the case of horse diapers, the diapers must be approved for efficiency by the inspector before they are used. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-140. - Traffic violations. 
(a)  Horse-drawn carriages shall be prohibited from stopping in traffic or delaying any on-street traffic for the purposes of loading and unloading passengers or for any other purpose. 
(b)  Every person riding any animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle within the city limits of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall operate the vehicles in accordance with the traffic laws of the city, as well as the state. 
(c)  Due to the nature of operating animal-drawn vehicles in areas of congestion and heavy traffic within the city, it shall be unlawful to operate the animal-drawn vehicles except when the animals are under complete control at all times, and shall be operated with extra caution and due care for the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-141. - Impediment of traffic flow. 
It shall be unlawful for any horse-drawn carriage to willfully impede the normal flow of traffic on any city street, alley or thoroughfare at any time. Horse-drawn carriages will be required to pull immediately to the nearest curb area when one or more vehicles are unable to safely pass or continue in normal traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-142. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Hours of operation: 

 
(b)  Hours of operation may be altered for special events planned in the downtown district only upon approval by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Private hires will be exempt from hours of operation from 8:00 a.m. until regular business hours subject to the requirements and restrictions contained in section 22-143. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-143. - Travel routes allowed. 
(a)  Horse drawn carriages will be allowed to travel only inside of the following areas: 
College Street from Clark Street to Spring Street to First Avenue to LaGrange Street, to Nimmons Street, to Greenville Street, to Salbide Avenue, to Perry Street, to Madison Street, to Jefferson Street, to Wesley Street, to College Street. 
(b)  Private hire: If someone wishes to hire the company for private use, the company must submit a request for an unloading site for the animal and carriage. The company must take the most direct route from their departure address to their destination address. The company must notify and receive approval from the chief of police of the proposed route to be used as soon as the route is known, but not less than one day. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-144. - Place of business required. 
If anyone operates a horse drawn carriage more than five days a week, the owner thereof shall maintain a place of business from a building located on private property with adequate off-street parking for all horse-drawn carriages not in service and adequate retention facilities for draft animals not in service within a commercially zoned district in which horse-drawn carriages for hire is a permitted use in accordance with the most recently adopted zoning map and have first obtained certification of compliance from the city zoning administrator. The location shall not be moved, except by the approved transfer of the license to another location. No draft animals shall be permitted to remain overnight at the location of the place of business. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-145. - Limits to the number of horse-drawn carriages. 
It shall be unlawful for any horse-drawn carriage company to operate more than two horse-drawn carriages for hire on the streets of the city at any given time. The city clerk may authorize more than two carriages to operate upon the company's request. Such request shall be in writing indicating the company's needs for additional carriages. The city clerk may approve the request for special events or with respect to special circumstances upon approval from the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
Sec. 22-146. - Compliance required. 
Failure to comply with this article or any of the laws, ordinances and regulations of this city can result in the revocation of permit and citation and punishment in municipal court as set forth in section 1-14 of the city's Code of Ordinances. Any ordinance or laws of this city, state of federal agency which governs the treatment of animals, including horses or other animals of burden, must be complied with by the horse-drawn carriage operator, passengers or agents of the horse-drawn carriage company. 
(Ord. No. 06-3, § 1, 2-14-06) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1972 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972 Code, as updated through January 25, 1988, which are included herein. Sections of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1972 Code, as updated through January 25, 1988, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1972 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since January 25, 1988, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in this Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE - OFFICIAL CODE OF GEORGIA ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 