CODE OF ORDINANCES - CITY OF NASHVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
THE CHARTER 
and 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the Mayor and Council 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF NASHVILLE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Hanson R. Carter 
Mayor 
____________ 
P. J. Griner, Jr. 
A. J. Powelle 
Mrs. Chris Barfield 
L. L. Chaney 
Randy J. McGill 
R. O. Griner 
City Council 
____________ 
Law Firm of Perry and Franklin, P. C. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Elaine H. Giddens 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF NASHVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Michael Richbourg 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mellisa Watson 
Billy Retterbush 
Antonio Carter 
Eric Gaither 
Walt Steward 
Scott Stalnaker 
City Council 
____________ 
Mitchell Moore 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mandy Luke 
City Manager/Finance Director 
____________ 
Randy Lane 
Assistant City Manager 
____________ 
Jackie Jordan 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of Nashville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, as supplemented through November 15, 2011, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This republication was under the direct supervision of Mary Summers, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Nashville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Nashville, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Nashville, Georgia. 2013. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter of the City of Nashville, Georgia, is derived from Act No. 1094 of Georgia Laws of 1978, page 4017 et seq., which was approved March 17, 1978. The act is set out herein as enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia. The section numbers and section catchlines of said act have been retained. Material appearing in brackets has been added by the editor. The title, the enacting clause and the indication of the governor's approval of the Charter have been omitted. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 1-1. - Title and citation. 
This Act shall be known as the "Charter of the City of Nashville, Georgia" and may be cited as and referred to herein as the "Charter." 
Section 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  As used in this charter the following meanings, respectively, shall be given to the following terms, unless otherwise specifically provided or a different meaning is apparent from the context: 
(1)  "City" shall refer to the municipal corporation, Nashville, Georgia, or the territory embraced within the boundaries of the municipality, dependent upon the context. 
(2)  "City limits" shall refer to and mean the territory embraced within the boundaries of the city. 
(3)  "Company" means corporation. 
(4)  "Council" or "city council" shall mean the persons elected or serving as provided in this charter. 
(5)  "County" or "this county" shall mean the County of Berrien, in the State of Georgia. 
(6)  "Day" means a full day of twenty-four (24) hours, commencing at midnight, Eastern Time. 
(7)  "Elector" means a person residing within the city who is qualified to vote therein. 
(8)  "In" may be the equivalent of "on." 
(9)  "Is" may mean "shall be." 
(10)  "May" ordinarily denotes permission and not command; where it concerns the public interest or affects the rights of third persons, it will be construed to mean "must" or "shall." 
(11)  "Mayor" shall mean the Mayor of Nashville, Georgia. 
(12)  "Month" means a calendar month. 
(13)  "Next" means "in the nearest time," "just after," "immediately following." 
(14)  "Oath" includes affirmation. 
(15)  "Officer" shall mean and include the mayor, councilmen, members of boards and commissions, and any other persons classified as public officers by the laws or judicial decisions of this State. An "officer" as herein defined shall fill an office and an employee shall fill a position of employment. 
(16)  "Or" is ordinarily to be understood in the disjunctive sense, but will be construed as "and" when necessary to effectuate a legislative intent manifested by the context and surrounding circumstances. 
(17)  "Person" shall include individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, companies, corporations and all legal entities. When used with reference to the omission or commission of acts required or forbidden, it shall include persons, as above defined, participating in such omission or commission of acts, and their agents, employees and servants, acting within the scope of their authority and so participating. 
(18)  "Preceding" means next before. 
(19)  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
(20)  "Shall" is mandatory. 
(21)  "State" or "this State" shall mean the State of Georgia, in the United States of America. 
(22)  "Streets" means street, sidewalk and public way and place used for travel, and shall include bridges thereon. 
(23)  "Until" a certain day or hour includes all of such day or hour. 
(24)  "While" means "pending" or "during the time." 
(25)  "Writing" includes printing and numerals. 
(26)  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(b)  Terms not defined herein, but which are defined in the laws of the State shall have the meanings given in said laws. 
(c)  The following rules shall govern in the construction of the provisions of this charter: 
(1)  Unless otherwise expressly or by necessary implication provided, the ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or trade or words connected with a particular subject matter, which shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such art, trade or subject matter. 
(2)  The present or past tense shall include the future. 
(3)  The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
(4)  The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly or by necessary implication included. 
(5)  A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(6)  Substantial compliance with a requirement of any provision of this charter, especially on the part of officers of the municipality, shall be deemed sufficient, unless otherwise expressly or by necessary implication provided. 
(7)  When a number of days, months or years is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Sunday, another day shall be allowed in the computation. 
(8)  Grammatical errors shall not vitiate; and a transposition of words, phrases and clauses may be resorted to when a sentence, clause or phrase is without meaning as it stands. 
(9)  The object of the construction of this Charter shall be to ascertain the intention of the enacting authority; and to that end there shall be kept in view at all times the old law, the evil, the remedy and the surrounding circumstances. 
Section 1-3. - Incorporation; name, style, designation, authority as body politic and corporate. 
(a)  The City of Nashville, in Berrien County, Georgia, heretofore made a body politic and corporate by Acts of the General Assembly of the State, under the name of the City of Nashville, shall continue a body politic and corporate, known by the corporate name of the "City of Nashville," hereinafter also referred to as "the city." 
(b)  As a body politic and corporate, the city shall have authority to govern itself and its inhabitants by such ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and bylaws for municipal purposes as may be adopted and promulgated under the terms and provisions of this charter, not in conflict with the Constitution or laws of this State or of the United States, with authority in and by its corporate name to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded in all courts, and have and use a common seal, buy, hold, exchange, sell and convey property, make all necessary and lawful contracts, transact all of its business, and do all other things necessary to promote the municipal corporate purposes of said city. Said corporation, through its city council, shall have all of the authority, powers and privileges incident to municipal corporations under the laws of the State, and all other authority necessary and proper to make, regulate, maintain and preserve a proper and legal government for said city. 
Section 1-4. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the city as they exist on the effective date of this charter are hereby recognized, ratified and confirmed. 
Section 1-5. - Vesting of rights, etc. 
All properties, titles, easements, hereditaments, privileges, related rights and powers belonging or in any way appertaining to the city as heretofore incorporated, are hereby vested absolutely in the city, incorporated under this charter in the same manner and to the same extent as they were had by the former city. 
Section 1-6. - Assumption of debts, etc. 
The city as created by this charter is hereby made responsible as a corporate body for all legal debts, liabilities and undertakings of the city as heretofore incorporated. 
Section 1-7. - Continuation in office of mayor and aldermen and other officers. 
(a)  The mayor and aldermen who are serving in these offices of the city at the time of the approval of this charter shall continue to serve in their respective offices for and during the full terms for which they were elected. 
(b)  Other officers shall continue in office until removed or replaced as provided by law or ordinance. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

Section 2-1. - Generally. 
The municipal government of the city and its corporate powers shall be vested in and exercised by a mayor and a city council, consisting of six (6) members and also by officers, agents and employees under their authority except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Section 2-2. - Qualifications. 
In order for a person to be eligible to hold the office of a mayor, or to be a member of the city council, he shall, at the time of his filing and qualifying for office: 
(1)  Have been a resident of the city for at least twelve (12) consecutive months; 
(2)  Be a qualified voter in the city; 
(3)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(4)  Have been a freeholder in the city for at least two (2) years. 
Section 2-3. - Oath of office. 
(a)  The mayor and all members of the city council shall, before they enter on the duties of their respective offices, take the following oath or affirmation: 
I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will faithfully execute the office of mayor (or councilman as the case may be) of the City of Nashville, Georgia, and will to the best of my ability, preserve and protect and defend the city charter, the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Constitution of the United States of America. 
Persons elected to the office of mayor or to the city council shall take such oath at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in December following their election, or if such person was elected at a special election, at such time as the mayor and city council shall designate. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his oath of office. Any person violating such oath shall be subject to impeachment and removal from office in the manner provided herein, or to punishment to the maximum extent authorized for violations of city ordinances, or to both such removal and punishment. 
Section 2-4. - Failure to attend meetings. 
If the mayor or any member of the city council fails to attend eight (8) regularly scheduled consecutive meetings of the city council in any calendar year, such person's office shall be declared vacant and the office shall be filled as provided in this charter. 
Section 2-5. - Filling of vacancies. 
If the office of mayor or councilman becomes vacant by death, resignation, removal or otherwise, the mayor and city council by resolution adopted within ten (10) days of such vacancy shall order an election to fill such vacancy; provided, however, that if any of such offices become vacant at any time within three (3) months of the expiration of the term of office, the city council shall have the right and power to fill said office for the remainder of the term by appointment made by the mayor and city councilmen. 
Section 2-6. - Mayor pro tem generally. 
There shall be a mayor pro tem who shall be selected annually by the mayor, with the consent of the city council, from among the membership of the council. 
(2003 Ga. Laws) 
Section 2-7. - Meetings generally. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the mayor and city council shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at such time as shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the mayor and city council shall be held only upon call of the mayor, the mayor pro tem, or upon the written request of two (2) members of the city council. The city clerk shall give written notice of a special meeting to all members of the city council and the mayor if they are in the city within twenty-four (24) hours of the meeting. 
Section 2-8. - Quorum; procedure. 
A majority of the members of the city council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business. Any councilman shall have the right to call for the ayes and nays and have the same recorded on the minutes in all cases. The mayor shall have no vote, except in the case of a tie. The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Section 2-9. - Powers generally. 
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the mayor and city council, shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  General. To exercise all powers and authority provided elsewhere in this charter. 
(b)  Enactment of ordinances, etc. To make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the city. 
(c)  Codification of ordinances and resolutions. To codify the general and permanent ordinances and resolutions of the city and cause such ordinances to be published as a Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Emergency situations. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(e)  Corporate limits. To fix the corporate limits of the city in a manner not inconsistent with the law. 
(f)  Departments, offices, etc. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon those agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; and to make investigations into the conduct thereof as authorized in this charter. 
(g)  Elections. To regulate city elections in the manner provided by general law. 
(h)  Contracts and agreements for service. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor. 
(i)  Intergovernmental cooperation. To cooperate with any department or agency of the State or federal government, or any political subdivision of the State, in making of public improvements and doing the things which contribute to the health, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and for this purpose may expend such public funds as are necessary to effectuate said purpose. 
(j)  Insurance and retirement. To establish and maintain a retirement system and insurance plan for officers and employees of the city and to provide the methods of financing such systems and plans. 
(k)  Property acquisition, etc. To acquire, dispose of and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, within and without the city. 
(l)  Appropriations generally, expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city, to authorize the expenditure of monies for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(m)  Appropriations and borrowing for payment of debts; issuance of bonds. To appropriate and borrow monies for payment of the debts of the city, and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the State. 
(n)  Property tax levy and collection. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, reevaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; and to contract with any city, county or other governmental or political subdivision for any service in connection with the taxation process authorized by State law, including without limitation, the ministerial acts of billing and collection of city ad valorem taxes. 
(o)  Exempting property from taxation. To exempt property from taxation as authorized by law. 
(p)  Back taxes. To provide for the collection on back taxes and penalties thereon. 
(q)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements. 
(r)  License fees and taxes. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such license fees and taxes. 
(s)  Permits and fees. To provide for the issuance of permits and for the revocation thereof and to prescribe fees for the issuance thereof. 
(t)  Taxes for advertising the city and for hospitals, libraries, etc. To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising said city and its advantages and resources so as to bring new capital, commercial, manufacturing and other enterprises into the city; and also to levy taxes and to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city for the support of public hospitals, libraries, and other municipal facilities. 
(u)  Laying out, etc., public ways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light, streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, walkways, and other public ways. 
(v)  Control of public ways. To regulate and control public streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, walkways and other public ways; and to prevent the blocking of streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, walkways, and other public ways and railroad crossings. 
(w)  Public facilities and improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment facilities, quarries, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, communication, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities and any other public improvements, within and without the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or other applicable Public Acts as are or may be enacted. 
(x)  Traffic regulations. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, walkways and other public ways of the city. 
(y)  Vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; and to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance. 
(z)  Executions. To issue executions for the collection of any debt or claim due the city, arising by ordinance, or by contract, express or implied, by tort, or otherwise. Said executions may issue and be satisfied as provided in this charter or as otherwise authorized by law. 
(aa)  Filing claims against city. To provide for the filing of claims against the city and for the barring of such claims unless properly filed. 
(bb)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside of the city, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the mayor and city council, under Section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia of 1933, or under other applicable Public Acts, as are or may be enacted. 
(cc)  Ownership, etc., of utilities generally. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities; including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility, within and without the city, and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, and regulations for same, and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same or to abide by such regulations, and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced. 
(dd)  Sewer charges. To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and expansion of a sewage disposal plant and extension of a sewer system and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewer system a sewer service charge, fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; and to charge, impose and collect sewer connection fees and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewer system. 
(ee)  Collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, recyclable materials. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; to take all necessary and proper means for keeping the city free from garbage, trash and filth; to levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services, to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(ff)  CATV. To acquire rights-of-way and easements for, purchase, construct, own, sell and dispose of, maintain, operate, extend and improve a community antenna television system, (CATV) within and without the city, subject to the provisions of applicable State law, and to prescribe the charges, rates, fares, fees, regulations and standards and conditions of service to be provided, and to impose a lien against any property of the persons served, said lien to be enforceable in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
(gg)  Franchises. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, and other things. The council may prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with laws of the State. 
(hh)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(ii)  Pollution control. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams, ponds and other bodies of water within the city. 
(jj)  Zoning, planning and subdivisions. To adopt by ordinance a plan or plans for the zoning of the city in the interest of public health, safety, order, convenience, comfort, aesthetics, prosperity, or general welfare, and for the purpose of regulating the location of trades, industries, apartment houses, dwellings, and other uses of property; or for the purpose of regulating the height and location of the buildings, fences and other structures; for the purpose of regulating the alignment of buildings or other structures near street frontages; for the purpose of preserving buildings, structures or areas having national, regional, State or local historic significance; and for the purpose of maintaining or improving the aesthetic appearance of any buildings, structures or areas. The zoning regulations may be based upon any one or more of the purposes above described. The city may be divided into such number of zones or districts, and such districts may be of such shape and area as the city council shall deem best to accomplish the purposes of the zoning regulations. The mayor and city council may prescribe regulations for the subdividing or platting of property. 
(kk)  Fire limits, fire prevention and protection. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof. 
(ll)  Building construction and repair. To establish minimum standards for and to regulate the erection and construction and repair of buildings and other structures, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, air-conditioning installation and equipment, plumbing, warm air heating installation and equipment, and housing, for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; to adopt by reference building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, mechanical, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades, and to license all building trades and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures. 
(mm)  Dangerous structures. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(nn)  Adoption of published codes, etc. To adopt by reference any codes, publication or compilation of rules, regulations, specifications, standards, limitations, or requirements by an agency of the federal, State or county government or by a municipality, by a trade association or other organization generally recognized as an authority in its field of activity. 
(oo)  Signs, etc. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets, roads or other public ways, or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(pp)  Police power. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental or likely to be detrimental to the health, morals, safety, security, peace, convenience, or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, within the city and on any property outside of the city and owned by the city. 
(qq)  Animals and fowl. To regulate, license, tax or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment thereof for violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition, by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance. 
(rr)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance in the city and to provide for its abatement, whether on public or private property. 
(ss)  Alcoholic beverages. To regulate and control the manufacture, sale or transportation of alcoholic beverages, and license and tax the same in a manner not inconsistent with the law. 
(tt)  Loitering, disorderly conduct, etc. To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct and disturbing the peace in the city and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein, and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct or activity within the city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this State, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of its citizens. 
(uu)  Peddlers, shows, etc. To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind whatever by taxation or otherwise. 
(vv)  Dangerous activities or conditions. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the use and sale of firearms, and to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property. 
(ww)  Penalty for violation of ordinances, etc. To provide that upon the conviction of the violation of any ordinance, code, rule, regulation, or order, the offender may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or confinement in the city jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. 
(xx)  Inquiries and investigations. To make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the mayor and city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(yy)  Additional powers generally. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under the Constitution and other laws of the State. No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but instead shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable Public Acts of the State. 
Any other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, all legislative power shall be vested in the city council. 
Section 2-10. - Mayor's powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city council. He shall also be the chief executive officer of the city government and shall see that all laws, ordinances, orders, bylaws, resolutions, and regulations of the city or of any departments of the city are properly executed and enforced, and that all officers of the city shall properly execute and perform their duties. Subject to the provisions of this charter, he shall have control of the police department of the city and shall see that the peace and good order of the city are preserved and that persons and property therein are protected. He shall exercise general supervision over the affairs of the city and shall make such recommendations to the city council from time to time as may to him seem proper for the public good. 
(b)  In the absence, disqualification or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall discharge his functions; and if he, for the same reasons cannot act, then another member of the city council shall be selected by the councilmen to act temporarily. 
Section 2-11. - Construction of powers. 
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS 

Section 3-1. - Electors. 
Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector by the city clerk shall be eligible to vote in a city primary or election. The council shall provide by ordinance for the manner of registration of voters. 
Section 3-2. - Filing for office. 
All candidates for mayor or the city council shall file with the city clerk, in a book kept for such purpose, at least fifteen (15) days before the election day paying any required qualification fee to the city clerk. No person shall be qualified and eligible to hold the office of mayor or councilman or have his name placed upon the ballot of a city election who does not comply with the provisions of this Section. 
Section 3-3. - [City council and councilmen.] 
(a)  The three (3) councilmen elected in November, 1989, whose terms normally expire on the second Monday in December shall remain in office until December 31, 1991, and until their successors are elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 1991, and biennially thereafter, the successors to such three (3) councilmen shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of two (2) years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following their election. 
(b)  The three (3) councilmen who are to be elected in November, 1990, whose terms normally expire on the second Monday in December shall remain in office until December 31, 1992, and until their successors are elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 1992, and biennially thereafter, the successors to such three (3) councilmen shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of two (2) years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following their election. 
(c)  The city council is divided into six (6) posts to be designated Post No. 1, Post No. 2, Post No. 3, Post No. 4, Post No. 5 and Post No. 6. The councilmen to be elected in the municipal elections to be held in each even-numbered year shall be elected to Post No. 1, Post No. 2, and Post No. 3, respectively. The councilmen to be elected in the municipal elections to be held in each odd-numbered year shall be elected to Post No. 4, Post No. 5 and Post No. 6, respectively. Any person seeking election as a councilman shall designate the city council post to which he seeks election and shall seek election only to the post so designated. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed as requiring the division of the territory of the city councilmanic districts or the establishment of councilmanic districts. (1990 Ga. Laws, p. 4430) 
Section 3-4. - Mayor. 
The mayor to be elected in November, 1990, whose term normally expires on the second Monday in December, shall remain in office until December 31, 1992, and until a successor is elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1992, and biennially thereafter, the successor to such mayor shall be elected and shall serve for a term of office of two (2) years and until a successor is elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following such election. (1990 Ga. Laws, p. 4430) 
Section 3-5. - Election to be by majority vote. 
Any provision of this charter to the contrary notwithstanding, no person shall be elected mayor or councilman in any election unless such person has received a majority of the votes cast to fill the office of mayor or councilman. 
Section 3-6. - Standing committees. 
At the first regular meeting in December of each year the mayor shall appoint standing committees of the city council whose duties shall be as provided by the council. 
ARTICLE IV. - LEGISLATION 

Section 4-1. - Generally. 
(a)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, or the Constitution and the laws of the State, or the United States, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the city, and may enforce the same by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(b)  Any action of the city council having a regulatory or penal effect or otherwise required to be done by ordinance, shall be done only by ordinance. The appointment of city officers or employees and the waiving of the rules of the city council may be done by simple motion. Any action of the city council which is not required or permitted by State law or this charter to be done by ordinance or permitted by this charter to be done by motion shall be done by resolution. 
Section 4-2. - Enactment procedure. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, every official action of the council which is to become law shall be introduced in writing in the form required for final adoption. 
(b)  No ordinance shall be valid if it refers to more than one subject matter or contains matter different from what is expressed in its title. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (b) shall not be construed to prohibit the adoption of a code of ordinances or the adoption of building, housing, plumbing, electrical, mechanical and air-conditioning codes for [or] the Georgia Rules of the Road (Georgia Code, Title 68A), by reference. 
(d)  The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be as follows: 
"Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nashville, Georgia". 
If the enacting clause of an ordinance is not verbatim the language required above, but is substantially the language required above, the ordinance shall be valid. If the enacting clause of an ordinance is not verbatim the language required above, or is not substantially the language required above, the ordinance shall be invalid. 
(e)  The affirmative vote of a majority of the city council present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
(f)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the city council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, that all ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall not be adopted until the next regular meeting of the council following the meeting of their initial introduction. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the city clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor, and to each councilman, and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the council may designate. 
(g)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the total membership of the city council shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. 
(h)  Upon becoming law the title of all ordinances shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The city clerk shall attest to such publication in the official records of the city. 
(i)  Ordinances shall become effective upon the date provided therein; provided, however, that no ordinance shall become effective: 
(1)  Prior to its becoming law; 
(2)  Prior to the public of the title in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, as provided in subsection (h) except that this clause shall not apply to emergency ordinances. 
If no effective date is specified in an ordinance, it shall become effective upon its becoming law and after its publication as required in subsection (i). 
(j)  The enactment procedures for resolutions and motions of the city council shall be as provided by rules of the council, except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Section 4-3. - When legislation becomes law. 
(a)  No ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council shall become law until it has been approved in writing by the mayor; provided, however, that if the mayor fails to approve an ordinance or resolution before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council it shall be deemed to have been approved by him. Upon his disapproval of an ordinance or resolution, the mayor shall submit it to the city council through the city clerk, together with a written statement of his reasons for disapproval. An ordinance or resolution which is disapproved by the mayor, together with his written reasons therefor, shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting and should the council again adopt the ordinance or resolution by a two-thirds vote of all of its members, it shall become law. 
(b)  Any action of the city council which is not in the form of an ordinance or resolution shall become law as provided in the rules adopted by the city council or in such action. 
Section 4-4. - Signing, authenticating, recording. 
The city clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose of all ordinances and resolutions which become law. 
Section 4-5. - Existing ordinances, resolutions, etc. 
All ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, rules and regulations, now in force in the city, not inconsistent with this charter, are hereby declared valid and of force and effect until amended or repealed by the city council. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Section 5-1. - City administrator. 
The mayor, with the consent of the city council, may appoint a city administrator who shall hold office until his employment is terminated by the mayor, with the consent of the council. The administrator shall, during his employment, be a resident of the city. The administrator shall receive such compensation as the city council may provide. The administrator may be delegated such nonlegislative and nonjudicial functions as the council may provide by ordinance. 
Section 5-1.1. - City manager. 
(a)  There shall be a city manager for the City of Nashville who shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council to serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice with respect to the duties of the office set forth in this section. At the time of appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the city or state, but, during such city manager's tenure of office, shall reside within the city. No council member shall receive such appointment during the term for which such council member shall have been elected nor within one year after the expiration of such council member's term. 
(b)  The city council may remove the city manager at any time by a majority vote of its members. If requested, a public hearing shall be granted by the council within 30 days following notice of removal. During the interim, the council may suspend the manager from duty, but shall continue the manager's salary and, if the removal becomes final, shall pay said salary for one calendar month following the final removal date. 
(c)  The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, may head one or more departments, and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. The city manager shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. The city manager may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend, or remove subordinates in such department or office; 
(2)  Prepare an annual budget and submit such budget to the council together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption; 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city council for the preceding year; 
(4)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as the city manager deems desirable; 
(5)  Recommend to the council a standard schedule of pay for each appointed office and position in the city service, including minimum, intermediate, and maximum rates; 
(6)  Recommend to the council from time to time the adoption of such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services; 
(7)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided in this charter or by law; 
(8)  Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units under the jurisdiction of the city manager with the approval of the council; 
(9)  Attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the council; 
(10)  Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget, let contracts necessary for the operation or maintenance of the city services for amounts up to and including $500.00, and receive sealed bids for purchases or contracts in excess of $500.00 and present them to the council; 
(11)  See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced; 
(12)  Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof, investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed; 
(13)  Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of all official duties; and 
(14)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the council not inconsistent with this charter, law, or ordinances. 
(d)  Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or removal of any person from office by the city manager or any of the city manager's subordinates or, in any manner, take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative services of the city. Except for the purposes of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administration solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(e)  In the case of accident, disaster, or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the city manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency, but the city manager shall promptly file with the city council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(f)  The city manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the city council. Such bond shall be conditioned upon faithful performance of all of the city manager's duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(g)  The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(h)  Any vacancy in the office of city manager shall be filed within 60 days after the effective date of such vacancy. 
(2003 Ga. Laws) 
Section 5-2. - Oaths. 
(a)  Employees of the city who are required to do so by the mayor or this charter shall take the following oath of office: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will faithfully execute the office (or position, as the case may be) of (insert name of office or position) of the City of Nashville, Georgia, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the city charter, the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Constitution of the United States of America." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his oath of office. Any person violating such oath shall be subject to removal from office in the manner provided in this charter, or to punishment to the maximum extent authorized for violations of city ordinances, or to both such removal and punishment. 
Section 5-3. - Official bonds. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to require bonds of any nonelected city officer or employee with approved corporate or other surety and conditioned on such person faithfully performing the duties of his office. The premium on such a bond shall be paid with funds taken from the city treasury. 
Section 5-4. - Residency requirements. 
All appointed officers or employees of the city shall be residents of the county during their employment, except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Section 5-5. - Political activity prohibited. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the city shall be a candidate for any public office or take an active part in a political campaign while on duty or within any period of time during which he is expected to perform services for which he receives compensation from the city. 
(b)  No city officer or employee shall use the authority of his position or office to secure support for, or oppose any candidate in a city election. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to such fine and confinement as shall be determined by ordinance, or by removal from office in the manner provided in this charter, or by both such fine and confinement and removal. 
Section 5-6. - Appointment of department heads, et al. 
All department heads and the city clerk and city attorney shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(2003 Ga. Laws) 
Section 5-7. - Police department. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by State law, or city ordinance or resolution, the members of the police department shall have the power and duty to enforce all laws and city ordinances. 
(b)  In addition to the arrest powers conferred upon them by general law, members of the police department are hereby empowered to arrest in hot or fresh pursuit outside the city limits persons whom they would be authorized to arrest had such persons remained within the city limits. The term "hot or fresh pursuit" in addition to its commonly accepted meaning shall include pursuit without unreasonable delay. 
(c)  There shall be a committee, known as the police committee, which shall consist of the mayor, the mayor pro tem, and one other councilman elected by the council for a period of one year. The mayor shall be chairman of this committee. The police committee shall have control of the police department, subject to the direction of the entire council. 
Section 5-8. - Impeachment and removal. 
(a)  The mayor, members of the city council, and the judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Nashville shall be subject to impeachment and removal from office for: 
(1)  Violation of any of the criminal laws of the state, except minor traffic offenses; 
(2)  Violation of their oaths of office; 
(3)  Violation of Section 5-4 or Section 5-5 of this charter or both such Sections; 
(4)  Willful neglect or failure to perform the duties of his or her office; or 
(5)  Private misconduct as renders his or her office a subject of reproach to the public or makes him or her unfit to discharge the duties of his or her office and prevents the true performance thereof. 
(b)  Upon a majority vote of the entire membership of the city council, articles of impeachment shall be prepared. The procedure to be followed in the trial of articles of impeachment shall be as determined by the mayor and council except that if the mayor is on trial, a judge of the superior court shall preside. 
(c)  No person shall be eligible to vote on any matter concerning his own impeachment. 
(d)  Upon conviction, a person shall be removed from office and shall not be eligible to hold city office or employment again. 
(e)  The impeachment process shall not affect the criminal or civil liability of any person. 
(2003 Ga. Laws) 
Section 5-9. - Charter as defense to lawsuits. 
Any city officer or employee who is sued for any act done in his official capacity, may justify such action under this charter, and the provisions of this charter may be pleaded and shall be a full defense for such an act. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 6-1. - Generally. 
There is hereby established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Nashville, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. The court shall have the power and authority to: 
(a)  Enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; 
(b)  Punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; 
(c)  Try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. The court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the judge pro tem shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. Should both the judge and judge pro tem become disqualified, then any member of the city council may be designated to preside with the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
Section 6-2. - Judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he or she shall have obtained the age of twenty-one years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. The judge shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council and shall serve at the discretion of the city council, to be relieved of his or her duties only by a majority vote of the city council and mayor. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  The judge pro tem shall serve in the absence of the judge, shall have the same qualifications as the judge, shall be appointed by the council, and shall take the same oath as the judge. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of his office, the judge shall take such oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this State, as required for nonelected officers or employees in this charter. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council. 
(2003 Ga. Laws) 
Section 6-3. - Convening. 
The Municipal Court of the City of Nashville shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Section 6-4. - Jurisdiction and powers generally. 
(a)  The Municipal Court of the City of Nashville shall try and punish for crimes against the city and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or thirty (30) days in jail. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or confinement in the city jail for up to six (6) months or both such fine and confinement. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of State law. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property or personal endorsement as surety for appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi, at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a State law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by State law. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the city granted by State law generally to mayor's, recorder's, police and justice of the peace courts, including, but not limited to those laws authorizing the abatement of nuisances. 
Section 6-5. - Appeals. 
(a)  Anyone convicted in the municipal court of any offense shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of Berrien County; provided that any person who fails to file his appeal within ten (10) days of the date of his conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right, and provided, further, that before an appeal can be had there must be filed with the city clerk a notice of appeal and the accrued court costs (which include jail costs) which must be paid by cash or certified check unless the appellant files with the city clerk an affidavit stating that because of his poverty he is unable to pay the court costs. 
(b)  Once an appeal is filed the appellant shall be entitled to an appeal bond, which bond shall be a cash bond the amount to be specified by the judge of the municipal court. The amount of the cash bond shall be posted and deposited with the city clerk before the appellant's release or the court in its discretion can release the appellant on a property surety bond of a specified amount, which bond must be approved by the sheriff of the county of which the surety is a resident. 
Section 6-6. - Rules. 
The Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Nashville shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations relative to the procedure of the operation of the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection. Upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants or their attorneys in municipal court proceedings at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the proceedings. 
Section 6-7. - Employees. 
The mayor and city council shall furnish the judge of the municipal court such employees as the judge deems necessary for the proper conduct of court. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE AND TAXATION 

Section 7-1. - Fiscal year. 
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each office, department or institution, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by State or federal law. 
Section 7-2. - Expenditures to be in accordance with budget. 
No expenditure shall be made except in accordance with the budget ordinance adopted annually by the city council. 
Section 7-3. - Taxation. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall have full power to levy and collect an annual ad valorem tax, on all property within the city which is taxable under the laws of the State, for the purpose of supporting and maintaining and bearing the general expense of city government. 
(b)  Taxes shall be due and payable on December twenty of each year unless such day is a Sunday, in which case taxes shall be due and payable on the following business day; taxes shall be a lien on all property as owned on January one of each year. 
(c)  Taxes which are not paid when due shall be subject to such interest and penalties as are established by ordinance. 
Section 7-4. - Executions generally. 
(a)  Executions shall be issued for unpaid city taxes and any unpaid interest and penalties thereon on February one in each year, or if such day is a Sunday, then on the following business day, and shall be enforced by levy as herein provided. 
(b)  All executions issued against persons, who fail to pay any license fee or tax assessment owed to the city shall be signed and issued by the city clerk, shall bear teste in the name of the mayor, and shall be directed to and enforced and levied by the chief of police who, after levying the same upon the property of the defendant in fi. fa. or the property against which it is issued, shall, if the property levied on be personal property advertise the sale by posting notices thereof in three (3) or more public places in said city for ten (10) days before the day of sale; and if the property be real estate, he shall advertise the same once a week for four (4) weeks in the public gazette in which the sheriff's sales of the county are advertised, before selling the same. 
(c)  All sales under execution shall be sold before the door of the county courthouse. Sales shall be made under the rules and laws governing sheriff's sales. When personal property is sold, the chief of police shall deliver the possession thereof at once to the purchaser and a bill of sale if he so desires. When real estate is sold, the chief of police shall make to the purchaser a deed, and upon application of the purchaser or his agent shall put such purchaser or agent in possession of the real estate sold. 
Section 7-5. - Transfer of execution for street, sewer, etc., assessments; redemption by owner. 
(a)  The chief of police or collecting officer of the city shall be authorized to transfer and assign any fi. fa. or execution issued for street, sewer or other assessment in the same manner upon the same terms, and to the same effect, and thereby vest the purchaser or transferee with the same right as in cases of sales or transfers of tax fi. fas. as provided by law. 
(b)  On sales of property made under execution in behalf of the city for the collection of street, sewer and other assessments, the owners, may redeem same within the same time and on compliance with the same terms of the payment of the same premium, interest and costs, as in cases of redemption of property where sold under tax fi. fas. 
Section 7-6. - Affidavit of illegality of executions. 
Whenever any execution issued by the proper authority of the city for taxes, licenses, assessments, fines, forfeitures or any other charge or demand due the city, shall be levied upon any property, the defendant in fi. fa. shall have the right to file an affidavit denying that the whole or any part of such execution is due and the reason same is not due, and stating what amount is admitted to be due (which amount so admitted shall be paid before said affidavit shall be received, and said affidavit shall be received for the balance) with bond and security for the forthcoming of the property levied upon, if same is personal property; and said affidavit so presented shall be returned to the justice court or superior court of the county and there tried and the issue determined as in cases of other affidavits of illegality returnable to said court, subject to all the pains and penalties provided for in cases of illegality or delay. Such affidavits of illegality and the procedures in reference thereto being governed by the rules and laws governing such matters in the courts of the State. 
Section 7-7. - City auditor. 
The mayor shall select the city auditor or auditing firm with the consent of the city council. 
(2003 Ga. Laws) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 8-1. - Severability. 
In the event any Section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this charter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other Sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the Section, subsection, sentence, clauses or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this charter if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Section 8-2. - Repeal of Prior Acts. 
This Act shall constitute the whole charter of the city, repealing all previous charter laws and other Acts of the General Assembly solely relating to the City of Nashville, Georgia, including, but not limited to, the following are hereby repealed: 
(a)  Georgia Laws 1892, Act No. 26, Page 162, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to incorporate the Town of Nashville in Berrien County; and for other purposes." 
(b)  Georgia Laws 1901, Act No. 99, Page 374, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to establish a new charter for the Town of Nashville in the County of Berrien, State of Georgia; to grant certain privileges to said town; to repeal all Acts in conflict; to define the limits of the same; to provide for the elections of officers; to prescribe their duties, rights and powers; and for other purposes." 
(c)  Georgia Laws 1906, Act No. 661, Page 910, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend the charter of the City of Nashville, providing for the extension of the corporate limits of said city, and also providing for amendment or repeal of existing laws relating to the extension of the corporate limits of the City of Nashville; and for other purposes." 
(d)  Georgia Laws 1910, Act No. 538, Page 956, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend the charter of the City of Nashville, in the County of Berrien, and for other purposes. An Act to amend the charter of the City of Nashville to provide that all valid contracts heretofore entered into by the City of Nashville, or by its authorized officials, shall be good and valid for or against the City of Nashville; to provide that all bylaws and ordinances heretofore passed, not in conflict with this charter shall be binding and enforceable; to define its corporate limits; to provide a government for said city and to confer certain rights, powers and privileges on same; to continue and confirm certain powers heretofore granted to said corporation, and also its public schools and waterworks system, and the regulations and ordinances in force in said city; to provide for a mayor and board of aldermen and other officers for the City of Nashville and to prescribe their powers and duties, and the manner of their election; to provide for streets and sidewalks, and the working or paving of the same; to provide for a system of sanitary sewerage; to provide for a system of waterworks; to provide for a board of health; to declare and define the police powers of said city; to provide for the condemnation of private, public or semipublic property for the use of said city, and a method of arriving at the value of such property and compensating the owner thereof; to authorize the City of Nashville to establish a public school system, a system of waterworks and a system of electric lights, to authorize said city to issue bonds and other evidences of debt for public purposes; to provide for taxation and the granting of licenses to all kinds of businesses, trades, callings or professions; and to provide for other matters of municipal regulation, concern and welfare; and for other purposes." 
(e)  Georgia Laws 1915, Act No. 237, Page 759, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend the Act incorporating the City of Nashville, in the County of Berrien, State of Georgia, approved December 17, 1900, and the Acts amendatory thereof, so as to extend the corporate limits of said City of Nashville a distance of one mile in every direction from the present courthouse site in the center of the public square in said city; and for other purposes." 
(f)  Georgia Laws 1915, Act No. 255, Page 749, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act incorporating the City of Nashville in Berrien County, Georgia, so as to create within the territorial limits of said City of Nashville, Georgia, a special school district in and for said city to be known as the City of Nashville School District; to provide for the election of certain officers therefor; to grant power and authority to such officers; to provide for the levying of taxes upon the property within the limits of said City of Nashville for the maintenance of said school; to provide plans and means whereby the proportionate part of the funds to which the children within the limits of said city shall be received from the State school commissioner and how the children to attend said school living without the limits of said City of Nashville shall have their proportionate part of the funds to which they shall be entitled from the State, pro rata, paid over by the county school superintendent to school herein to be created; and for other purposes." 
(g)  Georgia Laws 1919, Act No. 127, Page 1150, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act entitled an Act to amend the Act incorporating the City of Nashville, in Berrian County, providing for the creation of a system of municipal schools in and for said city, approved August 16, 1915, such amending Act to provide for the levying of a tax for the maintenance of such schools in a sum not exceeding three-fourths of one per centum of the property within the limits of said city, such tax not to be part of any other levy made by the tax levying authorities of said City of Nashville, nor shall the moneys raised by such tax levied for school purposes under the Act so amended be used for any other purpose than for the support and maintenance of the public schools of said city; and for other purposes." 
(h)  Georgia Laws 1925, Act No. 25, Page 1301, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to repeal Sections XLVI to LXIII both inclusive of an Act entitled an Act to amend an Act incorporating the City of Nashville, Berrien County, Georgia, so as to create within the territorial limits of the said City of Nashville, Georgia, a special school district in and for said city to be known as the City of Nashville School District, approved August 16, 1915, as shown in Georgia Laws of 1915 from pages 749 to 759 both inclusive." 
(i)  Georgia Laws 1926, Act No. 25 (second session), Page 160, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, reincorporating the City of Nashville, in the County of Berrien, approved August 15, 1910, so as to authorize and empower the City of Nashville, by its mayor and council, to establish and change the grade of any streets, avenues, alleys, lanes, sidewalks and other places in the City of Nashville, and to improve the same; to provide for the procedure for such grading, improving and paving, and for making and collection of assessments for the same, and for establishing a loan therefor to provide for the payment of such grading, improvement, and paving entirely or partially by the abutting and adjacent property owners on the basis of ten percent, yearly for ten (10) years; to provide for the issuance of bonds as the City of Nashville by its mayor and council, to be known as"'street improvement bonds," and for the payment of the same; to provide for the renewal of any such paving and other paving previously laid; and for other purposes." 
(j)  Georgia Laws 1927, Act No. 112, Page 1426, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act incorporating the City of Nashville, Berrien County, Georgia, so as to change the time of electing a mayor and council; and for other purposes." 
(k)  Georgia Laws 1938, Act No. 309, Page 1224, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend the charter of the City of Nashville, in the County of Berrien, approved August 15, 1910, so that when amended, the salary of the mayor of said city shall not exceed the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and shall not be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the salary of each alderman shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00); and for other purposes." 
(l)  Georgia Laws 1945, Act No. 47, Page 559, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act granting to the City of Nashville, Georgia, a charter approved August 15, 1910, Georgia Laws 1910, Page 956 et seq., and all amendatory Acts thereof, to grant to the governing authorities of the City of Nashville authority to pass zoning and planning laws whereby the City of Nashville may be zoned or districted for various uses, and other different uses prohibited therein, and regulate the use for which said zones or districts may be set apart, and regulate the plans for development and improvement of real estate; and for other purposes." 
(m)  Georgia Laws 1960, Act No. 923, Page 3301, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act establishing a new charter for the City of Nashville, Berrien County, approved December 17, 1900 (Ga. Laws 1900, p. 374), as amended, particularly by an Act approved August 15, 1910 (Ga. Laws 1910, p. 956), an Act approved August 16, 1915 (Ga. Laws 1915, p. 749), and an Act approved August 3, 1927 (Ga. Laws 1927, p. 1426), so as to change the time of electing a mayor and aldermen; to change the term of office of the mayor; to fix the qualifications of the mayor and aldermen and to provide the fee and manner of qualifying as candidates; to provide salaries of the mayor and aldermen; to fix qualifications of voters in city elections; to provide for permanent registration of voters; to provide for closing of registration books; to fix the hours of voting; to provide for the appointment of election managers; to provide for the qualifications of voters; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes." 
(n)  Georgia Laws 1968, Act No. 1253, Page 3754, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act creating a new charter for the City of Nashville, approved December 17, 1900 (Ga. Laws 1900, p. 374), as amended, so as to change the corporate limits of said city; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes." 
(o)  Georgia Laws 1972, Act No. 1008, Page 2557, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act establishing a new charter for the City of Nashville, approved December 17, 1900 (Ga. Laws 1900, p. 374), as amended, particularly by an Act approved August 15, 1910 (Ga. Laws 1910, p. 956), so as to provide that candidates seeking election as aldermen shall seek election only to designated posts; to provide for the designation of posts; to provide that no person shall be elected mayor or alderman of the City of Nashville in any election unless such person shall have received a majority of the votes cast to fill the office of mayor or alderman; to provide for meetings of the mayor and aldermen; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes." 
(p)  Georgia Laws 1973, Act No. 623, Page 3441, being an Act entitled: 
"An Act to amend an Act establishing a new charter for the City of Nashville, Berrien County, approved December 17, 1900 (Ga. Laws 1900, p. 374), as amended, particularly by an Act approved August 15, 1910 (Ga. Laws 1910, p. 956), and an Act approved March 23, 1960 (Ga. Laws 1960, p. 3301), so as to change the method of fixing the salary of the mayor and aldermen[;] to create the Municipal Court of the City of Nashville; to provide for a judge for said court; to provide for the time for convening said court; to provide for jurisdiction of said court; to provide for powers of said court; to provide for appeal from said court; to provide for rules for said court; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes." 
Section 8-3. - Effective Date. 
This Act shall become effective on [March 17, 1978]. 
Editor's note— The effective date of the Charter was March 17, 1978, the date on which it was approved by the governor. Ga. Code Ann., § 102-105. 
[ARTICLE IX. - DESIGNATION OF CITY] 

Section 9-1. - [How city known.] 
From henceforth or upon the enactment of this charter the City of Nashville shall be known as the City of Nashville, the City of Dogwood. 
[ARTICLE X. - REPEAL OF PRIOR LAWS] 

Section 10-1. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter. As the Charter is amended in the future, these amendments will be included herein. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Nashville, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1967, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to codify ordinances, § 2-9(c); legislation, § 4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council: 
Council. Whenever the word "council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the mayor and city council of the City of Nashville. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Nashville" followed it. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given, or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Berrien. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Judge. The word "judge," where used herein, shall mean the judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Nashville, except where otherwise stated. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Land and real estate. "Land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
Limits, corporation and city. The words "limits," "corporation" or "city" shall mean the corporate limits of the city, the legal boundary of the City of Nashville. 
Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used it shall mean the mayor of the City of Nashville. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Name of officer or department. Whenever the name of an officer or department is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Nashville" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing, and a word importing the plural number may be applied to the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. "Personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public. 
Real property. "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the city seal, the seal of the corporation. 
Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. §§ 102-102—102-104. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Parenthetical and reference matter. 
The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the Code. Citations to the 1967 Code of the city (Code 1967) and to later ordinances indicate only the source, and the text may or may not be changed by this Code. Reference matter not in parentheses is for information only and is not a part of this Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the City of Nashville, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1967, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance, code, rule, regulation or order of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in any such provision the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or confinement in the city jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months or work in the workgang on the public streets or on such public works as the authorities may employ the workgang for not more than six (6) months, or by any one (1) or more of these punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the charter of the city. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance, code, rule, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(c)  In all cases in which the council is authorized to fix a penalty for the violation of provisions of the city charter, subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall apply thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 1-8) 
Charter reference— Authority for above section, § 2-9(ww); power of mayor and city council to provide detentional and penal institutions, § 2-9(w); punishment of employees for violation of oath, § 5-2. 
Cross reference— Municipal court, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to organize correctional institution, O.C.G.A. § 69-205. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1967, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code—Effect. 
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Nashville, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Same—New ordinances. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the council. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-11. - Same—Language. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Nashville, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: . . . ." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-12. - Same—New material. 
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Nashville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows: ..." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-13. - Same—Repeals. 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-14. - Same—Subject to general penalty. 
In case of the amendment by the council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-8 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Sec. 1-15. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building official, § 5-1 et seq.; civil defense director, § 7-3; electrical department, § 9-1; planning commission, § 21-1; administrator of flood control land use authority, § 21-19; area planning and development commission, § 21-42 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 20; sanitation department, § 25-19; taxation, Ch. 27; superintendent of utilities, § 29-3; administration of zoning ordinance, App. A, § 101 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, App. A, § 111 et seq.; administration of subdivision ordinance, App. B, Art. IV. 
State Law reference— Uniform standards for audits of municipalities, Ga. Code Ann., § 23-1302; personal liability of officers, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-208; liability of municipal corporation, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-301; liability for acts of officers, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-307. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City departments. 
The mayor, as the chief executive of the city, responsible to the council and citizens for all operations of the city government, shall directly supervise all departments performing services for the city. The city is organized into six (6) departments. These are the administrative department, police department, fire department, street department, sanitation department and the gas, water and sewage department. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on the first day of August and end on the last day of July. 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 27. 
Sec. 2-3. - Limitation on purchases. 
Any purchases involving more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be made on a competitive bid basis, and purchases involving less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be made on a purchase order approved by the city manager and the department head concerned issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6; Ord. of 7-10-06) 
State Law reference— Competitive bids required for state contracts, Ga. Code Ann., § 89-914. 
Secs. 2-4—2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and city council, § 2-1 et seq.; beginning of term, §§ 3-3, 3-4. 

Sec. 2-20. - Office of mayor full time. 
There is hereby created the office of a full-time mayor, the mayor to have such powers as are provided in the City Charter, enacted in March, 1978. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § I; Ord. No. 1-78, § I, 10-9-78) 
Sec. 2-21. - Administration of oath. 
Each mayor and councilman elected to service for the city will be sworn into office on the second Monday in December next following his respective election and same will assume their respective responsibilities and duties. 
(Ord. of 10-9-72, § 8) 
Sec. 2-22. - Compensation of mayor. 
The compensation of the mayor shall be a minimum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month and a maximum of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) per month, the said salary of the mayor to be set by the council each year at the first meeting after the general election. 
(Res. of 5-14-73; Ord. of 10-9-78, § II; Ord. No. 1-78, § II, 10-9-78; Ord. of 11-22-04) 
Sec. 2-23. - Compensation of members of council. 
The salary and compensation of the council shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month. 
(Res. of 5-14-73; Ord. of 10-9-78, § III; Ord. No. 1-78, § III, 10-9-78; Ord. of 11-22-04) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipal governing authority to fix the compensation of its members, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1019. 
Sec. 2-23.1. - Increase in compensation. 
The increasing compensation shall not be effective until after the taking of office of those elected at the next regular municipal election, which is held immediately following the date on which the ordinance action to increase such compensation is taken. 
(Ord. No. 1-78, § IV, 10-9-78) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1-78, § IV, adopted Oct. 9, 1978, being nonamendatory of the Code, has been included herein as § 2-23.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-24. - Compensation for attending council meetings and service on committees. 
(a)  For each regular council meeting attended, each councilman shall receive as compensation for his work on the various advisory committees of the city government the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the mayor shall receive the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each regular council meeting attended for his work on these committees. This compensation is in addition to the regular salary of the mayor and council. A councilmember who is absent from a council meeting due to a personal illness, hospitalization, sickness or death in the immediate family shall be paid the one hundred dollars ($100.00) compensation for the meeting. The maximum meetings that a councilmember can be absent and still be compensated will be three (3) per year provided that they meet the above criteria. This compensation is authorized for the services of the mayor and council on committees, which function to run the city and are in lieu of a city administrator. 
(b)  The city clerk is authorized and hereby directed to start paying the above stated compensation as follows: The mayor's compensation under this section shall be paid on a rotating basis from the water and sewer fund, the gas fund and the general fund. The councilman who is the chairman of the water and sewer department shall be paid out of the water and sewer fund and the councilman who is chairman of the gas department shall be paid from the gas fund. The rest of the councilmen shall be paid out of the general fund. 
(c)  The clerk is directed to pay this compensation on a monthly basis. 
(Res. of 1-27-75; Amend. of 3-15-82; Ord. of 1-25-01, § I) 
Charter reference— Police committee required, § 5-7. 
Sec. 2-25. - Mayor or mayor pro tem to act for finance chairman. 
The mayor or mayor pro tem shall act in the absence of the finance chairman. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of mayor and mayor pro tem, § 2-10. 
Sec. 2-26. - Council meetings. 
The regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month, at 6:00 p.m. at the city hall. Providing, that if the regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall take place on the next secular day, at the same hour. Adjourned meetings may be held at such times and places as the mayor and council may determine. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1; Ord. of 2-27-06) 
Charter reference— Meetings of mayor and city council generally, § 2-7; quorum, procedure, § 2-8. 
State Law reference— Meetings open to the public, Ga. Code Ann., § 40-3301 et seq. 
Secs. 2-27—2-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-43. - Term of department heads. 
The term of office of department heads appointed at the beginning of a regular term shall be one (1) year. 
Charter reference— Authority for above section, § 5-6. 
Sec. 2-44. - City clerk, duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep accurate and correct minutes of the meetings of the city council, to prepare copies of charges in criminal cases in the municipal court, to issue subpoenas for witnesses in cases pending in the municipal court, to properly enter all cases on the court docket and to receive the tax returns for the city and collect both the ad valorem and special taxes in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations of the city, to issue licenses to parties doing any business for which privilege a special tax is assessed and collected. It shall be the further duty of the city clerk to notify the chief of police of the failure or refusal of any party to pay any special tax or license fee under the laws of the city in order that the chief of police may make cases against such delinquent taxpayers for doing business without a license. 
(Code 1967, § 2-4) 
Charter reference— Council to provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, § 2-8. 
Cross reference— Administration of oath to business licensees, § 15-15. 
State Law reference— Minutes of meetings open to public inspection, Ga. Code Ann., § 40-3301 et seq. 
Sec. 2-45. - Use of city owned vehicles, equipment, by city employees. 
No city vehicles, machinery or equipment are to be used by any employee at any time, except during regular working hours or when an employee is so authorized when on call for service to the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8) 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 28. 
Sec. 2-45.1 - Lending or borrowing of equipment by city officers and employees prohibited; penalty for violation. 
(a)  No heavy city equipment of any form or fashion shall be lent out to or borrowed by any private individuals and the mayor and council and all city employees are forbidden and prohibited from lending city equipment to any private individuals, persons, firms or any other kinds of business entities. 
(b)  No city employee shall be allowed to use any city equipment for his or her personal purposes and no member of the council or the mayor shall be allowed to use any city equipment for their own personal purposes. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 2-79, §§ 1—3, 2-26-79) 
Editor's note— Since Ord. No. 2-79, §§ 1—3, adopted Feb. 26, 1979, did not expressly amend this Code, inclusion as § 2-45.1 has been at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-46. - City supplies. 
An employee of the city who is under bond shall be in charge of the city supply house and shall maintain a perpetual inventory of all city supplies. Each department shall keep a daily log of all jobs and materials used. This log will be submitted each day to the office of the city clerk. 
(Mo. of 7-16-73) 
Sec. 2-47. - Work on private property. 
Whenever any work is done by the city on private property, a charge for this work shall be made by the department superintendent, depending on the time involved and the equipment used on the job. 
(Mo. of 10-29-75) 
Sec. 2-48. - Conduct of trial for removal of city officer. 
In the event of the impeachment of an officer of the city, the trial shall be conducted in the manner employed by the courts, both the council and the accused having the right to introduce evidence and to be represented by counsel, it being the duty of the city attorney to act as prosecuting officer in such trials. 
Charter reference— Authority for above section, § 5-8. 
Secs. 2-49—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 4-22-02, §§ I—IX did not specifically amend the Code, and have been included herein as §§ 2-61—2-69 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-61. - Creation of office. 
The office of city manager is hereby created. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § I) 
Sec. 2-62. - Appointment of city manager. 
The city manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council for an indefinite term. The manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualification with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office hereinafter set forth. At the time of this appointment, the appointee need not be a resident of the city or state, but during the manager's tenure of office, shall reside within the city. No council member shall receive such appointment during the term for which the council member shall have been elected nor within one (1) year after the expiration of the council member's term. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § II) 
Sec. 2-63. - Removal of the city manager. 
The city council may remove the city manager at any time by a majority vote of its members. If requested, a public hearing shall be granted by the council within thirty (30) days following notice of removal. During the interim, the council may suspend the manager from duty, but shall continue the manager's salary and, if the removal becomes final, shall pay said salary for one (1) calendar month following the final removal date. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § III) 
Sec. 2-64. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, may head one or more departments, and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. To that end, the manager shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by the city charter or law. The city manager may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend, or remove subordinates in such department or office. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city council for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations as may be deemed desirable. 
(5)  Recommend to the governing body a standard schedule of pay for each appointed office and position in the city service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. 
(6)  Recommend to the governing body (from time to time), adoption of such measure as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(7)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by the existing charter or by law. 
(8)  Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his/her jurisdiction, with the approval of the city council. The city manager may be the head of one (1) or more departments. 
(9)  Attend all meetings of the city council unless excused there from and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. The manager shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the council. 
(10)  Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; let contracts necessary for operation or maintenance of the city services for amounts up to and including five hundred dollars ($500.00), receive sealed bids for the purchases or contracts in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and present them to the council. 
(11)  See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced. 
(12)  Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city, and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
(13)  Devote his/her entire time to the discharge of all official duties. 
(14)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the council, not inconsistent with the city Charter, law or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § IV) 
Sec. 2-65. - Council not to interfere with appointments or removals. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or removal from, office by the city manager or any of the manager's subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative services of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administration solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § V) 
Sec. 2-66. - Emergencies. 
In case of accident, disaster or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the city manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency; but the manager shall file promptly with council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § VI) 
Sec. 2-67. - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the council, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of all the manager's duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § VI) 
Sec. 2-68. - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § VIII) 
Sec. 2-69. - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy in the office of the city manager shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the effective date of such vacancy. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02, § IX) 
Secs. 2-70—2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-76. - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the City of Nashville that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-77. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro-tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within sixty (60) days of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
(2)  Interest means a pecuniary benefit accruing to a governing authority or any member of his/her family as a direct result of any payment received from the city. A governing authority or member of his/her immediate family shall be deemed to have directly benefited from any payment from the city if any such person shall own at least ten (10) percent of the entity receiving such payment. 
(3)  Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any council member of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
(4)  Immediate family members are the council member's spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-78. - Prohibitions. 
No member of the governing authority shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
(7)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
b.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
c.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
(9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him/her or persons having an interest. 
Prohibition (2) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
b.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
c.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
d.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
Prohibition (5) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-129 are made to the board or commission chairperson thirty (30) days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-79. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement ten (10) days prior to, if possible, but always before the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statement shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-80. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify him/her from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-81. - Prohibited contracts. 
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to contracts entered into: 
(1)  After scaled competitive bids, together with a disclosure of the nature of the members of the governing authority's interest. 
(2)  For emergency situations, provided that the city manager discloses the contract and explains the emergency at the next regular meeting of the governing authority. 
(3)  In accordance with applicable Georgia law, including O.C.G.A. 16-10-6. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-82. - Complaints. 
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three (3) members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-83. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition of the board of ethics; 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five (5) residents of the city to be appointed as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor and council members shall designate one (1) qualified citizen each and three (3) members at large to provide a pool of ten (10) individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two (2) years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these ten (10) qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five (5) members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within fifteen (15) business days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent re-filing if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six (6) months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article. 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action on as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-84. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) business days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the mayor and council within five (5) business days after completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-85. - Penalty and member rights. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten (10) business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to heat and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-86. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Berrien County within fifteen (15) business days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Sec. 2-87. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances and resolutions or parts thereof previously adopted by the mayor and council establishing a code of ethics for the governing authority of the City of Nashville in conflict with this article and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 28, 2009, amended ch. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 3 consisted of §§ 3-1—3-10, 3-26—-3-37, 3-50—3-54, 3-61—3-67, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the 1967 Code; and ordinances adopted Apr. 9, 1973; Jan. 14, 1974; Aug. 26, 1983; May 10, 1993; Sept. 26, 1994; Aug. 22, 1995; Oct. 23, 1995; Dec. 28, 2000; Mar. 12, 2001; Aug. 25, 2003; Aug. 22, 2005; and Nov. 13, 2007. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate, license and tax alcoholic beverages, § 2-9(ss). 
Cross reference— Model glue, § 12-56 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 15; operating taxi under the influence of alcohol, § 15-131; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 19-7; driving while drinking, § 28-71. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or, fortified wine. 
Bar means any establishment (by whatever name it may be known including, but not limited to, bar, barroom, club, juke joint, honky-tonk, night club, pool hall, pool room, pub, recreation center and any other like or similar name describing the same or similar type of activity) which holds any consumption on premises alcoholic beverage license but which does not meet the requirements of restaurant, private club or licensed alcoholic. 
Brown bagging means the bringing of alcoholic beverages into business establishments licensed for the retail sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for the purpose of drinking such alcoholic beverages at any such establishment. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverages obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid to any member, officer, agent or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any council on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to bills of members and their guests under club regulations shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Fortified wines means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Grocery store means a business which holds a grocery store retail business license issued by the city, and which: 
(1)  Is engaged primarily in the retail sale of food and beverage items by the package designed for nonpremises consumption; and 
(2)  Maintains at no time a retail inventory of alcoholic beverages which is more than thirty (30) percent, valued at its retail sales price, of the total retail inventory of merchandise of such business. 
Legal age means the age established by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended from time to time, as the age below which alcoholic beverages may not lawfully be sold to, furnished to, purchased by or possessed by a person. 
License means the authorization granted by the city to engage in the sale of specified alcoholic beverages upon the premises so licensed for a calendar year, or the remaining portion of a calendar year. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to article VI of this chapter. 
Licensee means a person holding a license issued pursuant the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to the premises of a restaurant or its adjacent lobby or reception area, with all booths, stools, and tables located therein being open to view only from within the lounge, with a seating capacity of at least twenty (20) persons, and with all access and all exits to and from the lounge opening into such restaurant or the lobby or reception area adjoining such restaurant except for emergency exits or exits used solely as service doors. 
Malt beverages means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer provided that the term "malt beverage" does not include sake, also known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manager means the individual who supervises the regular operations of a business licensed under this chapter and who is physically present on site at such business (a) at least thirty-five (35) hours per week, or (b) at least ninety (90) percent of the hours such business is open to the public, whichever is less. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased, or controlled by the licensee and used by the licensee for the purpose of operating under the license and shall include that area circumscribed by the property lines of the property for which an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city; except that in the case of hotels and motels, the term "premises" shall include only that portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold, delivered, or served. 
Restaurant means a business which holds a restaurant retail business license issued by the city and is engaged primarily in the food service business on the premises and which must, in addition to all other requirements relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, meet and maintain the following requirements: 
(1)  Meet all health and sanitation requirements set for food service establishments by the city, state and federal government. 
(2)  Must have installed an operative cooking facility and kitchen equipment for accommodating the demand for twenty (20) food customers. 
(3)  Must have a complete place setting of metal cutlery and china dishes in regular use for twenty (20) food customers. 
(4)  Must have seating facilities, at booths or tables designed for food service, sufficient for twenty (20) food customers, and such booths or tables shall be large enough to accommodate at least two (2) place settings of metal cutlery and china dishes. 
(5)  Such restaurants as contemplated by this section shall be, at all times during the hours of operation, prepared to serve full-course meals with a substantial variety of culinary choices, or substantial substitutes therefore, such food must be prepared on site, and shall print and maintain a complete menu and furnish such printed menu to each food customer, with prices which are competitive with other restaurants within the city, whether or not those restaurants engage in the business of pouring mixed drinks. 
(6)  Liquor by the drink shall be served only during the hours in which all printed menu items, or substantial substitutes therefore, are available to the customers. The hours of service for food may be prolonged, but in no event shall mixed drinks be sold at any hour contrary to the hours established for the sale of alcoholic beverages by other ordinances of the city. 
Retail sale means the sale or offer of sale of any alcoholic beverage to any member of the public. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combination of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(b)  As used in this chapter, the singular and the plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. 
(c)  As used in this chapter, the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-2. - Activities are privileges. 
The manufacture, distribution, sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within the city are privileges and not rights with any privilege with respect thereto granted pursuant to this chapter to the holder of any alcoholic beverage license being held and enjoyed only for so long as the holder of such license issued pursuant to this chapter shall fully and completely comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-3. - Compliance required. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Distribute, sell, or offer to sell, either at retail or wholesale, any alcoholic beverage in the city except to the extent permitted pursuant to a current alcoholic beverage license issued by the city; 
(2)  Distribute, handle, possess, sell, or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in the city in violation of any provisions of this chapter or any provision of any law or regulation of the state relative to any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)  Distribute, handle, possess, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-4. - Sales permitted. 
The sale of malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits, subject to the provisions of this chapter, as this chapter may be amended from time to time, are permitted in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-5. - Consumption in public places. 
Except to the extent otherwise specifically permitted, no person shall consume any alcoholic beverage while such person is located in or upon any public street, road, alley, lane or sidewalk of the city or upon the premises of any building owned or leased by the city or upon the premises of any other property, either real or personal, owned or leased by the city. Functions sponsored by the city or any other governmental unit shall be exempt from this prohibition. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-6. - Open containers. 
Except to the extent otherwise specifically permitted, no person shall have in such person's possession any package which contains an alcoholic beverage which has been opened or the seal of which has been broken while such person is located in or upon any public street, road, alley, lane, or sidewalk of the city or upon the premises of any building owned or leased by the city or upon the premises of any other property, either real or personal, owned or leased by the city. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-7. - False and misleading statements. 
No person shall make, cause to be made, or present to the city any application for issuance, application for renewal, report, or other notification with respect to any alcoholic beverage license issued or sought to be issued or renewed by the city or any tax on alcoholic beverages due to the city which contains as of the date made or presented, any untrue or misleading statement or representation. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-8. - Knowledge of chapter. 
The holder of any alcoholic beverage license as well as all employees, agents and servants of any business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall be conclusively presumed, for purposes of this chapter, to have at all times complete and full knowledge of all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-9. - Notification to state revenue department of violations. 
Upon determination of the existence of circumstances which are required pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21 to be reported to the state department of revenue, the finance director shall promptly report the existence of such circumstances to the state department of revenue as required. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-10. - Criminal conviction not required. 
Any proceeding or action which may be taken by the city with respect to the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license or the grant, denial or renewal of any such license shall be and are administrative in nature with respect to the privileges of the holder of such license and the right of such holder to continue to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with the provision of this chapter. No conviction, dismissal, acquittal, other plea or other disposition with respect to any criminal violation involving the sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages or any other alleged criminal conduct shall be necessary for any action by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relative to any such license or otherwise effect any action taken by the city relative thereto. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-11. - Amount of fines. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The following guidelines for the disposition of alcoholic beverage license violations are hereby adopted. It is emphasized that these are guidelines only and can be altered based upon the facts of any individual case. The guidelines for disposition of alcoholic beverage license violations are as follows: 
(1)  First offense within past two (2) years: Thirty (30) days suspension and two hundred dollars ($200.00) reinstatement fee; 
(2)  Second offense within past two (2) years: Ninety (90) days suspension and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) reinstatement fee; unless 
(3)  Second offense within past twelve (12) months: Revocation; 
(4)  Third offense within past two (2) years: Revocation. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Secs. 3-12—3-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM AGE 

Sec. 3-30. - Presence of persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to be or remain upon the premises licensed if such business is a bar as defined herein. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-31. - Consumption by persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to consume any alcoholic beverage upon the premises licensed. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-32. - Possession by persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant, or employee of any business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operations of the business in which such license is utilized, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to possess any alcoholic beverage upon the premises licensed. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-33. - Furnishing to persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized sell, provide, give, furnish or distribute any alcoholic beverage to any person who has not attained legal age, except for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall be in violation of the provisions hereof in the event that (i) such person has been furnished with identification showing that the person who is being furnished with alcoholic beverages has attained legal age and (ii) under the surrounding circumstances the person so furnished such identification could reasonably conclude that the person furnishing such identification had attained legal age. For purposes of this section, the term "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person such as the person's photograph or other written description of and providing the person's date of birth, and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, or a driver's license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-34. - Acquiring for persons not of legal age. 
No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized shall, in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized, purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of any person who has not attained legal age, or otherwise procure for or furnish to any person who has not attained legal age any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purpose upon the prescription of a physician duly licensed under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-35. - Employment of persons not 18 years of age. 
(a)  No holder of an alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall permit or allow any person who has not attained eighteen (18) years of age and who is employed by any business operated upon premises for which an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to nor prohibit persons who have not attained eighteen (18) years of age who are employed by a business in connection with the operation at such premises of a grocery store, as such term is defined in this chapter from engaging in the sale, distribution, and handling of alcoholic beverages at such premises in connection with employment in the operation of such business. 
(b)  No holder of an alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall permit or allow any person who has not attained eighteen (18) years of age to be employed by any business operated upon premises for which a license for the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon such premises is issued by the city. Provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to nor prohibit the employment of persons who have not attained eighteen (18) years of age in connection with the operation upon such premises of a restaurant, provided further, that persons who have not attained eighteen (18) years of age shall not engage in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in connection with the operation of any such restaurant. Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition of sale or service by persons under eighteen (18) years of age, such persons may accept orders of alcoholic beverages but shall not serve said orders. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-36. - Failure to check identification. 
No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized shall, in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized, fail to require or check the identification of the person to whom any alcoholic beverage is sold or furnished prior to the sale, furnishing or distribution of any alcoholic beverage or any person who has not attained legal age, except for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state. No person shall be in violation of the provisions hereof in the event that (i) such person has been furnished with identification showing that the person who is being furnished with alcoholic beverages has attained legal age and (ii) under the surrounding circumstances the person so furnished such identification could reasonably conclude that the person furnishing such identification had attained legal age. For purposes of this action, the term "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person such as the person's photograph or other written description and providing the person's date of birth, and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, or a driver's license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Secs. 3-37—3-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES 

Sec. 3-61. - License required for sales. 
No person shall sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages which are permitted to be sold in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless such sale is made or is to be made pursuant to the authority of a current effective alcoholic beverage license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-62. - Classification of licenses. 
Alcoholic beverage licenses authorized to be issued by the city and required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to be held for the sale of alcoholic beverages are classified as follows: 
(1)  Wholesale malt beverage license; 
(2)  Retail malt beverage package license; 
(3)  Retail malt beverage consumption license; 
(4)  Wholesale wine license; 
(5)  Retail wine package license; 
(6)  Retail wine consumption license; 
(7)  Retail distilled spirits package license; and 
(8)  Retail distilled spirits consumption license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-63. - Activities authorized pursuant to licenses. 
The holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city, as well as the employees of such holder, shall be authorized subject to the provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state relative thereto and the rules, regulations and requirements of the state department of revenue relative thereto to engage in the following respective activities but none other than those which are specifically authorized with respect to each such license: 
(1)  Wholesale malt beverage license, wholesale sale only of malt beverage in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of effective retail malt beverage licenses issued by the state department of revenue for the purpose of resale only; 
(2)  Retail malt beverage package license, retail sale only of malt beverages in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises; 
(3)  Retail malt beverage consumption license, retail sale only of malt beverages to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises; 
(4)  Wholesale wine license, wholesale sale only of wine in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of current retail wine licenses issued by the state department of revenue for the purpose of resale only; 
(5)  Retail wine package license, retail sale only of wine in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises; 
(6)  Retail wine consumption license, retail sale only of wine to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises; 
(7)  Wholesale distilled spirits license, wholesale sale only of distilled spirits in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of current retail distilled spirits licenses issued by the state department of revenue for the purpose of resale only; 
(8)  Retail distilled spirits package license, retail sale only of distilled spirits in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises; 
(9)  Retail distilled spirits consumption license, retail sale only of distilled spirits to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-64. - Qualifications for license. 
No alcoholic beverage license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued to any person or for any location unless and until it has been successfully demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city council that: 
(1)  Such person, or the person who shall actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which such license shall be utilized, is a citizen of the United States of America; 
(2)  Such person by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, moral character, mental capacity, physical capacity, trade associations, record of arrest, and reputation in communities in which he has lived is, in the opinion of the city council, likely to operate the business in which the license will be utilized in conformity with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, and requirements, including particularly the provisions of this chapter and the laws, rules and regulations of the state and the United States relative to the manufacture, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages, and, in making such determination, the city council shall, in addition to the other and further provisions of this section, consider all information that would be considered by the city council if this person was being denied a renewal license pursuant to the requirements of section 3-82 or, if this person was having his license suspended or revoked pursuant to the requirements of section 3-86; provided further that no license shall be issued to or for: 
a.  Any person whose business in which the license will be utilized is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possessed and meets all of the qualifications required hereunder for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; 
b.  A partnership, unless all partners, members and managers of such partnership, as well as the manager of the business in which the license will be utilized, possess and meet all of the qualifications for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; 
c.  A corporation, unless all officers thereof, all directors thereof and all shareholders thereof who shall either directly or beneficially as such word is defined and utilized in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and regulations issued pursuant thereto own more than twenty (20) percent of the outstanding shares of stock thereof, as well as the manager of the business in which the license will be utilized, possess and meet all of the qualifications for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; 
d.  Any person who has been convicted, has entered a plea of nolo contendere or has forfeited a bond with respect to any felony within ten (10) years prior to the filing of any such application or with respect to any misdemeanor within five (5) years prior to the filing of any such application including particularly, but not being limited to, those offenses involving force or violence, prostitution, gambling, or tax law violations in the event that such conviction, plea or bond forfeiture tends to indicate, in the opinion of the city council, that the applicant may not maintain or operate the business in which the alcoholic beverage license sought by the applicant would be utilized in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. The terms "felony" and "misdemeanor" as used in this subsection shall include the violation of any criminal law of the United States of America, the state, or any other state of the United States of America; provided that the term "misdemeanor" shall not include those violations which are commonly referred to as "traffic violations." The term "conviction" as used in this subsection shall include an adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council, in its sole discretion, may decide to authorize the issuance of a license to a person who has in the past been convicted of, plead guilty to, entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond on any crime when, after a thorough investigation of all the facts including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant, it has determined, in the sole discretion of the city council, that such action is in keeping with the ends of justice and the public interest and welfare; 
e.  Any person who has been convicted of, has entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond to any charge of violation of any state, federal, or local law involving the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession of alcoholic beverages, contraband, or any "controlled substances" as such term is utilized under laws of the state, or any other substance, the control or possession of which is controlled or prohibited under laws of the state or the United States of America, or any other state of the United States. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council, in its sole discretion, may decide to authorize the issuance of a license to a person who has in the past been convicted of, plead guilty to, entered a plea of nolo contendere or forfeited a bond on any crime when, after a thorough investigation of all the facts including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant, it has determined, in the sole discretion of the city council, that such action is in keeping with the ends of justice and the public interest and welfare; 
f.  Any person who as either the previous holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority, or as a party interested in any business in "which any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority was utilized, either conducted, or allowed the conduct of, the business with respect to which such license was issued in such a manner as to cause, in the opinion of the city council, greater than normal police activity, observation or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law or regulation either relating to such license or the business associated therewith or in order to maintain public order; 
g.  Any location not suitable therefor, in the opinion of the city council, because of either traffic congestion or the general character of the neighborhood or by reason of the effect which the utilization of such license at such location would have upon adjacent and surrounding properties or upon adjacent neighborhoods; 
h.  Any location for which there is an unpaid or unsatisfied tax or other financial obligation due to the city which is not then the subject of appeal or litigation; 
i.  Any person who has not attained the age of twenty-one (21) years; 
j.  Any person who either held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority which was revoked by such authority within a one-year period immediately prior to the date of the filing of an application or was a party interested in any business in which any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority was revoked by such authority within the one-year period prior to the date of the filing of an application; 
k.  Any location that is within three hundred (300) feet, as measured in a straight line from the nearest point on the property which will be the location of the business in which the alcoholic beverage license will be utilized to the nearest point on the property upon which is located a church, school, college, or alcohol or drug treatment center operated by any governmental agency, with the terms "school" and "college" as used in this subsection meaning those institutions which are both (i) operated either by a governmental or church entity and (ii) are engaged in courses of instruction which are commonly taught in public primary or secondary schools or colleges in the state; 
[See in this regard the measurement of distances as set forth in Regulation 560-2-2-.32 of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division of the Georgia Department of Revenue.] 
l.  Any location at which the utilization of the licensee would cause or create any violation of the zoning ordinance of the city or of the building code or fire code of the city; 
m.  Any location at which an alcoholic beverage license has previously been suspended or revoked by either the city or the state department of revenue and where, in the opinion of the city council, there exists the likelihood that the utilization of such license at such location would cause or necessitate greater than normal police activity, observation or inspection in order to either prevent violation of laws and regulations relating to such location or to maintain public order, due to the history of either (i) violations of the provisions of this chapter or of the laws, rules and regulations of the state relative to alcoholic beverages by the holder of the previous license at such location or agents, servants or employees thereof or (ii) activities or conduct of patrons of the business in which such previous license was utilized at such location, all as compared to the locations of other licenses, or would cause or tend to cause, in the opinion of the city, council, greater than normal community problems or conflict as compared to the locations of other licenses; 
n.  Any location at which an alcoholic beverage license has previously been suspended or revoked by either the city or the state department of revenue and where, in the opinion of the city council, problems associated with the utilization of a prior alcoholic beverage license at such location were such that it would not be in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare to grant any other alcoholic beverage license for such location; 
o.  Any person or any location with respect to which the granting or utilization of a license would constitute a violation of laws, rules or regulations of the state; or 
p.  Any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection 3-66(2), (3) or (4) who has not paid or satisfied any tax or other financial obligation due to the city which is not then the subject of appeal or litigation. 
(3)  In addition to the other qualifications set forth herein, an applicant for a retail distilled spirits license must meet all of the requirements of the following subsection a. (restaurant): 
a.  No license will be issued unless the license applicant likewise operates a restaurant upon the proposed licensed premises and such restaurant: 
1.  Sells food prepared, served and consumed on the premises; and 
2.  Such sales of food prepared, served and consumed on the premises constitute at least sixty (60) percent of the gross income of all food and beverage sales on the premises. The term "gross income" shall not include tips or gratuities which may be added to the base food bill; and 
3.  Has permanent seating capacity at tables and booths, not counting bar stools, for at least thirty (30) persons; and 
4.  Meets all of the definitional requirements of "restaurant" set forth in section 3-1 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-65. - Location. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the location with respect to which an alcoholic beverage license has been issued by the city shall remain eligible for issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses by the city notwithstanding subsequent changes which would otherwise render the locations nonlicensable under subsection 3-64(2)k. for so long as an alcoholic beverage license remains issued for such location by the city and further provided that in the event of the termination of any such license issued with respect to such location the location itself shall thereafter remain eligible for the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses if within six (6) months following such termination an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city for such location. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-66. - Applications. 
Prior to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant therefor shall file with the city a written application, in such form and substance as shall from time to time be determined by the city manager, together with separate certified checks payable to the city or cash for both the application fee provided for in this article and for the licensee fee provided for in this article. Applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be presented to the finance director or his designee, shall be signed by the applicant if any individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent if a corporation, shall be verified by oath or affidavit, shall contain the following statements and information and shall otherwise meet the following requirements: 
(1)  In the case of an individual applicant who will actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized, then the name, age, sex, height, weight, birth date, social security number, current residence address, business addresses, and all previous such addresses of the applicant within the last ten (10) years; 
(2)  In the case of an individual applicant who will not actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which the licensee applied for will be utilized, then the name, age, sex, height, weight, birth date, social security number, current residence address, business addresses, and all previous such addresses within the last ten (10) years of both the applicant and the person who will actively manage such business; 
(3)  In the case of a partnership, then the name, date and location of formation, federal tax identification number, current principal business address, and all prior business addresses within the past ten (10) years of such partnership as well as the name, age, sex, height, weight, birth date, social security number, current business address, current residence address, and all prior such addresses within the past ten (10) years of all partners, members and managers of such partnership and the manager or managers of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized; 
(4)  In the case of a corporation, then the name, date and location of incorporation, federal tax identification number, current principal business address, name and address of registered agent in the state for service of process, and all prior business addresses within the last ten (10) years of such corporation as well as the name, age, sex, height, weight, social security number, current business address, current residence address, and all prior such addresses within the last ten (10) years of all officers thereof, all directors thereof, and all shareholders thereof who own either directly or beneficially, as such word is defined and utilized in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and regulations issued pursuant thereto, more than twenty (20) percent of the outstanding shares of stock thereof, and of the manager or managers of the business, in which the license applied for will be utilized; 
(5)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has made at any prior time any application to any governmental entity for any alcoholic beverage license of any nature and, if so, the circumstances thereof, including the disposition and current status thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(6)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any governmental entity, the circumstances thereof, and the present status of such license all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(7)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any governmental entity which has been suspended or revoked and, if so, the circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(8)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever been convicted of, entered a plea or nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond on, any crime other than traffic violations and, if so, the nature and circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(9)  A statement with respect to whether any person or entity other than the applicant and those persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section is or will be either directly or indirectly interested in the profits or losses of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized and, if so, the circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(10)  The classification of license applied for; 
(11)  The location with respect to which the license will be utilized and the name and nature of the business in which the license will be utilized, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; 
(12)  A statement that both the applicant and all other person's with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section are fully qualified in all respects under this chapter to be the holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city and that all such persons are entitled to have the license requested issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(13)  A statement that the location with respect to which the licensee is sought meets all conditions, qualifications and criteria established in this chapter for the location of a business utilizing the alcoholic beverage license applied for; 
(14)  Such other information and statements as shall from time to time be required by the city manager or the city council; 
(15)  A complete set of fingerprints administered by the police department of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section; 
(16)  A head and shoulder photograph, such as is contained on a state driver's license, taken within the past three (3) years of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section; and 
(17)  Written consents of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section that the city has the continuing permission and authority of all such persons to monitor the public records of the city, county, the state and of the United States to ensure on-going compliance with the statements set forth in subsections (7) and (8) of this section. Any license granted upon an application that does not contain such written consent shall automatically expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. Such license cannot be renewed under the provisions of sections 3-77 and 3-79. Rather, the city shall treat the request for renewal for such license as an application for a new license under section 3-66. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-67. - Designation of agent. 
All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses made by a corporation or a partnership shall name in the application one (1) or more persons as the agent and representative for the corporation or partnership to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation or partnership in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any such license. The application shall give the mailing address of such person, or persons, with the mailing of any notice to any such person at the address so furnished being sufficient notice to the corporation or partnership. If any such person shall cease to be the agent and representative of such corporation or partnership, another person shall immediately be appointed by the license holder and written notice shall be given the city stating the name and address of such new agent and representative. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-68. - Application fee. 
The application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be accompanied by a certified check payable to the city or cash in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk as an application fee to cover the cost of processing the application and conducting necessary investigations, which fee shall be nonrefundable upon denial of the application and shall not apply toward any licensee fee or excise tax payable by the licensee if the application is granted. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-69. - Investigation of application. 
Upon receipt by the finance director or designee of any application for an alcoholic beverage license, such application shall be forwarded to the chief of police for investigation, who, following such investigation, shall report his findings with respect thereto in writing and shall attach thereto the police record, if any, of every person named in the application. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-70. - Recommendation. 
The finance director shall conduct investigation and study with respect to an application for the issuance of an alcoholic beverage license as he shall deem necessary and shall report the investigation and study to the city manager together with his recommendation, if any, as to what action should be taken with respect to the grant or denial of the application for such license and the city manager shall in turn conduct such additional investigation as he shall deem necessary and report the investigation to the city council with his recommendation as to what action should be taken with respect to the grant or denial of the application for such license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-71. - Grant or denial of application. 
(a)  Following receipt by the city council of an application for an alcoholic beverage license together with the written report of the chief of police and the written recommendations relative thereto, the city council shall either: 
(1)  Grant such application and direct issuance of a license in connection therewith subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  Table action on such application pending a hearing on such application as provided in this section. 
If such application is so tabled by the council then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the applicant requiring such applicant to show cause, if any the applicant can, at a hearing at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of the citation by mail or otherwise upon the applicant as to why the application should not be denied as well as written notice of the findings of the chief of police, the recommendation of the finance director relative to such application, if any, and the recommendation of the city manager relative thereto. 
(b)  The hearing provided for above, which need not be a regular meeting of the city council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or request of the applicant or for good cause shown. At such hearing the applicant shall have the opportunity to show cause why the application should be granted and should not be denied and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against granting of the application, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceedings transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. 
(c)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within thirty (30) days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding the grant or denial of such application. 
(d)  Upon the denial of such application, the city manager shall cause the applicant to be notified in writing within ten (10) days of such decision of the nature of the decision and the reasons therefor and shall cause to be returned to the applicant the licensee fee tendered in connection with the application but not the application fee which shall be nonrefundable. 
(e)  Upon the grant of such application the city manager shall promptly notify the applicant thereof and the finance director shall promptly proceed to cause the license applied for to be issued. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-72. - Issuance of license. 
Upon the approval of an application for an alcoholic beverage license by the city council, the finance director, or his designee, shall cause to be issued to the applicant the license applied for with respect to the location listed in the application upon payment of all fees and charges required therefor and subject to the conditions and limitations imposed in this chapter relative thereto. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-73. - Conditions and limitation of license. 
The grant and issuance of an alcoholic beverage license to an applicant shall be conditioned upon: 
(1)  Payment of all fees, charges and taxes applicable thereto; 
(2)  Obtaining and maintenance of a license issued by the state department of revenue to the applicant for the location listed in the application for the same type activity which is authorized in the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city; 
(3)  Obtaining and maintaining a business license issued by the city with respect to the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is to be utilized; 
(4)  All statements, representations and information contained in the application for such license and all renewal and amended applications relative thereto continuing to remain materially unchanged except to the extent contained in amended application which have been granted pursuant to the provisions of section 3-89; and 
(5)  Compliance with all requirements and provisions of this chapter and all laws, rules and regulations of the state relative to the sale, distribution and possession of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-74. - License fees. 
(a)  In addition to all other charges, taxes, and fees relative thereto, annual alcoholic beverage license fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city finance director are imposed (which, consistent with city policy, are set by the city manager with the informal consent of city council) and shall be paid prior to the issuance of or renewal of any alcoholic beverage license. 
(b)  License fees for the sale of alcoholic beverages are due and payable immediately upon issuance thereof and immediately as of the date of renewal thereof. 
(c)  All license fees payable under this section shall be paid either in lawful currency of the United States of America or by certified or cashier's check payable to the city and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-75. - Duration. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for a period of time less than the remainder of such calendar year. In the event of the revocation, suspension, termination, lapse or surrender of a license before the expiration of a calendar year there shall not be any refund therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-76. - Expiration. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued with all applications for a renewal of the license for the ensuing year to be treated as applications for new licenses except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-77. - Application for renewal. 
(a)  The holder of any alcoholic beverages license who desires to renew such license shall annually file with the finance director, or his designee, an application therefor in such form and content as shall be determined from time to time by the city manager on or before 4:30 p.m. on the first Monday in December of the year preceding the year for which the application for renewal is made. Such application for renewal shall be accompanied by the applicable annual license fee for the ensuing year. Failure of any holder of any alcoholic beverage license to file such application for renewal by such time and to pay together therewith the required applicable annual license fee for the ensuing year shall render the license void, lapsed, and nonrenewed effective as of the last minute of December 31 of that year; provided however, that for providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city manager, the city manager may, in his sole discretion, extend the time for filing of such application for renewal and payment of such license fee and late fees for a period of time not later than January 31 of such ensuing year. 
(b)  Applicant shall pay a late fee in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges for any application for renewal which is submitted after close of business on the first Monday in December. Late applications submitted by December upon payment of all scheduled charges and late fees may be approved by council at the second regularly scheduled December meeting. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-78. - Lapse of license. 
(a)  If the holder of any alcoholic beverage license fails to timely file an application for renewal or to pay such annual license fee, as the time therefor may be extended pursuant to this chapter, then such license shall automatically become nonrenewed and lapsed. 
(b)  In such event, in order to obtain an alcoholic beverage license, such former licensee shall be required to file an application for another alcoholic beverage license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  In such event, pending receipt of other such alcoholic beverage license, such former licensee shall not be entitled to engage in the sale of the alcoholic beverages formerly authorized pursuant to such lapsed license and shall immediately cease and desist in conducting such sales. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-79. - Operation pending renewal. 
Upon the timely filing of an application for renewal of any alcoholic beverage license and the payment of the required license fee therefor pursuant to the provisions of section 3-77, the holder of such license shall be entitled to continue to engage in the activity authorized pursuant to the license issued for the previous year, subject to the provisions of this article, pending action on the application for renewal of such license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-80. - Review of application for renewal. 
All applications for renewal of alcoholic beverage licenses shall be reviewed by the city manager and/or his designees prior to the December regular meeting of the city council and the city manager shall submit a written recommendation to the city council with respect to the renewal or nonrenewal of each such alcoholic beverage license. Recommendations for renewal may be summary in form and may be collective; however, any recommendation for nonrenewal shall be made individually and shall specify the reasons for recommendation for nonrenewal. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-81. - Grant or denial of renewal. 
(a)  On or before the regular December monthly meeting thereof, the city council shall with respect to each application for renewal either (i) grant such application for renewal or (ii) table action on such application pending a hearing on such application for renewal as provided in this section. 
(b)  If an application for renewal is so tabled then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the applicant requiring the applicant to show cause why the application for renewal should be granted at a hearing at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five (5) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of the citation by mail or otherwise upon the applicant as well as written notice of the recommendation and reasons of the city manager relative to nonrenewal of such license or the recommendation of the city manager for renewal of such license, as the case may be. 
(c)  The hearing provided for in subsection (b) of this section, which meeting need not be a regular meeting of the council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or at the request of the applicant or for good cause shown. At such hearing the applicant shall have the opportunity to show cause why the application for renewal should be granted and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against granting the application for renewal, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceeding transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. 
(d)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within thirty (30) days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding the granting or denial of such application for renewal. 
(e)  Upon the denial of such application the city manager shall cause the applicant to be notified in writing within ten (10) days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefor and shall cause to be returned to the applicant the license fee tendered in connection with the application for renewal whereupon, effective thirty (30) days following notification by the city manager to the applicant thereof, all rights of the applicant to operate under the license for the preceding year shall lapse and terminate and the applicant shall cease and desist from all activity authorized under the prior alcoholic beverage license sought to be renewed. 
(f)  Upon the grant of such application for renewal the city manager shall promptly notify the applicant thereof and the finance director shall promptly proceed to cause the license applied for to be renewed. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-82. - Grounds for denial of application for renewal. 
The city council shall be entitled to deny renewal of any alcoholic beverage license upon a finding by the city council, following the hearing prescribed in connection therewith, of the existence, in the opinion of the city council, of any of the following: 
(1)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license of any of the following: 
a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, distribution, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Any provision, condition, requirement or limitation contained in this chapter; 
c.  Any criminal law which is classified as a felony; or 
d.  Any criminal law involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any employee, agent, or servant of the holder of such license or the business in which such license is utilized, in connection with the maintenance or operation of any business in which an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized, of any of the following: 
a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Any provision, condition, requirement, or limitation contained in this chapter; 
c.  Any other ordinance of the city; or 
d.  Any ordinance, rule, regulation or law of any governmental entity otherwise regulating the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; 
(3)  The initial application for issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, any application for renewal thereof, or any amended application relative thereto contained, as of the time made, material false or misleading statements or information or was otherwise misrepresentative or misleading; 
(4)  Failure of the applicant for renewal, or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license, to meet, as of the time of the application for renewal, the requirements established in this chapter for the initial issuance of such license; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation during the period of time that the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city has been issued for such location by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued for the location of the business in which alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized; 
(6)  Failure of the holder of the license or any employee or agent of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly report to the police department of the city: 
a.  Any violation of this chapter; 
b.  Any other violation of law; 
c.  Any violation of any other city ordinance; or 
d.  Any breach of the peace, disturbance or alteration which occurs upon the premises of the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; 
(7)  Repeated failure of the holder of the license or the employees, agent and servants of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly control and prevent upon the premises of such business any of the following activities or conduct: 
a.  Fighting; 
b.  Disorderly conduct; 
c.  Utilization of controlled substances; 
d.  Gambling; 
e.  Indecent conduct; 
f.  Excessive noise; or 
(8)  Failure of the holder of the license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license to promptly pay and satisfy all taxes and other financial obligations due to the city which are not the subject of appeal or litigation. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-83. - Transfer of licenses. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the city shall be personal to the person to whom issued and are applicable only to the location for which application therefor is made and accordingly no license shall be transferable to any person or entity or to any other location. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, then upon application and approval by the city manager subject to the terms of this section, an alcoholic beverage license may be utilized by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person, or by the heirs at law of the deceased person, in the event that such administrator, executor, personal representative or heirs meet all of the qualifications contained in this chapter for the issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, with the license of such deceased person to be so utilized by the administrator, executor, personal representative, or heirs of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete administration of the estate of such deceased person, but in no event longer than six (6) months from the date of the death of such deceased person, with such license to lapse upon the earlier of such six-month period, completion of such administration, or December 31 of the year in which death shall occur. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event that the person to whom an alcoholic beverage license is issued certifies under oath in writing to the city manager that the business served by such alcoholic beverage license is relocating to another physical location within the city, the city manager may, upon payment to the city of an application amendment fee, provide for an amended license specific to the new location if such new location meets all of the requirements of this chapter. In no event shall any holder of an alcoholic beverage license operate under that license at more than one (1) location at any time. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any change in the ownership interests of a partnership or corporation which holds any alcoholic beverage license, as reflected in the initial application for such license, shall cause the immediate cessation of sales of any alcoholic beverages and no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made until such change in the ownership interests is approved by the city council based upon the qualification of all persons then interested therein in accordance with the provisions hereof or until the issuance of another license to such corporation or partnership upon a new application therefor; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply in a situation in which one (1) or more individuals who have existing interest in the entity which holds the license cease to have such interest and the remaining ownership interest in such entity remains unchanged except as to the division of the remaining interests therein. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-84. - Emergency suspension. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter: 
(1)  The chief of police shall be authorized, upon concurrence with respect thereto by the city manager, to suspend the right of the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to sell or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverage, and to close the business in which such license is utilized, for such period of time as shall be determined to be necessary, but in no event in excess of twenty-four (24) hours duration, in the event of: 
a.  Any national, state or local emergency; 
b.  Any riotous or violent circumstances either with respect to such location only or the community generally; or 
c.  Any circumstances which require such action in order to prevent conditions which are contrary to public health, welfare or safety. 
(2)  The city council may, in its sole discretion, and either with or without notice or hearing, suspend the right of the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to sell or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverage for such period of time as it may deem necessary, but in no event in excess of thirty (30) days duration, in the event of: 
a.  Any national, state or local emergency; 
b.  Any riotous or violent circumstances either with respect to such location only or the community generally; or 
c.  Any circumstances which require such action in order to prevent conditions which are contrary to public health, welfare or safety; provided, however, that in no event shall such period of suspension exceed ten (10) days duration without an opportunity to be heard being afforded to the holder of such license in connection with the continuance thereafter of such emergency suspension, with notice thereof and such hearing hereon being the same as provided in section 3-85 for suspension of alcoholic beverage licenses generally. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-85. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon a preliminary determination by the city manager that a ground or grounds exist for the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the holder of such license requiring such holder to show cause, if any such holder can, at a hearing before the city council at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five (5) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of the citation, by mail or otherwise, upon such holder as well as written notice of the reasons believed by the city manager to authorize possible suspension or revocation of such license. 
(b)  The hearing provided for in subsection (a) of this section, which need not be a regular meeting of the council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or at the request of the license holder or for good cause shown for a period of not longer than ten (10) days. At such hearing the holder of the license shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence in favor of suspension or revocation, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceeding transcribed or recorded at the license holder's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. 
(c)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within thirty (30) days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding whether the license in issue should be suspended or revoked and, if suspended, then the duration of such suspension and the amount of license reinstatement fee which amount shall not be in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), if any, as the city council shall in its sole discretion determine to be appropriate under the circumstances, which license reinstatement fee shall be paid as a condition to reinstatement of the license following suspension. 
(d)  Upon the suspension or revocation of such license then the city manager shall cause the license holder to be notified in writing within ten (10) days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefor and thereupon the license shall immediately become suspended or terminated in accordance with such decision and the license holder shall immediately upon receipt of such notice cease and desist from all activity authorized under such alcoholic beverage license in accordance with such decision and physically surrender such license to the finance director. 
(e)  If the city council determines that grounds do not exist to suspend or terminate such license or decides to not suspend or terminate such license notwithstanding the existence of grounds therefor then the city manager shall promptly notify the license holder thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-86. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
The city council shall be entitled, in its sole discretion, to either suspend or revoke any alcoholic beverage license upon a finding by the city council, following the hearing prescribed in connection therewith, of the existence of any of the following: 
(1)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license of and of the following: 
a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, distribution, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Any provision, condition, requirement or limitation contained in this chapter; 
c.  Any criminal law which is classified as a felony; or 
d.  Any criminal law involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license or by any employee, agent, or servant of the holder of such license or the business in which such license is utilized, all in connection with the maintenance or operation of any business in which an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized, of any of the following: 
a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages; 
b.  Any provision, condition, requirement, or limitation contained in this chapter; 
c.  Any other ordinance of the city; or 
d.  Any ordinance, rule, regulation or law of any governmental entity otherwise regulating the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; 
(3)  The initial application for issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, any application for renewal thereof, or any amended application relative thereto contained, as of the time made, material false or misleading statements or information or was otherwise misrepresentative or misleading; 
(4)  Failure of the holder of such license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license, to meet, as of the time of the notice of hearing relative thereto, the requirements established in this chapter for the initial issuance of such license; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation during the period of time that the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city has been issued for such location by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued for the location of the business in which the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized; 
(6)  Failure of the holder of the license or any employee or agent of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly report to the police department of the city: 
a.  Any violation of this chapter; 
b.  Any other violation of law; 
c.  Any other violation of any other city ordinance; or 
d.  Any breach of the peace, disturbance or alteration which occurs within or upon the premises of the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; 
(7)  Repeated failure of the holder of the license or the employees, agent and servants of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly control and prevent within or upon the premises of such business any of the following activities or conduct: 
a.  Fighting; 
b.  Disorderly conduct; 
c.  Utilization of controlled substances; 
d.  Gambling; 
e.  Indecent conduct; 
f.  Excessive noise; or 
(8)  Failure of the holder of the license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license to promptly pay and satisfy all taxes and other financial obligations due to the city which are not the subject of appeal or litigation; 
(9)  With respect to a retail distilled spirits consumption license, failure to derive at least sixty (60) percent of its gross food and beverage sales, excluding tips and gratuities, from the sale of food prepared, served and consumed upon the licensed premises thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-87. - Termination. 
All rights and privileges of the holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall terminate upon the first to occur of the following: 
(1)  Death of the holder of such license, except to the extent on any right to continue to utilize such license as provided in subsection 3-83(b); 
(2)  Dissolution of a corporation or partnership which are holder of such license; 
(3)  The filing of any voluntary bankruptcy proceedings under the bankruptcy code by the holder of such license or the failure of the holder of such license to, within 60 days of the date of filing thereof, obtain dismissal of and involuntary proceeding filed under the bankruptcy code against the holder of such license; 
(4)  Lapse of such license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; 
(5)  Denial by the city council of an application for renewal of such license; 
(6)  Revocation thereof by the city council; 
(7)  Surrender thereof by the licensee to the city; 
(8)  Automatically without any action on the part of the city upon revocation by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the state department of revenue to the holder of the license in issue with respect to such location; or 
(9)  The licensee ceases to be engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages permitted with such license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-88. - License issued in error. 
No rights with respect to any license which is issued in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall attach thereto in favor of any person and the city shall be entitled at any time subsequent to the issuance of such license in error to terminate and cancel any such license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-89. - Amended applications. 
In the event that either (i) the business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized cease to be actively managed or operated on a day-to-day basis by the person so designated with respect thereto in the latest application relative to such license whether an initial, amended or renewal application; or (ii) any other material change occurs in any of the statements, representations or other information contained in any application relative to such license whether in an initial, amended or renewal application which has not otherwise been modified pursuant to an amended application previously granted pursuant to the provisions of this section, then: 
(1)  Within thirty (30) calendar days of such occurrence the licensee shall file with the finance director an amended application with respect to such license, in such form and of such content as shall from time to time be prescribed therefore by the city manager, disclosing, in sufficient detail to evaluate the application, the nature and extent of such changes and, in the case of the cessation of management of such business as reflected in the latest such application, the full details and particulars relative to the person who is then actively managing or operating such business on a day-to-day basis, all to the same extent as required in an initial application; 
(2)  An amended application shall be accompanied by payment to the city by cashier's check or cash of an amended application processing fee which shall be nonrefundable regardless of the ultimate decision relative to such amended application; 
(3)  Upon receipt of an amended application, city officials shall conduct such investigations as shall be appropriate relative thereto and shall make recommendations relative thereto as in the case of an initial application; 
(4)  Upon receipt of recommendations relative thereto the city council shall proceed to act on such amended application as in the case of an initial application utilizing the same qualifications and criteria relative thereto as for an initial application and utilizing the same procedures with respect thereto; 
(5)  Grant or denial of an amended application shall be based upon a finding by the city council that, as of the date of the determination thereof by the city council, the amended application either meets or fails to meet the requirements, criteria and qualifications contained in this chapter which are necessary for the initial issuance of such alcoholic beverage license; 
(6)  Approval of an amended application by the city council shall constitute, effective as of the date of such approval, an amendment of the initial application; 
(7)  The licensee shall, following determination thereof by the city council, be notified by the city manager of such decision as in the case of an initial application; and 
(8)  Effective fifteen (15) days following notification by the city manager of denial of an amended application for such longer period of time as the city manager in his sole discretion determines appropriate under the circumstances, but in no event later than thirty (30) days from the date of such notification: (i) such license shall lapse due to the failure of the licensee to continue to meet the qualifications, requirements and criteria for the grant of such license; (ii) all privileges relative to such license shall cease and terminate; (iii) such former licensee shall not be entitled to engage in the sale of the alcoholic beverages formerly authorized pursuant to such lapsed license; (iv) such former licensee shall immediately cease and desist from conducting such sales; and (v) in order to be authorized thereafter to engage in the sale of such alcoholic beverages the former licensee shall be required to file an application for another alcoholic beverage license and obtain approval thereof, all in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-90. - Waiting period before reapplication. 
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, any unsuccessful applicant must wait ninety (90) days from the date of final decision before reapplying. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09)\ 
Secs. 3-91—3-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 3-121. - Hours during which sales prohibited. 
The sale of any alcoholic beverage by the holder of any alcoholic beverage license or by any employee of any business in which such license is utilized is prohibited during the following periods of time: 
(1)  From 11:59 p.m., prevailing time, on Saturday until 8:00 a.m. prevailing time on Monday; and 
(2)  From 1:32 a.m., prevailing time, on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday until 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, in that same day. 
For purposes of this section, "sale of any alcoholic beverage" prohibited during the above specified times shall include private events wherein the host (i.e., someone other than the holder of any alcoholic beverage license at such location) has purchased alcoholic beverages for sale (i.e., cash bar) or for free distribution as an emolument of attendance. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-122. - Hours during which other activities prohibited. 
Neither any holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall allow or permit any alcoholic beverage to be handled in any manner upon the premises of the business in which such license is utilized or any alcoholic beverage to be located upon any table, counter, or other such customer service area upon such premises, either in the form of the original container therefor or otherwise, from one (1) hour after the last time permitted to sell an alcoholic beverage as set forth in section 3-121 until such time as alcoholic beverages may again be sold as set forth in section 3-121. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-123. - Sales on election day. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted and is authorized during polling hours of any local, state or federal election; provided that the foregoing shall not authorize the sale of any alcoholic beverage within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any polling place during the period of time that polls are open for voting. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-124. - Advertising. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license shall allow or permit any advertising to be placed or run in any media or by any other means with respect to the availability of alcoholic beverages at the location licensed except to the extent permitted by state law and rules and regulations relative thereto. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-125. - Consumption prohibited upon premises of package licensee. 
No holder of a license only for the package sales of any alcoholic beverage nor any employee, agent or servant of any business in which only a license for package sales is utilized shall knowingly allow or permit the breaking of any package containing any alcoholic beverage upon the premises where sold, or intentionally allow or permit the consumption of any of the contents of any package containing any alcoholic beverage upon the premises where sold. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-126. - Sales prohibited beyond premises. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license or any employee, agent or servant of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage at any location other than upon premises so licensed in which such sales are authorized. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-127. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to intoxicated person. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall sell, give, provide, distribute, or furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person who is then in an obvious state of intoxication. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-128. - Assisting other in violations. 
No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall promote, encourage, or assist any other person in conducting or engaging in any activity or action which is in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-129. - Misrepresentation of beverages. 
No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city, nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall add to or otherwise adulterate the contents of a package or refill any empty package, or in any other manner misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-130. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-131. - Operation only by licensee or designated manager. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall permit or allow any business in which such license is utilized to be managed or operated for any period of time longer than 15 days by any person except to the extent otherwise specifically provided in this chapter who is not listed upon the initial application for such license, upon the most recent application for renewal thereof, on an amended application relative thereto which has been approved by the city council, or upon a then pending and un-acted-upon amended application relative thereto. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-132. - Display of license. 
The holder of every alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall post and prominently display in a conspicuous place upon the premises licensed all alcoholic beverages licenses by the city and by the state department of revenue. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-133. - Posting of laws regulating sales. 
The holder of every alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall post and prominently display in a conspicuous place upon the premises licensed all notices required by state law relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages as well as such other notice or notices relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to license issued by the city as shall from time to time be prescribed by the city manager of such form, size and content as shall be prescribed by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-134. - Signage restrictions. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter shall at any time allow or permit any sign, signage or other visual media of any type or nature whatsoever upon any portion of the premises licensed relative to alcoholic beverages, the price thereof, the availability thereof, or the name, logo, trademark, or symbol of any brand of alcoholic beverage except to the extent specifically authorized in this section or in violation of any of the restrictions set forth as follows: 
(1)  There may be located upon the exterior of the building located upon the licensed premises which is utilized in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages one (1) sign on each of not more than two (2) exterior walls with each of such signs not being in excess of five (5) percent of the gross wall area of each such wall from grade level to actual roof line of a one-story building or to the actual floor line of the second floor if more than one (1) story; 
(2)  Signage authorized pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall only be located below the roof line of a one-story building, or, below the actual floor line of the second floor if the building is more than one (1) story, and shall be mounted flush against such exterior walls with no portion thereof extending more than eight (8) inches from the wall surface; 
(3)  In addition to the signage authorized pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, there may also be located upon the licensed premises one (1) freestanding sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area which shall be located at a height of not more than twenty (20) feet above ground level; 
(4)  No signage authorized pursuant to subsection (1) or (3) of this section shall be illuminated in any manner nor shall any letter or lettering utilized therein exceed eight (8) inches in height; 
(5)  No signage authorized pursuant to subsections (1) or (3) of this section shall make any reference to the price of any alcoholic beverage; 
(6)  No signage authorized pursuant to subsections (1) or (3) of this section shall make any reference in any manner to the availability of alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the licensed premises; 
(7)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (6) of this section, restaurants may utilize the word "lounge" in signage to the extent that a lounge as defined in this chapter is located upon the same premises as such restaurant; 
(8)  Signage authorized pursuant to subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall consist of the utilization of the words "Beer," "Wine," "Ale," "Champagne" only or any combination of such words plus use of the words "Package Store," if desired, together with the trade name of the business in which the alcoholic beverage license is utilized, if desired; 
(9)  Except to the extent specifically authorized in this section no sign, signage or other visual media or any type or nature whatsoever relative to alcoholic beverages shall be located upon the exterior of any building located upon the licensed premises or upon any unenclosed portion of the licensed premises; 
(10)  No sign, signage or other visual media or any type or nature whatsoever which is located upon the interior of any building located upon the licensed premises relative to (i) the price of any alcoholic beverage; or (ii) to the availability of alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises shall at any time be visible from the exterior of such building; 
(11)  Except to the extent prohibited in subsection (10) of this section signs, signage, and visual media relative to alcoholic beverages, the price thereof, the availability thereof for package sales and/or consumption upon the licensed premises, as licensed, and the name, logo, trademark and symbol of brands of alcoholic beverages are permitted within the interior of that portion of the building in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is conducted, subject however to such other provisions contained in this chapter; 
(12)  Nothing contained in any of the foregoing provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the parking upon the licensed premises of a wholesale dealer or upon the licensed premises of a retail dealer for a period of time not in excess of one (1) hour of a delivery vehicle of a licensed wholesale dealer; 
(13)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no sign, signage or visual media of any type or nature whatsoever shall at any time be erected, located or maintained except in strict accordance with the zoning ordinance of the city; 
(14)  Except to the extent specifically permitted and authorized in this section, no holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage licensed is utilized shall at any time allow or permit upon the premises licensed any sign, signage, or other visual media of any type or nature whatsoever relative to any alcoholic beverage, the price thereof, the availability thereof, or the name, logo, trademark or symbol of any brand of alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-135. - Obstruction of view of interior of premises and lighting of premises. 
(a)  For the safety of law enforcement personnel and other public officials, every business in which an alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall provide a door, window or other opening through which the interior of the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be visible from the exterior. Neither the holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall obstruct, block, or obscure the view through any door, window or other opening of the interior of the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Both the exterior and interior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be so arranged as to afford an unobstructed view from the outside thereof of the interior portion of the premises which is utilized for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  The exterior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall at all times be illuminated with sufficient light intensity so as to allow a complete view of all portions of the exterior thereof. 
(d)  The exterior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall at all times be illuminated with sufficient light intensity so as to allow a complete view of the interior of such premise which is utilized for the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person standing on the inside of the entrance of such premises. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-136. - Restrictions on compensation. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall permit or allow any agent, servant or employee of such business who is not the owner of an interest in such business to either directly or indirectly, receive or obtain in any manner any salary or other compensation of any nature whatsoever which is based solely upon the volume of alcoholic beverages sold upon such premises either by or as a result of the efforts of such agent, servant or employee individually or of such business generally or which is based solely upon the profit derived by such business from the sale of any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-137. - Restrictions on premises rental fees. 
It shall be unlawful for an alcoholic beverage license holder to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for the licensed premises is based in whole or in part upon the volume of alcoholic beverages sold upon such premises or based in whole or in part upon the profit derived by such business utilizing the alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-138. - Security cameras in certain retail establishments. 
Any retail business establishment licensed by the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages, beer or malt beverage by the package for off-premises consumption is required to install security cameras of a type and number approved by the chief of the Nashville Police Department or his designee. 
(a)  Cameras meeting the requirements of this section must be capable of producing a retrievable image in film, tape, or digital format that can be made a permanent record and can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the chief of police or his designee. In addition, the location of all such cameras shall be approved or determined by the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  Retail establishments required to install the camera security system shall be responsible for the maintenance and periodic check of said systems. It shall also be the responsibility of the establishments to have on hand at all times the correct film or tape type or other appropriate data storage device required to capture the video recording and batteries, other power backup device to ensure operation of all security cameras. These cameras will be required to display time and date on the video recording. 
(c)  In the event a camera security system fails to work as normal, the establishment will be required to report it to the Nashville Police Department within twelve (12) hours. In the event the system failure is not reported within this time period they will be found in violation of this section. 
(d)  Security camera system failures will be corrected within seventy-two (72) hours by the establishment or be found in violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-3-11) 
Sec. 3-139. - Access of police officers and public officials. 
No holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall at any time deny or prevent access to the licensed premises, or any portion thereof, to any police officer, to any state or federal or local law enforcement officer or to any local, state or federal building, zoning or fire inspector or official in connection with the conduct of such officer's, inspector's or official's duties or fail or obstruct any such officer, inspector or official in connection with the conduct of any investigation by any such officer, inspector or official with respect to the licensed premises or any activity or conduct upon the licensed premises involving alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-140. - Brown bagging. 
Reserved for future use. 
Sec. 3-141. - [Repeal.] 
Any ordinance in the existing code of Nashville contrary to or inconsistent with any provision of the Nashville 2009 Liquor by the Drink Ordinance is hereby overruled, stricken and declared null and void. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-142. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as and may be cited as "Nashville 2009 Liquor by the Drink Ordinance." 
Secs. 3-143—3-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 3-161. - Excise tax imposed. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon each holder of a wholesale alcoholic beverage license selling alcoholic beverages within the city a specific excise tax in addition to all other fees, taxes and charges relative thereto upon the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city as follows: 
(1)  Per case of twenty-four (24) seven-ounce containers ..... $0.70 
(2)  Per case of twenty-four (24) eight-ounce containers ..... $0.80 
(3)  Per case of twenty-four (24) 12-ounce containers ..... $1.20 
(4)  Per case of twenty-four (24) 14-ounce containers ..... $1.40 
(5)  Per case of twenty-four (24) 13-ounce containers ..... $1.60 
(6)  Per case of thirty-six (36) eight-ounce containers:$1.20 
(7)  Per case of twelve (12) 32-ounce containers ..... $1.60 
(8)  Per case of forty-eight (48) seven-ounce containers ..... $1.40 
(9)  For each one-half barrel (fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons) of tap or draft beer ..... $6.00 
(10)  A proportionate tax per one-half (½) barrel (fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons) of tap or draft beer on all fractional parts of half-barrels, at the rate of ..... $6.00 
(11)  A proportionate tax per twelve (12) ounces for all malt beverages not sold in barrels or other bulk container on all fractional parts of 12-ounce sizes not specified above, at the rate of ..... $0.05 
(12)  With respect to wines: 
a.  Per one (1) liter (33.8 ounce) container ..... $0.22 
b.  Per three-quarter liter (25.4 ounce) container ..... $0.16 
c.  Per one-half liter (16.4 ounce) container ..... $0.11 
d.  Per three-eighth liter (12.7 ounce) container ..... $0.08 
e.  Per .535 liter container ..... $0.05 
f.  A proportionate tax per liter for all fractional parts of liters not specified above, at the rate of ..... $0.22 
(13)  With respect to distilled spirits: A per liter tax and proportionate tax for all fractional parts of liters at the maximum rate allowed by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-162. - Monthly reports and payment. 
Each holder of a wholesale alcoholic beverage license shall file a monthly report by the tenth day of each calendar month itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all alcoholic beverages, by nature and by size and type of container, sold within the city and at such time shall remit to the city the amount of excise tax due to the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-163. - Examination of books and records. 
The books and records of all wholesalers selling or delivering these beverages and all retailers thereof in the city shall be subject to inspection and audit by the agents of the city to ensure compliance herewith. It shall be unlawful for any person to deny to any authorized agent of the city reasonable access to its books and records and shall be the duty of each person to keep accurate records of payments and collections of the case tax and remittances. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-164. - Penalties. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance required shall render a wholesaler liable for a penalty equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total due during the first thirty-day period following the date the report and remittance were due and a further penalty of fifty (50) percent of the amount of this remittance for each successive thirty-day period or any portion thereof during which the report and the remittance were not filed. 
(b)  The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making the report liable to a penalty equal to one hundred (100) percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(c)  Any person, wholesaler or retailer that shall violate the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed by the municipal court and may in addition be subject to suspension or revocation of the license to sell such beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-165. - Taxes collected upon delivery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retain these beverages unless he shall have paid the tax thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to sell or deliver these beverages to any retailer thereof unless he shall concurrently with this delivery collect the tax imposed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to fail to remit to the city, when promptly due, the taxes levied, and collected by the wholesaler. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged as a retailer of these beverages to receive these beverages from another retailer unless tax has been paid. 
(d)  It shall further be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retail these beverages from another retail store, whether the other store shall be owned by the receiving retailer or not, or whether the other store is located within the corporate limits of the city or not, unless the tax shall have been paid and remitted to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-166. - Tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this section and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Nashville and, variously, the incorporated areas of Nashville, wherein the City of Nashville is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Due date means twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Finance director means the duly appointed finance director of the City of Nashville or designee. 
Licensee means any person holding a license to serve distilled spirits by the drink from the city. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure (venture), association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Tax means the sales tax on distilled spirits by the drink imposed by this article. 
(b)  Imposition; rate of tax. There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three (3) percent on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the city. 
(c)  Collection by licensee. Every licensee shall collect a tax of three (3) percent on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink at his pouring outlet. 
(d)  Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the finance director monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(3)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed by every licensee with the finance director showing the gross sales of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the finance director. 
(4)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailer and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, as now and hereafter amended. 
(e)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within her possession or that may come into her possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(3)  Notice of determination; service of. The finance director shall give to the licensee written notice of her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee or postal certification that such mail was refused. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(f)  Determination of no return made. 
(1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, or as the case may be, of the amount of total such receipts in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (e)(3). 
(2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of fifteen (15) percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(g)  Collection of tax by city. 
(1)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(2)  Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this section sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the finance director either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(3)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(4)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the finance director. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the finance director, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the finance director, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(h)  Administration of ordinance; recordkeeping. 
(1)  Authority of finance director. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax. 
(2)  Records required from licensees, etc.; form. Every licensee shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, all records, receipts, invoices and such other documents as the finance director may prescribe, and in such form as she may require. 
(3)  Examination of records, audits. The finance director or any person authorized in writing by her may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(4)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this section, the finance director may require the filing of reports by person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when required by said official, and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, the amount of tax collection thereon, or such other information as the finance director may prescribe. 
(i)  Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in City Charter section 4.13. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-167. - Delinquency. 
If after forty-five (45) days any excise tax imposed by this division is not paid by any holder of a wholesale alcoholic beverage license, then the excise tax assessed against such license holder shall become delinquent and all of the provisions of this Code relative to the collection of delinquent taxes shall be applicable for the collection of such excise tax. Alcoholic beverages on which city taxes have not been paid are subject to seizure and may be destroyed or sold by public sale as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Secs. 3-168—3-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HEARING OFFICERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 3-191. - Hearing by hearing officers. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, hearings provided for pursuant to section 3-85 may be held, at the discretion of the council, by a hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-192. - Appointment of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer shall be such person as shall be appointed by the city manager from time to time for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-193. - Qualifications of hearing officer. 
Any hearing officer appointed by the city manager pursuant to this chapter shall be a resident of the state, shall be neither an employee nor a full time elected or appointed employee, officer or official of the city, nor the spouse of any such person except that the municipal judge shall, notwithstanding any other provision hereof, be for all purposes hereof a person qualified to act as a hearing officer; and shall be either an attorney who is a member in good standing of the state bar or be a person who, in the sole opinion of the city manager, is experienced in dispute resolution. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-194. - Notice of hearing. 
The city manager shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to the licensee involved at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing a notice with respect to such hearing which shall include the time, date, place and purpose thereof as well as the name of the hearing officer before whom such hearing shall be conducted. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-195. - Purpose of hearing. 
The purpose of the hearing shall be to: 
(1)  Afford officials and employees of the city and others an opportunity to present grounds and/or reasons for the suspension and/or revocation of the license in issue; 
(2)  Afford officials and employees of the city and others an opportunity to present the nature of prior violations relative to the license and license in issue, if any, which are considered to be relevant to the issues involved; 
(3)  Afford the licensee an opportunity to respond to any and all prior alleged violations and to the circumstances surrounding any such prior alleged violations; to respond to any evidence with respect to any alleged violations; to present evidence, matters, and witnesses relative to compliance by licensee with the provisions of this chapter and any other matter relative to the purpose as is of the hearing and the issues to be resolved; to propose recommendations relative to proposed actions with respect to the license in issue; to otherwise generally respond to any and all recommendations, reasons and grounds submitted relative to the license in issue; and to otherwise generally present matters relative to possible action by the city in connection with such licensee and license. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-196. - Conduct of disciplinary hearing. 
In connection with the conduct of the disciplinary hearing; 
(1)  The hearing officer shall have the authority to: 
a.  Administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses who testify or offer evidence; 
b.  Issue subpoenas but only to the extent authorized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; 
c.  Generally regulate and manage the conduct of the hearing; 
d.  Set the time and place for any continuation or postponement of the hearing; 
e.  Determine whether or not to require or accept the filing of briefs and if so the time period therefor; 
f.  Rule upon the admissibility of evidence and offers of proof submitted; 
g.  Rule inappropriate and out of order any despairing, irrelevant or inappropriate matter; 
h.  Limit evidence, statements, arguments and presentations which may [be] unduly lengthy, inappropriate, not germane, not relevant or otherwise inappropriate; 
i.  Reprimand and/or exclude from the hearing any person who fails to conduct themselves in an orderly and courteous manner during the hearing or fails to comply with the rulings of the hearing officer relative to the conduct of the hearing; and 
j.  Otherwise generally conduct the hearing in an orderly manner as in the nature of a hearing before a special master in the superior courts of the state. 
(2)  Continuances may be granted by the hearing officer upon motion of any party or upon the hearing officer's own motion provided that any such continuance shall be granted only to a specific date, time, and space and no such continuance shall be granted for more than fourteen (14) calendar days. 
(3)  Subpoenas may be issued by the hearing officer to any employee of the city or any elected or appointed officer or official of the city upon the timely request therefor by any party; provided, however, that the hearing officer does not have the authority or the power to issue any subpoena to any person other than employees, officers, or officials of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-197. - Rights of licensee at disciplinary hearing. 
(a)  At a disciplinary hearing the licensee involved shall be entitled to: 
(1)  Be represented by an attorney or by other representative; 
(2)  Present matters and witnesses relevant to the purpose of the hearing and the issues to be determined; 
(3)  Question those persons presenting matters which are adverse to the interest of the licensee but only to the extent of relevance, as determined by the hearing officer, to the purposes of the hearing and to the issues to be determined; and 
(4)  Offer suggestions or recommendations relative to the nature and/or extent of action, if any, taken with respect to the license and licensee in issue. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter a licensee subject to such hearing shall not be required to give any testimony or to answer any question with respect to such proceedings nor shall the licensee be required to attend such hearing or to present any evidence or matters in connections therewith. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-198. - Record of hearing. 
A record with respect to hearings shall be maintained by the city clerk which shall consist of and include the following: 
(1)  All written reports, recommendations, responses, objects and other written matters filed in connection with such hearing; 
(2)  All documents, instruments and other memorandum introduced into evidence at such hearing; 
(3)  A written statement to be prepared by the hearing officer with respect to all matters, if any, officially noticed by the hearing officer; 
(4)  All written orders and findings of the hearing officer; and 
(5)  A mechanical recording of the hearing or in lieu thereof a transcript thereof if determined by the hearing officer to be appropriate. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-199. - Recordation of hearing and transcript. 
(a)  The hearing shall be mechanically recorded with the product of such recording being a part of the record of such matter upon completion thereof. 
(b)  Any interested party shall be entitled to employ at their own expense and utilize a stenographic reporter in connection with the hearing. 
(c)  Should the hearing officer so direct, a stenographic reporter shall be utilized in connection with the hearing for the purposes of recording the hearing with the cost thereof to be paid by the city. Should the hearing officer so direct, the stenographic reporter shall prepare a transcript of the hearing with the cost thereof to be paid by the city. In the event the hearing officer so directs the preparation of a transcript by the stenographic reporter then the licensee, upon payment directly to the stenographic reporter of the cost thereof, shall be entitled to a copy of the transcript so prepared. In the event that the hearing officer does not direct the preparation of a transcript then either the city or the licensee shall be entitled to request preparation of a transcript of the hearing from such stenographic reporter upon payment to the stenographic reporter of the cost thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-200. - Representation of city at hearing. 
The city shall be represented at hearings by the city manager and upon his request by the office of the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-201. - Informal disposition. 
An informal disposition of a hearing may be made at any stage by stipulation or consent finding, all subject to approval thereof by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-202. - Procedure following hearing by hearing officers. 
Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the conclusion of such hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare and file with the city clerk a written report which shall contain the following: 
(1)  Findings of fact with respect to incidents, actions and/or behavior of the licensee in issue and/or the agents, servants and/or employees thereof which are relevant to the matters and issues to be determined; 
(2)  Findings of fact with respect to prior matters involving the licensee which are relevant to the issues to be determined; 
(3)  Findings of fact with respect to provisions of this chapter, breached or violated by the licensee, if any, which were determined by the hearing officer to be relevant to the issues to be determined; 
(4)  Findings of fact with respect to recommendations of city officials, if any, and the reasons, if any are presented, for such recommendations; and 
(5)  The recommendation of the hearing officer, if any, with respect to what action should be taken relative to the licensee in issue and, if any, in the extent and nature thereof. Such written report of the hearing officer, together with the record in connection with such hearing, shall be promptly filed with the city clerk and a copy of such report of the hearing officer shall be furnished by the hearing officer to the licensee, to the city manager and to the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-203. - Right to respond and object to report of hearing officer. 
(a)  Both the licensee and the city manager shall be entitled, within fifteen (15) calendar days after being furnished with such report, to file with the city clerk written objections to any finding of fact or recommendation of the hearing officer. 
(b)  Additionally, both the city manager and the licensee or the employee shall be entitled, within fifteen (15) calendar days after being furnished with such report of the hearing officer, to file a request with the city manager for a de novo hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-204. - Right of city council to conduct de novo hearing. 
Upon the filing of a request within fifteen (15) calendar days of the furnishing of the report of the hearing officer, or upon the decision of the city council on its own motion, the city council shall be entitled to conduct a de novo hearing with respect to the issues involved in connection with such license and licensee, which hearing shall be conducted upon same basis and accordance with same procedures as the hearing before the hearing officer. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-205. - Determination by city council following hearing. 
(a)  Following the filing of the report of the hearing officer and the lapse of the fifteen-day period for the filing of objections to the report of the hearing officer, the city council shall proceed to make a determination with respect to the issues relative to the license and the licensee involved. 
(b)  Such determination shall be based upon the written report and recommendations, if any, of the hearing officer and the written objections to the report of the hearing officer except in the event of a de novo hearing. 
(c)  In the event of a de novo hearing the city council shall proceed to conduct a hearing upon the relevant issues and following such hearing make a determination based upon matters presented at such do novo hearing. 
(d)  Such determination shall be made by the city council in written form within 30 calendar days following lapse of the time for the filing of objections to the report of the hearing officer, or in the event of the determination by the city council to conduct a de novo hearing then within thirty (30) calendar days following the conclusion thereof, with copies of such written determination to be promptly furnished by the city clerk to the city manager, to the city attorney and to the licensee. 
(e)  Such determination shall include what action with respect to the license and licensee, if any, shall be taken including the extent, duration and exact nature thereof as well as the effective date of the commencement of such action. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Sec. 3-206. - Reconsideration. 
(a)  Both the city manager and the licensee shall be entitled to file a request, within ten (10) calendar days of the date of receipt of the written determination of the city council, for reconsideration of the decision of the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall have the right, in the sole discretion of the city council, to reconsider any decision of the city council based upon a request therefor which demonstrates either the existence of substantial new evidence not available to the party prior to the hearing or providential cause. 
(Ord. of 12-28-09) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate, license and tax the keeping of animals and fowl, § 2-9(qq). 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide animal control services, Ga. Code Ann., § 2-6102; cruelty to animals, Ga. Code Ann., § 26-2802. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Keeping, grazing near buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pen, coop or enclosure for animals or fowl or to permit any animal or fowl to be kept, maintained or grazed within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of any house or building where people reside or work. This section shall not apply to any house or building on the same premises where such animal or fowl is kept or maintained, nor shall it apply to dogs or cats as household pets, but it shall apply to dog kennels where more than three (3) dogs are kept. 
Sec. 4-2. - Vicious animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to maintain or harbor within the city a manifestly vicious animal unless the same is securely, but humanely, confined or restrained in such manner as to prevent such animal from attacking or biting a person or another animal. It shall be prima facie evidence of viciousness if an animal, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites persons or animals not on the owner's premises. 
(Code 1967, § 4-5) 
State Law reference— Liability for damages caused by vicious animals, Ga. Code Ann., § 105-110. 
Sec. 4-3. - Keeping so as to constitute nuisance or be offensive. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit any animal or fowl in the city in such manner as to create an unsanitary or obnoxious condition, or to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-7) 
Sec. 4-4. - Notice to correct offensive conditions. 
Should a complaint to the police department arise from the causes referred to in section 4-3, the person involved shall be properly notified by a member of the police department and given an adequate time to either dispose of the animal or fowl or eliminate the cause of the complaint. 
(Code 1967, § 4-8) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the abatement of nuisances, § 2-9(rr). 
Sec. 4-5. - Animals running at large prohibited; pen regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens, turkeys, pigeons, goats, cows, horses, mules, hogs or pigs in the city unless such party or parties provide suitable coops, pens, lots and enclosures for such fowl or animals, and keep said fowl and animals enclosed and confined therein so that they cannot escape therefrom, and provide further that the following conditions are complied with, as set out below. 
(b)  Wherever fowl are kept as above described, the pens, lots or such other enclosures must not have any part or section thereof located within fifty (50) feet of a residence, hotel, hospital, church or other building where people congregate or reside. 
(c)  Whenever cows, horses, mules, goats, hogs or pigs are kept, the pen, stable, lot, barn or enclosure must not have any part or section thereof located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residence, hotel, church, restaurant or other building where people reside or congregate. 
(d)  Whenever fowl and animals are kept as above-mentioned, the pen, lot, stable, coop and/or other enclosure must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times so as not to create a fly breeding place or offensive odors, thereby causing a nuisance and menace to public health. The sanitary safety and nuisance factors of such areas, coops, pens or stables shall be judged by the health authority of the city, whose decision shall be final. 
(e)  Whenever cows, horses, mules or such animals including hogs and pigs are kept, the pen, lot and stables must be graded to drain, or drainage ways must be provided in order to keep said area free of standing water. 
(f)  Wherever cows, horses, mules, hogs, pigs or goats are kept, the manure must be picked up daily and stored, but never allowed to be stored more than four (4) continuous or consecutive days. It shall then be hauled away from the premises and spread in such a manner as not to cause fly breeding. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1) 
Sec. 4-6. - Removal of dead animals. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or persons responsible for any dead animal in the city to remove or dispose of the same in a sanitary and inoffensive manner within twenty-four (24) hours of learning of such dead animal. If not removed within said time, the city may remove the animal and charge the costs thereof against the owner or person responsible. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2) 
State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A., § 62-21. 
Sec. 4-7. - City declared bird sanctuary. 
The entire area within the corporate limits of the city shall be, and the same is hereby designated and established, as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1967, § 4-9) 
State Law reference— Protection of birds, nests and eggs, O.C.G.A., § 45-530. 
Secs. 4-8—4-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs, O.C.G.A., §§ 62-20, 62-9927. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 9, 2008, amended division 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 1 consisted of §§ 4-21—4-31, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 5-77, adopted Aug. 15, 1977. 

Sec. 4-24. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal which has been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. A domesticated animal shall also be considered as abandoned when it has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of such animal for a period of time in excess of thirty-six (36) hours unattended and without proper food and water. 
Abused animal means any animal which is any of the following: 
(1)  Mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased. 
(2)  Deprived of water, food or shelter. 
(3)  Kept under unsanitary conditions. 
(4)  Abandoned. 
(5)  Trained for fighting other animals. 
(6)  Transported in the trunk of any vehicle. 
(7)  Left unattended in a vehicle in extreme heat without proper ventilation. 
Altered animal shall mean a female animal which has been spayed or a male animal which has been castrated (neutered) by a licensed veterinarian in order to render the animal incapable of reproducing. 
Animal at large means any animal not under restraint. 
Animal control center means the facility designated by city council for the detention of animals. 
Animal control officer means any person so designated by the city to perform the duties prescribed by this chapter. 
Animal under restraint means any animal humanely secured by a leash or lead or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure or under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands, and the person being present with the animal or the animal confined within a vehicle parked or in motion. 
Companion animal means a domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. Such pets include, but are not limited to birds, cats, dogs, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals, exotic animals and other animals associated with human environment. 
Dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or by biting so as to cause serious bodily harm or an animal trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of animal fighting. An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if: 
(1)  It bites, attacks or menaces: 
a.  Anyone assaulting the owner; 
b.  A trespasser on the property of the owner; or 
c.  Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it; 
(2)  It is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; or 
(3)  It is protecting or defending its young or other animal. 
Department means the police department. 
Director means the animal control officer. 
Domesticated animal means an animal that is accustomed to living in or about the habitation of people, including, but not limited to cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. 
Electronic animal confinement system shall mean a commercially produced and professionally installed electronic fence which requires an electrically generated perimeter which is not visible, and that the animal within the perimeter wear an electronic collar which produces an electric shock to the animal when the perimeter is approached. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or the property upon and within which the dog is located. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping, harboring or acting as custodian of a domesticated animal. 
Public nuisance or public nuisance animal means any animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of section 4-31 or 4-34; 
(2)  Is unlicensed (unregistered) in violation of section 4-35; 
(3)  Is trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of dogfighting; 
(4)  Is dangerous, as defined, and is not restrained or confined, as provided for in sections 4-33 and 4-34; 
(5)  Produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; or 
(6)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the board of health, which rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-25. - Animal control center. 
There is created an animal control center for the city under the supervision of the director and the center shall be staffed with such personnel as may from time to time be authorized in the city budget and appropriations. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-26. - Enforcement generally. 
(a)  The primary responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the director who may call upon the city police from time to time to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. The director may also be designated by the mayor and council as the official rabies control officer for the city. The director may, in the exercise of authority as the director and as the chief rabies control officer for the city, delegate the enforcement responsibilities of this chapter to city employees. 
(b)  Upon information made known to or complaint lodged with the director or the director's authorized representative that any owner, possessor or custodian of any animal is in violation of this chapter, the director or the director's authorized representative shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner, possessor or custodian of the animal to appear before a judge of the municipal court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for the violation of this chapter. If a violation of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by the director or the director's authorized representative or other employee of the city, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint to be and appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there to testify on behalf of the city. The director will refuse to respond to anonymous complaints. 
(c)  If the owner, possessor or custodian of any dog or animal is not known and such dog or animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds or other public places or premises or the property of another without that property owner's permission as prohibited by this chapter, upon complaint made to or information made known to the animal control center, it shall be the duty of the director or the director's authorized representative to immediately take possession of such dog or animal and impound it in a facility designated for the detention of animals. Once impounded, an animal shall be kept for a period of time as defined in section 4-30; thereafter, if the animal is not claimed by anyone after a reasonable effort has been made to locate the owner, possessor or custodian of the animal as hereinafter provided, the animal may be disposed of in a humane fashion or in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 4 (§ 4-1-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-27. - Fee schedule and miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  Fees to be collected by the director shall be as established by action of city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Dogs and cats adopted or reclaimed must have a current rabies certificate or the owner must pay a late fee in the amount established by action of the mayor and council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the City of Nashville, and dogs and cats adopted or reclaimed without a current inoculation must receive a rabies inoculation within five (5) days. 
(c)  For any canine or feline adopted from the animal control center, a fee in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, will be charged to have the animal spayed or neutered by a veterinarian participating in the spay/neuter program. The fee will be paid to the veterinarian by the city upon the return of the certificate issued by the city to the veterinarian performing the surgery. The certificate for puppies and kittens will be honored for six (6) months from the date of issue, and thirty (30) days from the date of issue for adult dogs and cats. 
(d)  The fees to be paid for the following shall be in the amount established by action of the city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk: 
(1)  For adoption of cats, dogs, kittens and puppies. 
(2)  For boarding impounded animals. 
(3)  As an impoundment fee. 
(4)  As an owner's rabies tag registration fee for altered and unaltered animals: 
a.  Kitten or puppy six (6) months of age or less at time of license application, ten dollars ($10.00). 
b.  Cat or dog with a veterinarian exemption due to a permanent health problem or advanced age (ten (10) years or older) which prevents surgery, ten dollars ($10.00). Such exemption must be noted on the rabies certificate by the vaccinating veterinarian. 
c.  Altered cat or dog, ten dollars ($10.00). (Proof of spay/neuter must accompany animal license application). 
d.  Unaltered cat or dog seven (7) months to ten (10) years, ten dollars ($10.00). 
(5)  For seizing and impounding an animal suspected of being rabid. 
(6)  Any other fees deemed necessary or which are incurred while an animal is in the custody of the animal control center. 
(7)  For a nonrefundable user fee for live animal traps, ten dollars ($10.00) per trap. 
(8)  For emergency transportation of an injured animal to a veterinarian for the animal owner, twenty dollars ($20.00) per animal. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-28. - Public nuisances prohibited. 
It is unlawful to knowingly keep, own, harbor or act as custodian of a public nuisance animal. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-29. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  If a law enforcement agent of the city has probable cause to believe that a dangerous animal is being harbored in violation of this chapter, such agent may do one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner or keeper to appear in court for the violation. 
(2)  If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the animal is posing an imminent, serious threat to human beings or other domestic animals, the animal may be seized and impounded, in which case the owner or keeper will be cited to appear in court for the violation. At the owner's request and expense, such impoundment may be at a veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing. If the court rules that the animal is not dangerous, it will be released to the owner. If the court rules that it is dangerous, the animal will be released to the owner after payment of any fees and penalties, and upon presentation of proof that the animal will now be kept restrained or confined as specified in this chapter. 
(b)  If the owner or keeper of an alleged dangerous animal impounded for violation of this chapter presents proof that the animal will now be kept in compliance with this chapter, the animal will be released upon payment of any fees and penalties due. 
(c)  If, within fifteen (15) days after impoundment or such later time as specified by the court, the owner or keeper of an alleged dangerous animal fails to either provide proof that the animal will now be kept restrained or confined in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or fails to reclaim it from animal control after impoundment, and if it cannot be adopted by someone providing proof that it will be kept restrained or confined as specified in this chapter, it will be humanely euthanized. 
(d)  If the owner or keeper of an animal previously deemed a dangerous animal by the court fails to keep the dangerous animal restrained or confined in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and if it cannot be adopted by someone who does not reside in the same household as the owner or keeper providing proof that it will be kept restrained or confined as specified in this chapter, it shall be humanely euthanized. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-30. - Notice to owner of impounded animal. 
(a)  Upon impounding any dog or other animal, the city shall cause to be made a prompt and reasonable effort to locate the animal's owner, possessor or custodian and, upon location thereof, shall send to such owner, possessor or custodian notification of impoundment. For the purpose of this section, it shall be deemed sufficient notice if a notification of impoundment is sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner named on the most recent rabies certificate on file at the address indicated thereon. If the dog or animal is not claimed by the owner, possessor or custodian thereof within three (3) days from the receipt of the certified letter giving notice of impoundment or returning of letter by the post office, then it shall be the duty of the city to dispose of the dog or other animal. If the impounded dog or animal is not wearing a rabies tag or a tag identifying the name, address and telephone number of the dog's or animal's owner, possessor or custodian, the city may dispose of the dog or animal following five (5) days after it is impounded. 
(b)  In addition, if the dog or animal is not claimed as provided for herein, the city, after being satisfied that the dog or animal is in good health, may offer the dog or animal for adoption to any person after the required notification of impoundment has been given. 
(c)  In no event shall any animal be redeemed by its lawful owner, possessor or custodian until the required fees established for boarding the animal are paid. 
(d)  If for any reason as hereinabove described any animal is impounded, or if any owner, possessor or custodian of any animal violates any of the duties imposed by this chapter, in addition to penalties imposed, such owner, possessor or custodian shall be conclusively presumed to have given consent to the adoption of the impounded animal or to have given consent to dispose of the animal in a humane fashion. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-31. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal, or anyone having custody of any animal, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the City of Nashville, or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of that property or of the person in possession of that property. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-32. - General responsibilities of owners. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone having possession or custody of any animal, to exercise reasonable care and to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or damages which might result from such animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. 
(b)  If the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that there is compliance provisions of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors or is in charge of any animal not to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal on any street right-of-way, public or private property. It shall be the duty of any person having custody and control of any animal, while not on their own property, to have in their possession a device, equipment, or other means for the picking up and removal of animal excrement. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal when in police or rescue activities. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-33. - Keeping animal under restraint—While on owner's property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone having possession or custody of any animal, to ensure that the animal is kept under restraint and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian, and to ensure that: 
(1)  The animal is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended. 
(2)  The animal is on a leash and under the control of a competent person; or is off leash and obedient to that person's command and that person is present with the animal any time it is not restrained as provided for in paragraphs (1) and (3) of this subsection while on the owner's property. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any animal to be confined upon the premises of the owner or custodian of such animal by a leash or chain of less than ten (10) feet in length and equipped with swivels at both ends, except by a leash which is a free running line. Any animal confined by leash or chain shall be restrained at least six (6) feet from all entrance and exit locations to the property or building within which the animal is located. Animals shall not be restrained by leash or chain in a manner and location that precludes unrestricted and safe ingress and egress by animal control or law enforcement personnel. 
(b)  Additional requirements for precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous animals are: 
(1)  Whenever outside of its enclosure as provided for in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, but on the owner's property, a dangerous dog must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(2)  No dangerous animal shall be chained, tethered or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post or building, outside of its own enclosure as provided for in paragraph (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  In addition to the requirements in paragraph (a)(1) of this section for owners of dangerous animals who maintain their animals out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the dangerous animal must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides; the sides must be sunken into a concrete pad of at least two-inch thickness or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked. 
(c)  An electronic animal confinement system shall be considered an acceptable enclosure when: 
(1)  The equipment is maintained and in continuous working order, and the animal to be contained within wears the appropriate electronic collar when within the fence perimeters. 
(2)  Permanent and prominently displayed signs are posted at twenty-five-foot intervals around the entire perimeter of the electronic animal confinement system. The signs shall be no smaller than six (6) inches square, and shall read: "Caution—Animal(s) on this property contained by an electronic animal confinement system." 
(d)  In cases where an animal has been deemed dangerous by the court, or has been trained to be a guard dog, an electronic animal confinement system may not be used as either the primary or secondary fence. 
(e)  Individuals who contain their animal(s) by means of an electronic animal confinement system and are found in violation of this section or have been deemed as restraining a dangerous animal(s) pursuant to section 4-29 shall thereafter restrain the animal(s) in the manner provided in subsections (a) and (b) above. 
(f)  Failure to keep any animal confined or under restraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-34. - Same—While off owner's property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or anyone having possession of any animal to keep the animal under restraint and control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under control when: 
(1)  It is securely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion; 
(2)  It is properly confined with a secure enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located; or 
(3)  It is securely restrained by a leash or other device held by a competent person. 
(c)  Additional requirements for precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous animals are that, except when being transported in and securely confined within a vehicle, no dangerous animal shall be permitted off the property of its owner, except when it is: 
(1)  Attended by its owner; 
(2)  Restrained by secure collar and leash (not to exceed six (6) feet in length), both collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape; and 
(3)  Muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent biting other persons or domestic animals. 
(d)  Failure to keep any animal under restraint or control as provided for in this section shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-35. - Rabies vaccination; registration fee; issuance of tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any owner or possessor or custodian of any dog or cat three (3) months old or older, when such animal is being kept in the City of Nashville, to procure a current rabies vaccination from a duly licensed veterinarian, and pay the required registration fee. If a dog or cat is being transported from outside the city limits into the City of Nashville where it will reside on a permanent basis with its owner, possessor or custodian, it shall be the duty of the owner, possessor or custodian to have a current rabies tag on the animal transported into the City of Nashville unless the animal has not reached the age of three (3) months. Such rabies tag shall be obtained from the animal control center, after proof of a current vaccination by a recognized licensed veterinarian has been presented. 
(b)  Any owner, custodian or possessor of any dog or cat which has reached the age of three (3) months or older, or who is obligated under this section to obtain the rabies tag therefore, who fails to obtain same shall be obligated to pay a late charge in the amount established by city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, for any rabies tag required under the terms of this section. 
(c)  The directors and designees thereof shall exercise the powers and duties of the rabies control officer pursuant to the provisions of section and shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-36. - Collars, tags worn by dogs and cats. 
It shall be the duty of each dog or cat owner, possessor or custodian to provide a collar for such dog or cat to which the rabies inoculation tag shall be attached. The collar, together with the tag, shall be worn by the dog or cat if the animal is required to be inoculated against rabies as provided in section 4-35. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-37. - Rabies inoculation mandatory for dogs and cats. 
All dogs and cats in the incorporated limits of the city shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-38. - Guard dogs, dangerous dogs; warning signs on-premises. 
All owners, keepers or harborers of any guard dog or dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on their premises, and at each entrance or exit to the area where such dog is confined, a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-39. - Abandonment or abuse. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or abuse any domesticated animal within the City of Nashville. Each person who knowingly abandons or abuses, or willingly permits such abandonment or abuse, or aids in the abandonment or abuse of any domesticated animal shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-40. - Training for fighting prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited for any person to keep, buy, sell, trade, exchange, give, transport, or deliver any animal: 
(1)  For the purpose of training the animal, primarily or in part, for animal fighting. 
(2)  Which has been trained, primarily or in part, for animal fighting. 
(3)  Which has been or is intended to be engaged in any manner in animal fighting. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-41. - Change of ownership of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to abandon, sell, trade, swap or give away animals within the real property limits of the animal control facility, except by the established services provided by the animal control division inside the facility itself. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to give away or sell any animal in front of any business or store or on the side of any public roadway in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
Sec. 4-42. - Neutering of animal(s). 
It shall be the duty of any owner or possessor of any dog or cat adopted from the animal control center to have the dog or cat altered. Puppies and kittens must be altered by a licensed veterinarian within six (6) months from their date of adoption from the animal control center, and adult dogs and cats must be altered by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days of their adoption. Failure to comply with this section may result in a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 9-8-08) 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 4-43. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any dog in the city without having first obtained, annually, a license therefor from the city clerk, or such other agent as the council shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § B, 8-15-77) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to require licensing of animals, O.C.G.A., § 88-1503. 
Sec. 4-44. - Fee; tag. 
A license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the city for each dog annually; such license shall be acquired prior to January 1 of each year and shall be effective from January 1 to December 31, inclusive, of each year. 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § B, 8-15-77; Ord. of 5-23-05) 
Sec. 4-45. - Dogs in kennels. 
No license shall be required for dogs kept within a dog kennel duly licensed by the city; provided, however, for the keeper or owner of any such dog kennel to become entitled to the benefits of this section, such owner or keeper must keep all dogs kept in any such dog kennel continuously and securely confined in a separate enclosure built for such purpose, and nothing contained in this section shall apply to any dog allowed to escape or run at large. 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § L, 8-15-77) 
Sec. 4-46. - Duplicate license tag. 
Upon satisfactory proof that a license tag has been lost, or worn or damaged beyond further use, the city clerk shall issue a tag for a fee of fifty cents ($0.50). 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § B, 8-15-77) 
Secs. 4-47—4-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-58. - Dogs subject to impoundment. 
Any dog not wearing a license tag as prescribed herein; any vicious dog not confined, chained or muzzled as herein provided; any dog running at-large; any female dog while in breeding season running or having access to the public streets; any dog not wearing the rabies inoculation tag required by the statutes of Georgia; and any dog which causes annoyance shall be subject to be taken up by any police officer of the city, or any designated representative of the city, the director of the county health department, or his authorized representative, who shall have the dog confined in the dog pound. 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § F, 8-15-77) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to impound and dispose of animals running at large, § 2-9(qq). 
Sec. 4-59. - Destruction of animal in attempt to impound. 
(a)  In the event any dog subject to being taken up pursuant to the provisions of this article cannot be captured without actual danger to the officer, or the representative of the city or health department attempting capture, any member of the police department, rabies control officer, or authorized representative, is authorized and directed to shoot such dog when the shooting can be done without endangering persons or other property. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring any police officer to attempt to capture a dog plainly showing the existence of rabies, but such a dog may be shot by any police officer, rabies control inspector, or his authorized representative on sight, using due care not to injure persons or other property. 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § G, 8-15-77) 
Sec. 4-60. - Operation of dog pound. 
The city shall operate either independently or in cooperation with others, or shall contract with the Berrien County Humane Society, for the operation of a suitable place for the impounding of dogs picked up under the terms of this article. If the city shall operate independently, then said facility shall be known as the "dog pound." 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § F, 8-15-77; Ord. of 5-26-98, § 1) 
Sec. 4-61. - Notice to owner. 
Not later than two (2) days after the impounding of any dog, the owner, if known, shall be notified of the time allowed for redemption of the dog. 
Sec. 4-62. - Fees and fines. 
(a)  The keeper of the dog pound shall not release any dog impounded until the owner has paid all pound fees, all fines assessed by the judge for violations of this article for which such dog was impounded, and until the owner has secured license tag and rabies tag as provided in this article. 
(b)  Any dog impounded pursuant to this article which is not suspected of rabies may be reclaimed from the pound upon the payment to the city's authorized representative the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for first release. The release fee shall double for each subsequent infraction occurring within six (6) months of the initial impoundment. In addition to any release fee assessed, there shall be paid the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day, or any portion thereof, for room and board. 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § H, 8-15-77; Ord. of 11-10-97, § 1; Ord. of 5-23-05) 
Sec. 4-63. - Failure to claim. 
Any dog which has been impounded and is not taken up by the owner, within five (5) days of the date impounded, shall be subject to destruction by the keeper of the pound, or other disposition. 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § I, 8-15-77) 
State Law reference— Methods of disposal of dead animals, Ga. Code Ann., § 62-2105. 
Sec. 4-64. - Precedence of rabies inspector over pound keeper where rabies is suspected. 
In the case of any vicious dog or any dog giving signs of rabies, the authority of the rabies inspector under the statutes of the state shall take precedence over the keeper of the pound; but the handling of a dog by the rabies control officer shall not relieve any person violating this article from the penalties provided. 
(Ord. No. 5-77, § J, 8-15-77) 
State Law reference— County rabies control officer, Ga. Code Ann., § 88-1506.1. 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 12; mobile homes, Ch. 16; flood damage prevention, § 21-18 et seq.; arrangement of refuse storage prior to issuance of building permit, § 25-82; street numbering, § 26-47 et seq.; zoning, App. A, issuance of building permits, App. A, § 11-2; subdivisions, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Office of building official—Created. 
There is hereby created the office of building official. 
(Code 1967, § 5-4) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 5-2. - Office of building official—Appointment. 
The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint some suitable person as building official, who shall devote his time solely to the business of his office. 
(Code 1967, § 5-5) 
Sec. 5-3. - Office of building official—Qualifications. 
The building official: 
(1)  Shall be an elector of the city; 
(2)  Shall have such technical and practical knowledge of construction and engineering, electrical wiring and electrical engineering, gas installations and appliances, mechanical systems, housing standards and plumbing and sanitation as will enable him to perform the duties required of him under provisions of the various technical regulations of the city; 
(3)  Shall not, by reason of ownership or part ownership, be connected in any building trades firm or business in the city. 
(Code 1967, §§ 5-5, 9-2, 19-2) 
Sec. 5-4. - Office of building official—Assistants. 
Any assistant the building official may be authorized to employ shall be qualified to hold a contractor's license in each of his fields of responsibility. 
(Code 1967, §§ 5-5, 9-2, 19-2) 
Charter reference— Appointment of department heads, § 5-6. 
Sec. 5-5. - Office of building official—Duties. 
The building official shall have exclusive management and control of all buildings under construction or additions to any existing building or alterations and renovations of any buildings in the city, and shall perform all duties, now or hereafter provided by this Code or the ordinances of the city, to be performed by the building official. 
(Code 1967, § 5-6) 
Cross reference— Duties of building official with respect to plumbing, § 22-1; administration and enforcement of zoning ordinance, App. A, Art. 11. 
Sec. 5-6. - Fire district designated. 
The fire district of the city shall consist of all territory within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 5-1) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to fix and establish fire limits, § 2-9(kk). 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10. 
Secs. 5-7—5-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—3 of an ordinance adopted July 25, 1988, being not specifically amendatory of the Code, have been treated as superseding provisions formerly codified as Art. II, §§ 5-23—5-25, of Ch. 5. Said former provisions pertained to the city's building code and were derived from provisions presumably enacted at the initial (1980) codification; from §§ 5-2 and 5-3 of the city's 1967 Code, and from a motion of May 13, 1974. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate the construction and repair of buildings and to adopt building codes by reference, § 2-9(11). 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 9-33; fire prevention code, § 10-39 et seq.; gas code, § 11-16 et seq.; heating and air conditioning code, Ch. 13; housing code, Ch. 14; plumbing code, § 22-19 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt state standard codes, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6014—84-6017; authority to continue to operate under other codes or adopt more restrictive provisions, §§ 84-6013, 84-6015. 

Sec. 5-23. - Adopted. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the desire of Nashville City Council to adopt, in all aspects, the various Georgia codes relating to building, gas, energy, housing, mechanics, plumbing and electricity. The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the City of Nashville, Berrien County, Georgia, relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. The Georgia State Building Code is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(c)  Conflicts and effect. Any matters in said code which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city, shall prevail and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed, and this section shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its adoption and publication as provided by law. 
(d)  Transfer of responsibility. Within said codes when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, those designated officials of the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 5-24. - Shipping/cargo container. 
(a)  A single rigid, sealed, reusable, metal (corrugated) box in which cargo or freight is shipped by sea vessel, air, truck, or rail, that is generally ten (10), twenty (20), thirty (30), or forty (40) feet in length by eight (8) feet wide by eight (8) or eight and one-half (8½) feet high and is designed and constructed in conformance with International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and International Convention for Safe Containers (ICSC) regulations to withstand normal stresses applied to during regular transport. Container types include: Standard, high, cube, hard top, open top, flat, platform, ventilated, insulated, refrigerated and bulk. 
(b)  After proper application and permitting as hereinafter provided, a container as herein defined shall be utilized solely for storage/utility purposes on a temporary basis only, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days and shall not be inhabited under any circumstances, absent issuance of a permit by the code enforcement officer of City of Nashville expressly identifying and approving a specific container for a habitation at a specified site in accordance with the guidelines provided by the city. Until such guidelines are adopted, no permits authorizing habitation of a container shall be issued by the city. 
(c)  The property owner and tenant of the premises on which a container is located shall be jointly responsible for ensuring the container is maintained in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks, at all times and shall be maintained in an aesthetically acceptable manner. 
(d)  Prior to proper permitting expressly approving same, and payment of all fees for inspection and approval, containers shall not be placed, located or used in residential, commercial or industrial zones. 
(Ord. No. O-03-18, 9-24-18) 
Secs. 5-25—5-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CONTRACTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 5-42. - Definition. 
A building or general contracting business within the provisions of this chapter is defined to be a business engaged in by an individual, firm or corporation to do building or construction work of any kind, excepting those covered by other chapters of this Code such as the electrical and plumbing chapters. 
(Code 1967, § 5-7) 
Sec. 5-43. - Qualification for building contractor's license. 
The building official shall determine whether a person has the required competence to be issued a license as a building contractor. 
Sec. 5-44. - Payment of fees prerequisite to issuance of occupational license. 
No license to do business in the city as building contractor shall be issued by the city clerk except upon the presentation of the requisite license fees. 
(Code 1967, § 5-11) 
Editor's note— The schedule of occupational license fees is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 5-45. - Contractor to have place of business in city. 
Every licensed builder or general contractor shall have an established place of business within the limits of the city, provided, that contractors having fixed places of business without the limits of the city may erect a temporary booth or structure to be used as offices, and which shall be maintained as long as such contract work shall be in progress and until the same has been duly inspected and passed by the building official. 
(Code 1967, § 5-14) 
Sec. 5-46. - All work to be done under the supervision of licensed builder. 
The person receiving a license as provided herein shall be deemed to be a licensed builder or building contractor or general contractor, provided that any firm or corporation, one member or employee of which holds a license shall be authorized to do business in its firm name or corporation name, but provided further, that the actual work or construction undertaken shall be under the direct supervision of such licensed builder. 
(Code 1967, § 5-12) 
Sec. 5-47. - Fraudulent use of name to obtain permit. 
No person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall allow his name to be used by another for the purpose of obtaining a permit for work to be done which he does not supervise. Violation of this section shall be sufficient cause for suspension of the said license for a period of one year. 
(Code 1967, § 5-13) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the issuance of permits, § 2-9(s). 
Cross reference— Offenses generally, Ch. 18. 
Secs. 5-48—5-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITS AND FEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Being not specifically amendatory of the Code, the provisions of an ordinance passed and adopted July 25, 1988 have been codified, at the editor's discretion, as a new Art. IV to Ch. 5, the substantive provisions of which consist of §§ 5-58—5-66. 
Cross reference— Plumbing permit fees, § 22-22.1; electrical permit fees, § 9-7.1; mechanical permit fees, § 13-2. 

Sec. 5-58. - Residential buildings—Items required for permit. 
(a)  The following items will be needed before the issuance of a single-family residence permit: 
(1)  Plot plan. Drawing needs to show size of lot and approximate location of the house, distances from the front, sides and rear of the property lines and how far from any other structure on the property. Indicate the northerly direction by an arrow. 
(2)  Legal description of property. Recorded deed, warranty deed or mortgage deed. 
(3)  Building plans (two (2) sets). Include foundation, wall section, (frame construction to include grade and species of lumber to be used), roof view, floor plan, window/door locations and sizes, air and/or heat ducts (one (1) line drawing), show location of air conditioner and/or heater. 
(4)  Energy specifications. Energy specifications to be checked over with the building plans before the building permit can be issued. 
(5)  Power. Contact the appropriate power company to apply for power. The power company will spot the power pole location and need load data information. (Prompt application will cause less delay in final power connections). 
(6)  Elevation. If the property is in a flood zone, the prospective permittee will need an elevation determination by a registered surveyor or engineer. 
(7)  Septic tank permit. If city sewer is not available, a septic tank permit is required from the health department. 
(b)  The owner/occupant will furnish the city with the above items if the owner/occupant is going to do his own building and take out the permit. If the work is to be done by someone else, that person must be a contractor licensed by the city. The contractor will be liable for any permit fees. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88) 
Sec. 5-59. - Residential buildings—Responsibility for inspection. 
It is the permittee's responsibility to call for all inspections. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88) 
Sec. 5-60. - Residential buildings—Energizing power. 
Effective August 1, 1998, the city will not energize power to any residential building until final inspection is approved. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88) 
Sec. 5-61. - Permit fees for new residential buildings. 
(a)  Fees. 
(1)  Permit fees. 

 
(2)  Moving fee. For the moving of any building or structure, except a manufactured home, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The moving of a manufactured home and the set-up with foundation and anchors shall be sixty-five dollars ($65.00) plus the required electrical fee. 
(b)  Plan-checking review fees. When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and a plan is required to be submitted by 104.2 of the Standard Southern Building Code, a plan-checking review fee shall be paid to the building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Said plan-checking review fee shall be equal to one-fourth of the building permit fee as set forth in 103.7.4 of the Southern Standard Building Code. Such plan-checking fee is in addition to the building permit fee. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88; Ord. of 12-27-05) 
Sec. 5-62. - Commercial buildings—Items required for permit. 
(a)  The following items will be required before the issuance of a commercial building permit. This permit must be issued to a licensed contractor. 
(1)  Plot plan. Show size of property and approximate location of any structures and the distances to the front, rear and side property lines. Indicate any other structures on the property and the distances to them. This will be approved by the director of the department. 
(2)  Legal description of the property. Recorded deed, warranty deed or mortgage deed. 
(3)  Two (2) sets of signed and sealed drawings. Include foundation, wall section (frame construction to include grade and species of lumber to be used), roof view, floor plan, window and door locations and sizes, air and/or heat ducts (one (1) line drawings), show location of air conditioner and/or heater. 
(4)  Energy specifications. Energy specifications to be checked over with the building plans before the building permit can be issued. 
(5)  Power. Contact the appropriate power company to apply for power. The power company will spot the power pole location and need load data information. (Prompt application will cause less delay in final power connections). 
(6)  Elevation. If the property is in a flood zone, the prospective permittee will need an elevation determination by a registered surveyor or engineer. 
(7)  Septic tank permit. If city sewer is not available, a septic tank permit is required from the health department. 
(b)  The contractor will furnish the city with the above items and take out the permit. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88) 
Sec. 5-63. - Commercial buildings—Energizing power. 
Effective August 1, 1988, the city will not energize power to any commercial building until final inspection is approved. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88) 
Sec. 5-64. - Commercial buildings—Responsibility for inspection. 
It is the permittee's responsibility to call for all inspections. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88) 
Sec. 5-65. - Commercial buildings—Sanitary facilities on construction sites. 
Sanitary facilities are required on all construction sites of commercial buildings. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88) 
Sec. 5-66. - Other fees. 
(a)  One hundred dollars ($100.00) and less: No fee, unless inspection is required, in which case a five-dollar fee for each inspection shall be charged. 
(b)  Moving of building or structure ..... $25.00 
(c)  Demolition of building or structure ..... $25.00 
(d)  Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining a permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such doubled fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(e)  When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and a plan is required to be submitted, a plan-checking fee shall be paid to the building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Said plan-checking fee shall be equal to one-fourth (¼) of the building permit fee or a minimum fee of five dollars ($5.00). 
(f)  Reinspection fees are five dollars ($5.00), payable in advance. 
(g)  Inspection, approval and permitting fees for temporary placement of containers shall be set by resolution and payable in advance and shall be paid prior to placement of said container. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88; Ord. No. O-03-18, 9-24-18) 
Secs. 5-67—5-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 11, 2013, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V pertained the same subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted July 8, 1991. 

Sec. 5-76. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Lavatory faucet means a faucet that discharges into a lavatory basin in a domestic or commercial installation. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means a water closet. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13) 
Sec. 5-77. - Restrictions on residential construction. 
On or after July 1, 2012, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type flush-o-meter valve, or flush-o-meter-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and twenty-eight hundredths (1.28) gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 2012; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of two and five-tenths (2.5) gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one-half (0.5) gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than one and one-half (1.5) gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two (2.0) gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13) 
Sec. 5-78. - Restrictions on commercial construction. 
On or after July 1, 2012, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subparagraphs (1) through (5) of section 5-77 above. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13) 
Sec. 5-79. - Application to replacement toilets and/or showers. 
The requirements of section 5-77 of this article shall apply to any construction initiated after July 1, 2012, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building including replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13) 
Sec. 5-80. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 5-77 through 5-79 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subparagraphs (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the city building inspector. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) per fixture shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exception. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13) 
Sec. 5-81. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector. 
(b)  Any person who installs any toilet, faucet, urinal or shower head in violation of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both for each offense. Each day of continued violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13) 
Secs. 5-82—5-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as an ordinance adopted May 10, 1993, did not specify manner of codification, inclusion herein as Art. VI, §§ 5-86—5-89, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5-86. - Unsafe buildings defined. 
All buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the City of Nashville which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed to be "unsafe buildings." 
(1)  Those in which the interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the base of such wall; 
(2)  Those buildings which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three (33) percent, or more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent of damage or deterioration of a nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering; 
(3)  Those buildings which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs, or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which it is used, or intended to be used; 
(4)  Those buildings which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes, so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the city; 
(5)  Those buildings which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of those living therein, or may live therein; 
(6)  Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein; 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication; 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property; 
(9)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of the city; and 
(10)  Those buildings which exist in violation of any ordinance of the city, so as to constitute a nuisance and to be unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the City of Nashville, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 1) 
Sec. 5-87. - Unsafe buildings as nuisances. 
All unsafe buildings as defined herein are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided for in this article hereinbefore and hereinafter. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 2) 
Sec. 5-88. - Duties of the building inspector. 
(a)  The building inspector of the City of Nashville, Georgia, shall be appointed by the mayor and members of the council. The building inspector is specifically charged with the duty of enforcing this article and upon finding, within the corporate limits of the city, an unsafe building as defined herein, shall cause an inspection of said building, and if the same is found to be unsafe as defined herein, shall make a written statement of the conditions and defects of such building and such evidence as may be available be reported to the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  The building inspector at the time such report is filed with the mayor and members of the council of the city, shall specifically point out the defects in such building which should be repaired, shall specify whether the same is unsafe for human habitation and/or shall recommend to the mayor and council such steps which in his opinion should be taken to remedy the conditions found to exist so that such building will no longer be unsafe, as defined herein. 
(c)  Upon such report being filed with the mayor and members of the council of the city, by the building inspector, such report shall be considered by the mayor and members of the council at its next regular scheduled meeting, and, if, after consideration of the report and evidence filed by the building inspector, the mayor and members of the council, shall determine that reasonable cause to proceed exists, the mayor and members of the council shall then order that a hearing be held at a day and time to be set by the mayor and members of the council within not less than ten (10) days and not more than sixty (60) days to determine if the building described in the building inspector's report is indeed an unsafe building. 
(d)  The owner or owners, tenants, if any, and lienholders of record, if any, of such building shall be served with a copy of such notice of hearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for such hearing. The owner or owners and/or lienholders of such building shall be served personally with such notice, if they reside or can be found in the City of Nashville, or cannot be found in the City of Nashville, they shall be served by publishing a copy of such notice, addressed to them, in the newspaper having general circulation in Berrien County, Georgia, in which sheriff's advertisements appear, once a week for four (4) weeks immediately preceding the date of such hearing, and a copy of such notice shall be mailed to such owners and/or lienholders at their last address as shown by the tax records of the city, at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing, by registered or certified mail. The tenants in such building, if any, shall be served by leaving a copy with an adult residing in such building. 
(e)  After the hearing, the mayor and members of the council of the city, shall, by resolution, issue an order based upon hearing the evidence produced at such a hearing, and if by such order they find and determine such building to be an unsafe building, as defined herein, such order shall specify the acts and things to be done to such building or in and about such building, including demolition, if necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city and the persons who live or may live in, or who may inhabit such building. 
(f)  In the event that any interested party is dissatisfied with the finding of the mayor and members of the council as set forth in item (e) above, they shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of Berrien County, Georgia, as provided for by the Code of the State of Georgia as in cases originating in the Recorder's Court of the City of Nashville, Georgia. 
(g)  If the mayor and members of the council, pursuant to the hearing herein provided for, shall determine that the building is an unsafe building, if they also find that the same is unsafe for human habitation, the tenants and/or inhabitants of such building shall be immediately ordered to vacate the same, and the same shall be posted as an unsafe building, and all persons prohibited from entering therein, except for the purpose of restoring, repairing or demolishing the same, pursuant to an order entered hereunder. 
(h)  Further, in the event the mayor and members of the council of the city, determine that such building is unsafe and/or that the same should be demolished, the owner or owners of such building shall be given a reasonable period of time within which to repair the same or demolish the same as the case may be, and upon failure of the owner to comply with such order within the period or time fixed, the mayor and members of the council of the city shall order the building inspector, or other such proper official to repair and/or demolish the same, as required by such order, and assess the total cost thereof against the owner, as hereinafter provided; and 
(i)  In the event that the repairing and/or demolishing of such building as required herein, is performed by the building inspector, or such official, upon completion of such work, shall file with the clerk of the city an itemization of the cost of such work and the clerk of the city is hereby ordered to immediately issue an execution against the owner or owners of such property for the total cost of such work, which execution shall constitute a lien against such real estate as of the date of the resolution ordering such work to be done, and which execution shall thereafter be enforced and collected in the same manner as an execution fi.fa. for unpaid taxes for the city and such execution shall rank in dignity second only to taxes of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 3) 
Sec. 5-89. - State law adopted by reference. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through O.C.G.A. § 41-2-17 are incorporated into this article and made a part hereof by reference thereto a copy of which is attached hereto. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93) 
Secs. 5-90—5-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 5-101. - Administration. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the City of Nashville Property Maintenance Code 2011 Edition, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(3)  Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required, herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the International Existing Building Code except as expressly modified herein. 
(4)  Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in subsection (a). Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(2)  Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
(3)  Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Existing Building Code. 
(4)  Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. 
(5)  Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(6)  Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
(8)  Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the building official. 
(c)  Department of property development. 
(1)  General. The department of property development is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official aka code enforcement officer. 
(2)  Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the jurisdiction; and the building official shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority. 
(3)  Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, other related technical officers, inspectors, code enforcement officers and other employees. 
(4)  Liability. The building official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. 
Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of property development, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
(d)  Duties and powers of the building official. 
(1)  General. The code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this code. 
(2)  Rule-making authority. The building official shall have authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the provisions of this code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety. 
(3)  Inspections. The building official or its designee shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the mayor and council. 
(4)  Right of entry. The building official or its designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the building official or its designee is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. 
(5)  Identification. The building official or its designee shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. 
(6)  Notices and orders. The building official or its designee shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. 
(7)  Department records. The building official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations. 
(8)  Coordination of inspections. Whenever in the enforcement of this code or another code or ordinance, the responsibility of more than one (1) building official of the jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the building officials involved to coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance or code not within the inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to the building official having jurisdiction. 
(e)  Approval. 
(1)  Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason that makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. 
(2)  Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(3)  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction. 
a.  Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency. 
b.  Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
(4)  Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved. 
(f)  Violations. 
(1)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
(2)  Notice of violation. The building official or its designee may serve a notice of violation in accordance with subsection (g) [of this section] detailing an existing violation; however a citation may be issued without prior written notification. The notice shall contain a deadline for compliance, which may be extended after a written request is submitted and reviewed by the building official or its designee. 
(3)  Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with subsection (g) [of this section] shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the building official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(4)  Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment, upon conviction in the City of Nashville Municipal Court, and each and every day that the premises shall remain in a condition in violation of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall be in addition to the provisions of the abatement of said nuisance and the charge of the cost of the same against the owner of the premises by the city. A fine imposed under this code shall be no less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense. A sentence of imprisonment under this article shall not exceed sixty (60) days per offense. At the discretion of the municipal court judge, any sentence may be probated, altered or amended. Any property owner, occupant or party of interest who violates any other property maintenance code within a twenty-four-month period shall immediately be issued a citation and subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(5)  Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises. 
(g)  Notices and orders. 
(1)  Notice to person responsible. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, if a notice is issued, it shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsections (g)(2) and (g)(3) to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with subsection (h)(3). The building official shall have the power to issue subpoenas requiring occupants, residents, owners, or parties-in-interest of buildings under inspection, investigation, or who have been accused of a violation of this article to appear in the City of Nashville Municipal Court. The building official or its designee shall also have the power to issue subpoenas to occupants, residents, owners, or parties-in-interest to produce written records related to the property under inspection or investigation. 
(2)  Form. Such notice prescribed in subsection (g)(1) shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
a.  Be in writing. 
b.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
c.  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
d.  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code. 
e.  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
f.  Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with subsection (f)(3). 
(3)  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
a.  Delivered personally; 
b.  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
c.  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(4)  Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in subsection (f)(4). 
(5)  Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(h)  Unsafe structures and equipment. 
(1)  General. When a structure or equipment is found by the building official or its designee to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
a.  Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
b.  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
c.  Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the building official or its designee finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
d.  Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
(2)  Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the building official or its designee is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the building official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
(3)  Notice. Whenever the building official or its designee has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with subsection (g)(3). If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in subsection (g)(2). 
(4)  Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the building official or its designee shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word "condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. 
a.  Placard removal. The building official or its designee shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the building official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code. 
(5)  Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the building official or its designee shall be vacated as ordered by the building official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. 
(i)  Emergency measures. 
(1)  Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the building official or its designee, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official or its designee is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The building official or its designee shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: 
"This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Building official." 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same. 
(2)  Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the building official or its designee, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official or its designee shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official or its designee deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(3)  Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the building official or its designee shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(4)  Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the building official or its designee shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(5)  Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(6)  Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code. 
(j)  Demolition. 
(1)  General. The building official or its designee shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the building official's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two (2) years, to demolish and remove such structure. 
(2)  Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with subsection (g). 
(3)  Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the building official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(4)  Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. 
(k)  Means of appeal. 
(1)  Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the building official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
(2)  Membership of board. The mayor and council shall act as the board of appeals until such board has been established. 
a.  Alternate members. (Reserved) 
b.  Chairman. (Reserved) 
c.  Disqualification of member. (Reserved) 
d.  Secretary. (Reserved) 
e.  Compensation of members. (Reserved) 
(3)  Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within twenty (20) days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
(4)  Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the building official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the board membership. 
a.  Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
(5)  Postponed hearing. When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing. 
(6)  Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the building official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members. 
a.  Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the building official. 
b.  Administration. The building official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
(7)  Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(8)  Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the appeals board. 
(Ord. of 2-14-11, ch. 1) 
Sec. 5-102. - Definitions. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(2)  Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 
(3)  Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fire Code, International Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Existing Building Code, the ICC Electrical Code or the Georgia State Minimum Standard Property Maintenance Code, and such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
(4)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(5)  Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(b)  General definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Approved: Approved by the building official. 
Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Bathroom: A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom: Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
Building official: The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code or any duly authorized representative. 
Condemn: To adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
Dwelling unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including: permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Easement: That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lot or lots. 
Exterior property: The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, and trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
Garbage: The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Guard: A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
Habitable space: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Housekeeping unit: A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
Imminent danger: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
Infestation: The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
Inoperable motor vehicle: A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power. 
Labeled: Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards. 
Let for occupancy or let: To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
Occupancy: The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant: Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Openable area: That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Operator: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. 
Premises: A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
Public way: Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 
Rooming house: A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
Rubbish: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
Strict liability offense: An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do. 
Structure: That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
Tenant: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
Toilet room: A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Ventilation: The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
Workmanlike: Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure. 
(Ord. of 2-14-11, ch. 2) 
Sec. 5-103. - General requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property. 
(2)  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control. 
(3)  Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(b)  Exterior property areas. 
(1)  Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(2)  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
(3)  Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(4)  Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten (10) inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs, provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with subsection 5-101(f)(3) and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
(5)  Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reification [reinfestation]. 
(6)  Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another vent. 
(7)  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(8)  Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. 
(9)  Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(c)  Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
(1)  Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. 
(2)  Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least forty-eight (48) inches (1,219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than fifty-four (54) inches (1,372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six (6) inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. 
No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
(d)  Exterior structure. 
(1)  General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  Premises identification. (Reserved.) 
(4)  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(5)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
(6)  Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(7)  Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(8)  Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(9)  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(10)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(11)  Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(12)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(13)  Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight. 
a.  Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
b.  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(14)  Insect screens. During the period from January 1 to December 31 every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
(15)  Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with subsection 5-107(b)(3). 
(16)  Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
(17)  Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents. 
(18)  Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
a.  Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt locks shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall have a lock throw of not less than one (1) inch. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort. 
b.  Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six (6) feet (1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with window sash locking devices. 
c.  Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
(e)  Interior structure. 
(1)  General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two (2) or more dwelling units or two (2) or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
(2)  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(3)  Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
(4)  Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(5)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(6)  Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
(f)  Handrails and guardrails. 
(1)  General. The exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four (4) risers shall have a handrail on one (1) side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) high or more than forty-two (42) inches (1,066.8 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. 
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempt by the adopted building code. 
(g)  Rubbish and garbage. 
(1)  Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
(2)  Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers. 
a.  Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premise shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
b.  Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors. 
(3)  Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers. 
a.  Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one (1) of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container. 
b.  Containers. The operator of every establishment which produces garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
(h)  Extermination. 
(1)  Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(2)  Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
(3)  Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
(4)  Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
(5)  Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent- and pest-free condition of the structure. 
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. of 2-14-11, ch. 3) 
Sec. 5-104. - Light, ventilation and occupancy limitations. 
(a)  General 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure. 
(2)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the State of Georgia Building Code shall be permitted. 
(b)  Light. 
(1)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight (8) percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three (3) feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet (2.33 m 2 ). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
(2)  Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a sixty (60) watt standard incandescent light bulb for each two hundred (200) square feet (19 m 2 ) of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than thirty (30) feet (9,144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress stairways, shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one (1) footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads. 
(3)  Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
(c)  Ventilation. 
(1)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum glazed area required in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet (2.33 m 2 ). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
(2)  Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by subsection (c)(1), except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 
(3)  Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
Exception: Where specifically approved in writing by the building official. 
(4)  Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
(5)  Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(d)  Occupancy limitations. 
(1)  Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(2)  Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven (7) feet (2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three (3) feet (914 mm) between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls. 
(3)  Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet (2,134 mm). 
Exceptions: 
a.  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four (4) feet (1,219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six (6) inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height. 
b.  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six (6) feet eight (8) inches (2,033 mm) with not less than six (6) feet four (4) inches (1,932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions. 
c.  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet (2,134 mm) over not less than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five (5) feet (1,524 mm) or more shall be included. 
(4)  Bedroom requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements of subsections (d)(4)a. through (d)(4)d. 
a.  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one (1) person shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet (6.5 m 2 ) of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one (1) person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet (4.6 m 2 ) of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
b.  Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. 
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two (2) bedrooms. 
c.  Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and one (1) lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story. 
d.  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
e.  Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of section 5-105; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of section 5-106; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of section 5-107. 
(5)  Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5. 
a.  Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with subsection (d). 
b.  Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(6)  Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements: 
Table 404.5: Minimum Area Requirements 

 
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m 2 . 
a. See subsection (d)(5)b. for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
b. See subsection (d)(5)a. for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. Located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet (20.4 m 2 ). A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet (29.7 m 2 ). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by items 2 and 3. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3). 
(7)  Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. 
(Ord. of 2-14-11, ch. 4) 
Sec. 5-105. - Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided. 
(2)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Required facilities. 
(1)  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(2)  Rooming houses . At least one (1) water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four (4) rooming units. 
(3)  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten (10) occupants. 
(4)  Employees' facilities. A minimum of one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
a.  Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
(c)  Toilet rooms. 
(1)  Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
(2)  Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one (1) flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
(3)  Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one (1) story above or below the employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of five hundred (500) feet (152m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities. 
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of five hundred (500) feet (152m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities. 
(4)  Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(d)  Plumbing systems and fixtures. 
(1)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(2)  Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
(3)  Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, back siphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the building official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(e)  Water system. 
(1)  General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the State of Georgia Plumbing Code. 
(2)  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(3)  Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
(4)  Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than ll0°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(f)  Sanitary drainage system. 
(1)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(2)  Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
(g)  Storm drainage. 
(1)  General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 2-14-11, ch. 5) 
Sec. 5-106. - Mechanical and electrical requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. 
(2)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Heating facilities. 
(1)  Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 
(2)  Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the State of Georgia Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
(3)  Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one (1) or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to April 1 and to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
a.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the State of Georgia Plumbing Code. 
b.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
(4)  Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from (October 1) to (April 1) to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
b.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(5)  Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three (3) feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and two (2) feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall. 
(c)  Mechanical equipment. 
(1)  Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(2)  Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation. 
(3)  Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
(4)  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(5)  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
(6)  Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved. 
(d)  Electrical facilities. 
(1)  Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this subsection (d) and subsection (e). 
(2)  Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the ICC Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a ruling of not less than sixty (60) amperes. 
(3)  Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the building official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(e)  Electrical equipment. 
(1)  Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
(2)  Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one (1) grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one (1) receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
(3)  Lighting fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one (1) electric lighting fixture. 
(f)  Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. 
(1)  General. Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters shall comply with the Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Department of Labor and ASME A17.1 where applicable. (Effective January 1, 2009) 
(2)  Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one (1) elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. 
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one (1) elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. 
(g)  Duct systems. 
(1)  General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function. 
(Ord. of 2-14-11, ch. 6) 
Sec. 5-107. - Fire safety requirements. 
(a)  General. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. 
(2)  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Means of egress. 
(1)  General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code. 
(2)  Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the State of Georgia Fire Code shall be unobstructed. 
(3)  Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code. 
(4)  Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net-clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(5)  Overcrowding and life safety hazards. The number of persons occupying a structure or portion thereof, excluding dwelling units that comply with subsection 5-104(d)(5), shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants. Calculations for overcrowding conditions shall be based upon the requirements of subsections 5-104(d)(5) through 5-104(d)(5)b. A structure shall be considered overcrowded and a life safety hazard under any of the following conditions: 
a.  A structure, building, individual room or designated portion thereof shall be deemed to be overcrowded and a life safety hazard if the number of occupants exceeds one (1) person per five (5) square feet of open net floor area of such room or space when fixed seating is not provided; or 
b.  A structure, building, room or designated portion thereof shall be deemed overcrowded and a life safety hazard if the total number of occupants exceeds the exit capacity of the structure, building, room or area involved; or 
c.  A structure, building, individual room or designated portion thereof shall be deemed to be overcrowded and a life safety hazard if the minimum number of required exits is not provided for the calculated or expected occupant load; or 
d.  A structure, building, individual room or designated portion thereof shall be deemed to be a life safety hazard if the minimum construction requirements for area and height or the occupant location tables as specified in the Safety Fire Commissioner Rules and Regulations are exceeded based upon the number of required exits is not provided for the calculated or expected occupant load. 
(Effective January 1, 2009) 
(c)  Fire-resistance ratings. 
(1)  Fire-resistance rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained. 
(2)  Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smoke stop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. 
(d)  Fire protection systems. 
(1)  General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the State of Georgia Fire Code. 
(2)  Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
a.  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
b.  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
c.  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one (1) full story below the upper level. 
Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the State of Georgia Fire Code. 
(2.1)  Smoke alarms in Group R occupancies. Smoke alarms in buildings containing Group R occupancies built prior to January 1, 2007, shall comply with the minimum statutory requirements of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40. (Effective January 1, 2009) 
(3)  Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for over-current protection. 
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
(4)  Interconnection. Where more than one (1) smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one (1) alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind. 
b.  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 
(5)  Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(6)  Effective date. This article shall go into effect the first day of March, 2011, or at such time as same is adopted in compliance with the City Charter. 
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, recording and publication, the public welfare requiring it. 
(Ord. of 12-14-11, ch. 7) 
Secs. 5-108—5-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 5-151. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Nashville is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The City of Nashville City Council hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. of 4-22-13, § I) 
Sec. 5-152. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
(a)  Building means a building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
(b)  Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
(c)  Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing. 
(d)  Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
(e)  Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the City of Nashville City Council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 5-154(b) of this article. 
(f)  Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the City of Nashville City Council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 5-154(c) of this article. 
(g)  Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
(h)  Object means an object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
(i)  Site means a site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
(j)  Structure means a structure is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 4-22-13, § II) 
Sec. 5-153. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "The City of Nashville Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city government. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Nashville. 
(c)  Commission members: Number; appointment; terms and compensation. The commission shall consist of not less than three (3) nor more than five (5) members appointed by the mayor and city council. All members shall be residents of the City of Nashville and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
To the extent available in the city, at least three (3) members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
Members shall serve three-year terms which shall be renewed automatically unless the commission member notifies the mayor and council and tenders his or her resignation or unless the mayor and council notify the commission member the member's term will not be renewed at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of term renewal. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power. 
(1)  The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
a.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Nashville having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.  Recommend to the City of Nashville City Council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
d.  Recommend to the City of Nashville City Council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
e.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Nashville; 
f.  Promote the acquisition by the City of Nashville of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-5); 
g.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the City of Nashville City Council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
i.  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the City of Nashville City Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.  Submit to the historic preservation division of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
k.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the City of Nashville historic preservation program; 
l.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
m.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the City of Nashville without prior consent. 
n.  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
o.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the City of Nashville City Council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. 
(1)  The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. 
(1)  The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statues and in the City of Nashville Charters. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. 
(1)  The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 4-22-13, § III; Ord. No. O-01-19, 2-25-19) 
Sec. 5-154. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City of Nashville. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the City of Nashville City Council for designation. The commission shall present to the City of Nashville City Council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the City of Nashville City Council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one (1) or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one (1) or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Nashville or in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Noncontributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in [subsection] (b)(1)). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the City of Nashville, the region or the State of Georgia for one (1) of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Nashville, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts of property. Designations may be proposed by the City of Nashville City Council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts - A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties - A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district of describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Nashville and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission or the City of Nashville City Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three (3) consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten (10) or more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than thirty (30) days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection 5-154(a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the City of Nashville City Council. 
(6)  The City of Nashville City Council actions on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the City of Nashville City Council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the City of Nashville City Council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the City of Nashville City Council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Nashville of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. of 4-22-13, § IV) 
Sec. 5-155. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearing on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness: Commission action. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation: The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
b.  Relocation: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, tress judged to be fifty (50) years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one (1) of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The commission and the City of Nashville City Council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six (6) months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and is renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and or all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the City of Nashville City Council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness my [may] appeal such determination to the City of Nashville City Council. Any such appeal must be filed with the City of Nashville City Council within (fifteen (15) days) after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 5-155(h)(1) of this article or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within (fifteen (15) days) of the expiration of the forty-five-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection 5-155(h)(2) of this article. Appeals for properties within the City of Nashville shall be made to the City of Nashville City Council. The City of Nashville City Council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the City of Nashville City Council may be taken to the Superior Court of Berrien County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Nashville ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 4-22-13, § V) 
Sec. 5-156. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a buildings structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have thirty (30) days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in thirty (30) days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 5-158 of this article and, at the direction of the City of Nashville City Council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-22-13, § VI) 
Sec. 5-157. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the City of Nashville. 
(Ord. of 4-22-13, § VII) 
Sec. 5-158. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjunction shall in manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally part thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-22-13, § VIII) 
Secs. 5-159—5-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DERELICT PROPERTY 

Sec. 5-200. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Nashville Derelict Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-201. - Findings. 
The city declares and finds that within its city limits is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and which are not in compliance with the applicable state or minimum standard codes as adopted by local ordinance or operation of law or any building, fire, life safety or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by local ordinance by the city; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such swellings, buildings, or structures. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-202. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by and other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-203. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(a)  Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property-maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real-property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
(c)  Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 13, article 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". 
(d)  Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
(e)  Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
(f)  Governing authority means the city council of the City of Nashville, Georgia. 
(g)  Interested party means: 
(1)  The "owner"; 
(2)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(4)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
(h)  Municipality means the City of Nashville, Georgia. 
(i)  Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
(j)  Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
(k)  Public officer means the code enforcement officer, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom the city manager delegates such authority. 
(l)  Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(m)  Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-204. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on private property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-205. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
(a)  Every dwelling, building, or structure within the city which: 
(1)  Is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; 
(2)  Is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; 
(3)  Poses an imminent treat or harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; 
(4)  Is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; 
(5)  Is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; 
(6)  Is abandoned; or 
(7)  Otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Property which may be deemed esthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in or poses an imminent threat of impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime. 
(b)  If, after thirty (30) days' written notice to abate a nuisance as provided herein, the owner of the property has not taken action to abate the nuisance, the city may, but is not required to, make arrangement to abate such nuisance at the sole expense of the property owner. The costs of abatement shall operate as a lien against the property as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-207. - Powers of city manager or his/her designee. 
(a)  In carrying out the his/her duties pursuant to this article, the city manager or the designee to whom authority is hereby assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists; 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys; 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as determined necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of the functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as may designated. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the city manager or designee(s) may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-208. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(5)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; or 
(7)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within two hundred seventy (270) days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (f) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Berrien County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within ninety (90) days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The tax commissioner may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(i)  The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. The tax commissioner may retain an amount equal to the cost of administering collection of the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-209. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure, or property within three (3) business days of filing of the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriffs advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and 
(4)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the dwelling, building, structure, or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in municipal court. 
(b)  The public officer shall cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-210. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-211. - General cleanliness of premises. 
The owner and occupant of property within the city shall each be independently responsible for keeping the premises, including all buildings thereon and the full yard thereof, clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish and other offensive materials. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-212. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. 
(b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-213. - Violations; enforcement penalties. 
Any person who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00); each day of continued violation, after citation, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines, upon conviction, the director shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 1, 10-24-16) 
Secs. 5-214—5-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BLIGHTED PROPERTY 

Sec. 5-220. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Nashville Blighted Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-221. - Purpose. 
The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including, but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, mayor and council, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at O.C.G.A. title 36, chapter 61, urban redevelopment, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-222. - Definitions. 
(a)  Blighted property, blighted, or blight means any urbanized or developed property which: 
(1)  Presents two (2) or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structure; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm or poses an imminent threat of harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one (1) year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
(2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. 
(b)  Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(c)  Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
(d)  Governing authority means the city council of the City of Nashville, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
(e)  Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
(f)  Person means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
(g)  Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-223. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven (7.0) to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one (1) or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-224. - Identification of blighted property. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed, 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five (5) residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance, or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five (5) years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Berrien County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten (10) business days notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the Berrien Press, or other designated legal organ in Berrien County, at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the tax commissioner of Berrien County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Berrien County for a writ of certiorari within thirty (30) days of issuance of the court's written determination. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-225. - Remediation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)  Completion of work required under an order entered by the mayor and council in a proceeding brought pursuant to article VI, unsafe buildings, of chapter 5 of the Code of Nashville, Georgia; or 
(3)  Completion of work required under an order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to article IX, Nashville Derelict Property Ordinance of chapter 5 of the Municipal Code of the City of Nashville. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the tax commissioner of Berrien County. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five (5) acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-226. - Decrease of tax rate. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 5-224, identification of blighted property, of this article, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or portion thereof equaling one (1) year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four (4) successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 5-227. - Notice to tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the tax commissioner of Berrien County in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Berrien County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 10-24-16) 
Chapter 6 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of Nov. 26, 1990, amended Ch. 6 to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 6 consisted of §§ 6-1—6-9 and was derived from Code 1967, §§ 6-1—6-7; a motion of July 22, 1974; and an ordinance of May 11, 1987. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide cemeteries, § 2-9(w). 
State Law reference— Conveyance of money or property to mayor and city council for cemetery, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-503; authority of city to act as trustee for cemetery funds, § 69-506. 

Sec. 6-1. - Payment for lots. 
(a)  No person will be permitted to open a grave in a city cemetery without first paying to the city clerk the full purchase price of the lot or lots or making other suitable arrangements with the city clerk or city clerk's designee according to terms and conditions specified by the mayor and council or city manager. 
(b)  Upon receipt of payment in full of the purchase price or other suitable arrangement, the city clerk or city clerk's designee shall make a limited warranty deed conveying the lot or lots purchased expressly subject to the conditions and restrictions imposed upon the grave sites under the rules and regulations regarding flowers, memorials and operations of the city cemeteries referenced in said limited warranty deed. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90; Ord. No. O-01-18, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 6-2. - Permit to dig grave, erect headstone, monuments, memorials, etc. 
(a)  No person shall erect or place a headstone, monument, memorial, bench, chair or similar structure on a grave lot until such headstone, monument, memorial, bench, chair or similar structure has been determined by the city manager, city manager's designee or city cemetery staff to be compliant with the applicable rules and regulations regarding flowers, memorials and operations of the city's cemeteries. 
(b)  The rules and regulations regarding flowers, memorials and operations may be amended, revised or supplemented from time to time as the council deems necessary to protect the public health and safety of the general public, person's owning or visiting gravesites in the city's municipal cemeteries and city employees, agents or independent contactor's responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the city's cemeteries. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90; Ord. No. O-01-18, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 6-3. - Burials in vaults. 
All burials shall be made in a vault, which shall be constructed of materials other than wood. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-4. - Top soil; damage to sod; removal of surplus clay. 
No sand or clay shall be used as top soil upon the lots. No damage shall be done to grass sod adjacent to a new grave at the time of opening a new grave. The city, within a reasonable time, will remove the surplus clay not needed in properly closing a newly made grave. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-5. - Alignment of headstones and monuments. 
All headstones and/or monuments are to be aligned as closely as possible in a straight line with one another in said cemetery. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-6. - Height of monuments and stones. 
Monuments and tombstones shall be limited to a height of four (4) feet. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-7. - Coping around lots. 
No person owning a lot in a city cemetery shall be allowed to place coping of any material around his lot or lots. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-8. - Slabs, corner markers and foot markers. 
No slabs will be allowed in Memorial Gardens. Corner markers, if placed, shall be flush with the ground surface and are placed at the owner's risk. The city will not be held liable for mower damage, etc. Foot markers will be allowed. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-9. - Shrubbery. 
No person owning a lot in a city cemetery shall be allowed to place any shrubbery or live plants on his individual lot or lots. Any foliage or trees planted will be done by the city, at its discretion. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-10. - Sale of lots by sexton. 
All sales of cemetery lots are to be done only by the appointed cemetery sexton. All sales are to be in order of progression within the current block of lots. No random sales will be permitted within the cemetery. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-11. - Visiting hours in cemeteries. 
Visiting hours in all city cemeteries shall be from sunup until sundown. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90) 
Sec. 6-12. - Price of lots. 
The price per gravesite of cemetery lots owned by the City of Nashville will be as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges on file in the office of the city clerk effective as of the date thereof and modified as hereinafter provided. These prices shall be regulated by mayor and council in open session; however, any changes in the price of said lots will become effective the Monday following two (2) weeks' publication of notice of any revision of said gravesite lot prices. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90; Ord. of 12-28-98, § 1; Ord. of 12-9-13) 
Sec. 6-12.1. - Price of lots—Eastview Cemetery. 
The price per grave-site for Eastview Cemetery will be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). These prices shall be regulated by the mayor and council in open session. 
(Ord. of 8-22-05) 
Chapter 7 - CIVIL DEFENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to proclaim and deal with emergencies, § 2-9(d). 
Cross reference— Police department, Ch. 23; obedience to officers directing traffic, § 28-3. 
State Law reference— Civil defense act, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 86-18. 

Sec. 7-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "civil defense" means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of man-made or natural origin, caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1967, § 7-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 86-1803. 
Sec. 7-2. - Penalty for violation. 
It shall be unlawful, during an emergency, for any person: 
(1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  To wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the council of defense. 
(Code 1967, § 7-8) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide penalties for violations of rules and regulations, § 2-9(ww). 
Sec. 7-3. - Civil defense director. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of the civil defense director. Such officer shall be nominated by the mayor, as provided by law. 
(b)  The civil defense director is hereby directed: 
(1)  To represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to civil defense. 
(2)  To require and direct cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of civil defense plans. 
(3)  During periods of emergency, to direct the services of any city officers or employees. 
(4)  During periods of emergency, to obtain vital supplies and equipment needed for the protection of life and property of people and bind the city for the value thereof and if required immediately, requisition same. 
(Code 1967, § 7-4) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Appointment and duties of local civil defense director, Ga. Code Ann., § 86-1809. 
Sec. 7-4. - Civil defense corps. 
Officers and employees of the city, together with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements by which they are charged with duties necessary for the protection of life and property in the city during such an emergency, shall constitute the civil defense corps. 
(Code 1967, § 7-5) 
Sec. 7-5. - Divisions of the civil defense corps. 
(a)  The functions and duties of the civil defense corps shall be distributed among the divisions as listed below. Each division shall be under the direction of a chief and a deputy chief, appointed by the council of defense. The chiefs of divisions will include public officials such as sheriffs, chiefs of police and fire departments and heads of agencies dealing with transportation, communications and other sundry services as well as private persons who through their profession, business, knowledge or experience are particularly qualified to head divisions requiring specialized knowledge and experience. 
(b)  The divisions are established as follows: 
Law enforcement division 
Fire services division 
Transportation division 
Medical and health division 
Communications division 
Welfare division 
Information and education division. 
(Code 1967, § 7-6) 
Sec. 7-6. - Volunteers. 
All persons other than officers and employees of the city, volunteering in service pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service, they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
(Code 1967, § 7-7) 
State Law reference— Immunity from liability, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 86-1817, 86-1822. 
Sec. 7-7. - Council of defense—Created; membership. 
The Nashville Council of Defense is hereby created and shall include the following: 
Mayor 
Director of civil defense 
Police chief 
Fire chief 
County health officer 
City engineer 
County or city welfare officer 
American Red Cross representative 
Others including representatives of business, labor, civic and patriotic organizations as appointed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1967, § 7-2) 
State Law reference— Local organization for civil defense, Ga. Code Ann., § 86-1809. 
Sec. 7-8. - Same—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the council of defense and it is hereby empowered: 
(1)  To develop a city civil defense plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. 
(2)  To prepare and recommend for consideration by the city council ordinances necessary to implement the civil defense plan. 
(3)  To consider and recommend to the director of civil defense for approval mutual aid plans and agreements. 
(Code 1967, § 7-3) 
State Law reference— Mutual aid arrangements, Ga. Code Ann., § 86-1808. 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Filling of vacancy in office of mayor or councilman, § 2-5; authority of mayor and city council to regulate city elections, § 2-9(g); elections generally, § 3-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Mayor and city council, § 2-20 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal elections, Ga. Code Ann., Title 34A; ballots for primary elections, forms and stubs, §§ 34A-1002, 34A-1006; violations of Municipal Election Code, § 34A-1601; false statements, § 34A-1602. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8-1, pertaining to the election superintendent, and derived from ordinances of Oct. 9, 1972, § 7; and Sept. 22, 1986, has been deleted as being covered by state law. See O.C.G.A., § 21-3-8(3) for corresponding provisions. 
Sec. 8-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 8-2, pertaining to the date of general municipal elections, was superseded by an amendment to sections 3-3 and 3-4 of the city's Charter by an act of the legislature set forth in 1990 Ga. Laws, page 4430. 
Sec. 8-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Provisions formerly codified as § 8-3, Runoff elections, and derived from § 4 of an Oct. 9, 1972, ordinance, have been deleted as being covered by state law. See O.C.G.A., § 21-3-407 for corresponding provisions. 
Secs. 8-4—8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The substantive provisions of Art. II, consisting of §§ 8-20—8-27, which pertained to the registration of voters, and derived from Code 1967, §§ 8-15—8-17 and 8-19; from § 5 of an Oct. 9, 1972, ordinance; and from provisions presumably enacted during the 1980 codification, have been deleted as being covered by state law. See the following sections of O.C.G.A. for corresponding provisions: §§ 21-2-217, 21-3-20, 21-3-121, 21-3-122, 21-3-124, 21-3-126(b), 21-3-133, 21-3-134(a), 21-3-135, and 21-3-138. 

Secs. 8-20—8-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANDIDATES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Filing for office, § 3-2. 
State Law reference— Nomination of candidates, Ga. Code Ann., § 34A-901 et seq. 

Sec. 8-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8-44, Qualification fees, derived from § 6 of an Oct. 9, 1972, ordinance, has been deleted as being covered by state law. See O.C.G.A., § 21-3-90 for corresponding provisions. 
Sec. 8-45. - Qualifying for different post or office. 
Once a candidate has qualified to run for a designated post or office in any given city election, that candidate cannot change from running for that particular post or office and run for another post or office in that same election, nor can he totally withdraw from the election and qualify for another post or office in that particular election, notwithstanding his being withdrawn voluntarily or for cause from failure to comply with the qualifying regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-12-72, § II) 
State Law reference— Qualifying for office, Ga. Code Ann., § 34A-901 et seq. 
Sec. 8-46. - Refund of qualification fee. 
Once a candidate has qualified to run for a particular post or office in a city election he shall not be reimbursed his qualifying fee if he for any reason voluntarily withdraws from the race; but, he will be reimbursed his qualifying fee only if he is withdrawn from the race for cause for failure to fully comply with the qualifying regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-12-72, § III) 
State Law reference— Qualification fees, Ga. Code Ann., § 34A-904. 
Secs. 8-47—8-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VOTING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Election to be by majority vote, § 3-5. 
State Law reference— Preparation for and conduct of primaries and elections, Ga. Code Ann., § 34A-1201 et seq. 

Sec. 8-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8-63, derived from an ordinance enacted Oct. 9, 1972, § 7, and pertaining to polling places, has been deleted as being covered by state law. See O.C.G.A., §§ 21-3-185(c) and 21-3-186(3) for corresponding provisions. 
Sec. 8-64. - Incumbency of candidates indicated on ballots. 
On all ballots used in any city election, the notation "incumbent" will be placed opposite of or at the end of the name of any person seeking reelection to the particular city office or post he is holding. 
(Ord. of 12-12-72, § IV) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 34A-1002. 
Secs. 8-65—8-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 8-65—8-67, pertaining to absentee ballots and contested elections, and derived from Code 1967, § 8-1; an ordinance enacted Dec. 12, 1972; and from provisions presumably enacted during the 1980 codification, were deleted as being covered by state law. See O.C.G.A., §§ 21-3-280 et seq. and 21-3-422 et seq. for corresponding provisions. 
Chapter 9 - ELECTRICITY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Electrical department created. 
There is hereby created a department of the city to be known as the electrical department. 
(Code 1967, § 9-1) 
Charter reference— Appointment of department heads, § 5-6. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 9-2. - General powers and duties of building official. 
The building official shall be chief of the electrical inspection department. It shall be his duty to issue permits for all electrical work and to have supervision over all such work done in the city. He shall see that all fees are paid for permits and paid over to the city. He shall keep a record of all the transactions of his office and shall be provided with proper blank applications for the convenient listing of information regarding electrical work for which permits are to be issued. 
(Code 1967, § 9-3) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the issuance of permits, § 2-9(s). 
Sec. 9-3. - Regulation of electric wires and appliances. 
The building official is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate and determine the placing of electric light and power wires in and on buildings in the city so as to prevent fires, accidents or injuries to persons or property, and to cause all electrical appliances to be so placed, constructed and guarded, as not to cause fire or accidents or to endanger life or property, and whenever in the judgment of the building official an electric wire or appliance shall be defective by reason of insufficient insulation, or from any other cause, the said building official shall at once cause the immediate removal of such defects. 
(Code 1967, § 9-3) 
Sec. 9-4. - Management of city electrical installations. 
The building official shall be the chief of the electrical department; shall have exclusive management and control of all electrical devices installed and inaugurated by the city; and shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all currents when the circuit interferes with the work of the fire department. 
(Code 1967, § 9-3) 
Sec. 9-5. - Enforcement of regulations. 
It shall be the duty of the building official to see that all the provisions of this article and the city electrical code are enforced. He shall issue permits only to bona fide, licensed contractors within the provisions of this article, and shall not permit any electrical wiring of any class whatever within the limits of the city except under the direct supervision of an individual holding a license issued in due form by the state for the current license year. Provided, that where large buildings and establishments have in their regular employ a man competent to keep in repair the electrical equipment and wiring or to install new wiring or electrical equipment in such building or establishment, such employee shall upon the approval of the building official as to his fitness to properly discharge such duties, be issued a special permit to attend to such work solely in the particular building or establishment. 
(Code 1967, § 9-4) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the issuance of permits, § 2-9(s). 
State Law reference— Holder of statewide electrical contractor's license exempt from local examination requirement, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-5716. 
Sec. 9-6. - Inspections during progress of work. 
The building official shall make such necessary inspections of work as it progresses to be satisfied that the requirements of this article and the electrical code of the city are fulfilled, and in the event he shall, upon such inspection, find such electrical work or construction not to be in compliance therewith, he shall immediately notify the electrical contractor under whose supervision the work is being done, and such notice shall be in writing and shall specify wherein such work or construction shall be found defective. 
(Code 1967, § 9-5) 
Sec. 9-7. - Permits. 
No alteration or change shall be made in writing of any building, nor shall any building be wired for the placing of electric lights, motors or heating devices, without first securing from the building official a permit therefor, nor shall any change be made in any electrical plant, after inspection, without notifying the building official and securing a permit therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 9-6) 
Cross reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the issuance of permits, § 2-9(s). 
Sec. 9-7.1. - Electrical permit fees. 
New Services 

 
Remodeling, Repair and Additions 
For commercial and residential buildings, based on existing amp service without upgrading service: 
New Services 

 
(Ord. of 7-25-88; Ord. of 12-27-05) 
Sec. 9-8. - Notice of completion of wiring; certificate of inspection. 
Upon the completion of the wiring of any building it shall be the duty of the individual doing the same to notify the building official, who shall at once inspect the same, and if approved by him, he shall issue a certificate of inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection and an outline of the results of such inspection, but no such certificate shall be issued unless the electric light, power or heating installation, and all apparatus, wire and other facilities connected with it shall be in strict conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in the electrical code adopted in section 9-33, nor shall current be turned on for such installation until said certificate be issued. 
(Code 1967, § 9-7) 
Sec. 9-9. - Conditions on removal of poles. 
All persons maintaining poles on the streets or public places of the city, for the purpose of supporting wires for the transmission or conducting of electricity for any purpose, or other poles or posts, shall be, and they are hereby required, when any poles are taken up or removed, to remove such pole in its entirety and fill up the hole from which said pole is removed with like material to that of the surrounding surface, and it shall be unlawful to permit the stump or any portion of any pole that has heretofore been, or shall be hereafter removed, to remain on any street or public place in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 9-8) 
Sec. 9-10. - Inspection fees. 
All owners, agents or occupants of buildings in the city wherein inspection is required under the ordinances of the city to be made of the electric wires installed therein, and all persons installing wiring for electric light, heat or power in the city shall pay or cause to be paid to the city, inspection fees as fixed by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1967, § 9-9) 
Sec. 9-11. - Notice of work ready for inspection to be in writing. 
When the electrical work for which a permit has been obtained is ready for inspection, notice in writing shall be given to the building official stating the location of the work and the name of the owner or the building contractor. 
(Code 1967, § 9-10) 
Sec. 9-12. - Reinspections; fees. 
If after the first visit to a job on a notice to inspect same, it is necessary to return to reinspect any work whether from defect or the work not being ready, the building official will return only on a written notice; a fee fixed by the council from time to time for doing so will be charged and collected in advance. 
(Code 1967, § 9-11) 
Sec. 9-13. - Payment of fee prerequisite to certificate of inspection. 
All payments for inspections shall be made before the building official shall give a certificate of inspection to the owner, agent or occupant, and such certificate of inspection shall only be given upon the presentation of a receipt from the city for the payment of the amount required by section 9-10. 
(Code 1967, § 9-12) 
Sec. 9-14. - Work to be left open until inspection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lath, seal or in any manner conceal any electrical wiring or equipment in any building under construction or repair until the same has been inspected and the notice posted as required by this article. 
(Code 1967, § 9-14) 
Sec. 9-15. - Wiring to be done after roofing; plumbing roughed in. 
Wire shall not be placed in buildings by the knob and tube or nonmetallic type construction until the roof of the building is on. The parts of the building where the plumbing is planned shall not be wired until the plumbing is roughed in. 
(Code 1967, § 9-15) 
Sec. 9-16. - Certificate of inspection prerequisite to supplying electricity. 
The power company shall not connect and supply electric current to any building unless a certificate of inspection has been issued in proper form. 
(Code 1967, § 9-16) 
Secs. 9-17—9-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—3 of an ordinance adopted July 25, 1988, being not specifically amendatory of the Code, have been treated as superseding provisions formerly codified as Ch. 9, Art. II, §§ 9-33 and 9-34. These former provisions pertained to the electrical code and were derived from provisions presumably enacted during the 1980 codification and from Code 1967, § 9-13. 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-23; fire prevention code, § 10-39 et seq.; gas code, § 11-16 et seq.; heating and air conditioning code, Ch. 13; housing code, Ch. 14; plumbing code, § 22-19 et seq. 

Sec. 9-33. - Adopted. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the desire of Nashville City Council to adopt, in all aspects, the various Georgia codes relating to building, gas, energy, housing, mechanics, plumbing and electricity. The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the City of Nashville, Berrien County, Georgia, relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. The Georgia State Electrical Code is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(c)  Conflicts and effect. Any matters in said code which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed, and this section shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its adoption and publication as provided by law. 
(d)  Transfer of responsibility. Within said code when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, those designated officials of the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88, §§ 1—3) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to establish minimum standards for electrical wiring and equipment and to adopt electrical codes by reference, § 2-9 (ll). 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt state standard codes, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6014—84-6017; authority to continue to operate under other codes or adopt more restrictive provisions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6013, 84-6015. 
Secs. 9-34—9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Electrical contractors, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 84-57. 

Sec. 9-51. - Definition. 
An electrical contracting business, within the provisions of this article, is defined to be a business engaged in by an individual, firm or corporation, to do electrical wiring installations, installation of electric motors, electric fixtures, electric bells or any electric work for purposes of which electric current is utilized for light, heat, power or signal systems. 
(Code 1967, § 9-20) 
Sec. 9-52. - License required for persons doing electrical contracting. 
All persons engaged in an electrical contracting business shall obtain a city license. 
(Code 1967, § 9-19) 
State Law reference— Holder of statewide electrical contractor's license exempt from local examination requirement, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-5716. 
Sec. 9-53. - State license prerequisite for city license. 
No license to do business in the city as an electrical contractor shall be issued by the city clerk except upon presentation of a valid statewide license, and the payment of requisite license fee, as set out in the occupational license fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 9-25) 
State Law reference— Holder of statewide electrical contractor's license exempt from local examination requirement, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-5716. 
Sec. 9-54. - Electrical contractor to have place of business in city; temporary office. 
Every licensed electrical contractor doing business in the city shall have an established place of business within the city, provided that contractors having fixed places of business without the limits of the city may erect a temporary booth or structure to be used as offices, and which shall be maintained as long as such contract work shall be in progress and until such work has been duly inspected and passed by the building official. 
(Code 1967, § 9-24) 
Sec. 9-55. - Work to be done under supervision of licensed electrician. 
(a)  A person holding a valid statewide license shall be deemed to be a certified electrician or electrical contractor, who must obtain a city business license. 
(b)  All work shall be done under the supervision of a certified electrician or electrical contractor; provided, that any firm or corporation, one (1) member or employee of which holds a license issued by the state, shall be authorized to do business in its firm or corporation name, but provided further, that the actual work or installation undertaken shall be under the direct supervision of such certified electrician or electrical contractor. 
(Code 1967, § 9-17) 
State Law reference— Holder of statewide electrical contractor's license exempt from local examination requirement, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-5716. 
Sec. 9-56. - Improper use of licensee's name. 
Any person who shall knowingly permit any other person, not holding a license as provided for in this article, to secure, in the name of such licensee, a permit to do any electrical work of any nature or kind whatsoever in the city, which contract or work shall not be, bona fide, the work, contract or employment of such person holding said license, shall upon proof thereof before the building official, forfeit such license and he shall not thereafter receive a license for a period of one (1) year. 
(Code 1967, § 9-18) 
Chapter 9.2 - ENERGY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Electricity, Ch. 9; heating and air conditioning, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 29. 

Sec. 9.2-1. - Energy code adopted. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the desire of Nashville City Council to adopt, in all respects, the various Georgia codes relating to building, gas, energy, housing, mechanics, plumbing and electricity. The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the City of Nashville, Berriern County, Georgia, relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. The Georgia State Energy Code is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(c)  Conflicts and effect. Any matters in said code which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed, and this section shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its adoption and publication as provided by law. 
(d)  Transfer of responsibility. Within said code when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, those designated officials of the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— Sections 1—3 of an ordinance enacted July 25, 1988, being not expressly amendatory of the Code, have been codified as § 9.2-1 to a new Ch. 9.2 at the discretion of the editor. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to adopt published codes by reference, § 2-9 (nn). 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-23; electrical code, § 9-33; fire prevention code, § 10-39 et seq.; gas code, § 11-16 et seq.; heating and air conditioning code, § 13-1; housing code, § 14-1; plumbing code, § 22-19 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt state standard codes, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6014—84-6017; authority to continue to operate under other codes or adopt more restrictive provisions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6013, 84-6015. 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to prescribe fire safety regulations, § 2-9(kk). 
Cross reference— Fire district, § 5-6; burning of solid waste, § 25-103 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide fire protection services, Ga. Code Ann., § 2-6102; crossing fire hose, Ga. Code Ann., § 68A-1110; following fire apparatus, § 68A-1109. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - State safety fire commissioner; rules and regulations adopted. 
The rules and regulations now and hereafter promulgated for the prevention of destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in this state by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon said Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner by the laws of Georgia (Acts of 1949, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-701 et seq.), are hereby adopted as rules and regulations of this city. 
(Code 1967, § 10-5) 
State Law reference— Inspections by local inspection departments serving as state inspections, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-706. 
Sec. 10-2. - Same—Cooperation by city officials. 
The local fire marshal for this city, when appointed, together with all other city officials, department heads and employees, shall lend their cooperation to the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, state fire marshal and/or his deputies or assistants whenever called upon by him or them in the enforcement of the Georgia Safety Fire Law (Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-701 et seq.) and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 10-6) 
State Law reference— State fire marshal, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-704 et seq.; local fire marshal, § 92A-706. 
Sec. 10-3. - Self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps. 
(a)  Self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps shall be allowed in the city. 
(b)  If the council determines that the operation of self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps will not be injurious to the health or welfare of the residents of the city, it shall grant a license to any applicant that meets the local and state regulations governing same and is not otherwise disqualified by law who shall make application on a form prescribed by the council. The license shall be effective from January 1 to December 31 of each year. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a self-service motor fuel dispensing pump unless he shall have obtained a valid license from the council and an attendant is present at the pump's location. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to motor fuel dispensing units which are not open to the public. 
(Ord. of 4-9-73, § 1; Ord. No. 2-76, 3-8-76) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible materials, § 2-9(vv). 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 23-2713 et seq., 23-9914; Gasoline Marketing Practices Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 106-1101 et seq. 
Sec. 10-4. - Turning on fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city official or employee, to turn on a fire hydrant. 
(Code 1967, § 10-3) 
Secs. 10-5—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Police authority of fire department, § 28-2. 

Sec. 10-21. - Full-time. 
There shall be a full-time fire department. Said fire department is to employ three (3) full-time employees, and one (1) or more of said full-time employees are to be on duty at the said fire department twenty-four (24) hours a day, every day of the year. Said fire department is to employ nineteen (19) volunteer firemen which said volunteer firemen will respond to every fire alarm and participate in fighting any and all fires to be controlled or extinguished by the fire department. 
(Ord. of 9-24-73, § 1) 
Sec. 10-22. - Calls outside city limits. 
The volunteer fire department shall man the county fire equipment under the following provisions: 
(1)  The fire siren will sound in answer to a county fire call, and the county will pay each fireman answering the call the same sum that the city pays. 
(2)  Three (3) firefighters will man the county fire equipment, and the county will pay the sum of five dollars ($5.00) per person per hour after the first hour or portion of an hour. 
(3)  The county will maintain and furnish equipment and supplies for all out-of-town fire calls and will furnish insurance protection for its equipment. 
(4)  The county will help pay for the construction of a new building to house its equipment on a pro rata basis of a five-year contract, the cost of the construction to be determined jointly by the city and the county. 
(Code 1967, § 10-2; Ord. of 3-8-76, § 1-4) 
Sec. 10-23. - User fee for fire department services. 
(1)  The City of Nashville's Fire Department shall initiate user fees for the delivery of fire department services, personnel, supplies, and equipment to the scene of motor vehicle accidents and structure fires. The rate of the user fees shall be that which is the usual, customary and reasonable costs (UCR), which included any services, personnel, supplies and equipment and may fluctuate based on the needs of the accident or fire. 
(2)  The user fees shall be filed upon the motor vehicle insurance, commercial or homeowner's insurance, representing an add-on-cost of the claim for damages of the vehicles, property and/or injuries. The claim costs shall be filed against the insurance coverage of the owner of a vehicle, owner of the property, or responsible party. 
(3)  The City of Nashville's Fire Department, at the option of the governing board for each respective department, are authorized to initiate a user fee for the delivery of fire department services, personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of an oil and hazardous waste incident. The rate of the user fee shall be that which is the usual, customary, and reasonable costs (UCR), which includes any services, personnel, supplies and equipment and may fluctuate based on the needs of the incident. The user fee shall be filed against the vehicle, commercial or homeowner's insurance, representing an add-on-cost of the claim for damages of the property. The claim costs shall be filed upon the insurance coverage of the owner of the property, or responsible party. 
(4)  The respective fire department or their designees are hereby authorized to execute any and all documents and/or implement any and all procedures necessary to effectuate the collection of fees in order to enhance services by the fire department. 
(5)  The city manager and/or finance director may make rules or regulations, and from time-to-time may amend, revoke and add rules and regulations consistent with this section as they deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for these fees or the collection thereof. 
(6)  All amounts collected as a result of this section shall be placed into a fund as established by the city manager to be used exclusively for personnel, supplies and equipment for the fire department. 
(Ord. of 8-10-07, §§ 1—6) 
Secs. 10-24—10-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 10-39. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the "Fire Prevention Code" recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1976 edition thereof, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, a copy of which has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
(Code 1967, § 10-4) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to adopt recognized codes by reference, § 2-9(nn). 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-23; electrical code, § 9-33; gas code, § 11-16; heating and air conditioning code, § 13-1; housing code, § 14-1; plumbing code, § 22-19. 
Sec. 10-40. - Modifications. 
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the codes shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed shall be entered upon the records of the fire department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
Sec. 10-41. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. 
Sec. 10-42. - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
The chief of the fire department shall determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall required permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The chief of the fire department shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
Sec. 10-43. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
Sec. 10-44. - Gasoline storage tanks. 
All storage tanks for the storing of any kind of flammable gas or liquid (gasoline, etc.,) therein and located within the city shall be located no less thank one and one-half (½) feet below the surface of the land except storage tanks belonging to petroleum or gasoline wholesalers who have an unexpired wholesale gasoline or petroleum license from the city. 
(Ord. of 10-12-70, § I) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible materials, § 2-9(vv). 
Chapter 11 - GAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to establish minimum standards for gas installation and equipment and to adopt published codes by reference, § 2-9(ll). 
Cross reference— Utilities generally, Ch. 29; municipal gas utility, § 29-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1—11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GAS CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, Ch. 29. 

Sec. 11-16. - Adopted. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the desire of the Nashville City Council to adopt, in all aspects, the various Georgia codes relating to building, gas, energy, housing, mechanics, plumbing and electricity. The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the City of Nashville, Berrien County, Georgia, relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. The Georgia State Gas Code is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(c)  Conflicts and effect. Any matters in said code which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed, and this section shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its adoption and publication as provided by law. 
(d)  Transfer of responsibility. Within said code when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein; those designated officials of the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— Having not expressly amended the Code, §§ 1—3 of an ordinance enacted July 25, 1988, have been treated as superseding the former provisions codified herein as §§ 11-16—11-19. Said former provisions pertained to the adoption of the gas code, amendments and additions, standards applicable thereto, and conflicts between the gas code and other ordinances, rules and regulations. These provisions were derived from provisions presumably enacted during the 1980 codification and from Code 1967, §§ 19-29, 19-30, 19-38 and 19-40. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to adopt gas codes by reference, § 2-9(ll). 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-23; electrical code, § 9-33; fire prevention code, § 10-39 et seq.; heating and air conditioning code, § 13-1; housing code, § 14-1; plumbing code, § 22-19 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt state standard codes, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6014—84-6017; authority to continue to operate under other codes or adopt more restrictive provisions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6013, 84-6015. 
Secs. 11-17—11-19. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 11-16. 
Sec. 11-20. - Provisions of permit. 
Each permit shall state the kind of work to be performed thereunder and that it shall be unlawful for any person to do or perform any work other than that designated in said permit. Such permit shall also state the location by street and number of the consumer's premises where such work is to be done and shall be valid only for the location so stated. A separate permit shall be issued for each consumer's premises and shall terminate ninety (90) days after issuance unless extended by the gas inspector for good and sufficient cause. 
(Code 1967, § 19-38) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the issuance of permits, § 2-9(s). 
Sec. 11-21. - Effect of permit. 
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for or approval of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other law. No permit purporting to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be valid. 
(Code 1967, § 19-34) 
Sec. 11-22. - Permit where gas not used for one year. 
A new permit shall be required for a consumer's premises which have already been piped for gas but in which no gas has been used for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more. 
(Code 1967, § 19-43) 
Sec. 11-23. - Temporary use of gas. 
When only the temporary use of gas is desired, the building official, upon application, may issue a permit for a temporary use for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, provided that the consumer's gas facility is given a test similar to that required for any facility for which a longer use is contemplated. 
(Code 1967, § 19-35) 
Sec. 11-24. - Emergencies. 
In the event of any emergency endangering the life, health, safety or property of any person and necessitating immediate repairs to any gas facility or gas appliance, the owners of such gas facility or appliance without first obtaining a permit shall take or cause to be taken immediate emergency action for the protection of life, health, safety and property through such appropriate measures as may be required to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions and not later than the next succeeding business day such owner shall apply for a permit as required under this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 19-37) 
Sec. 11-25. - Notice of completion of work. 
When any work done under a permit issued by the building official is completed and ready for inspection, the person to whom the permit has been issued shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after completion, give notice to the building official that the same has been completed and is ready for inspection, and the building official shall cause said work to be inspected within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(Code 1967, § 19-39) 
Sec. 11-26. - Defective work or materials. 
If the inspection shall show that defective materials have been used or defective workmanship has been performed in the construction, installation, alteration, repair or extension of any gas pipe fixture in or on any consumer's premises, such defective materials or work shall be replaced by the permittee within three (3) days, after which the building official shall reinspect the replaced materials or work. 
(Code 1967, § 19-45) 
Sec. 11-27. - Proximity of gas to water line. 
No person shall install a gas service line on consumer's premises in the same ditch as the water service line without written permission of the utilities department. 
(Code 1967, § 19-56) 
Sec. 11-28. - Disconnection of dangerous or defective facilities. 
The building official is authorized to cause to be disconnected any gas facility or appliance connected before a certificate of approval has been issued which upon inspection shall be found defective or in such condition as to endanger life, health and safety or property. In all cases where such disconnection is made a notice shall be affixed thereto and shall state that the same has been disconnected by the building official, together with the reason or reasons therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove said notice or to reconnect said gas facility or appliance until authorized by the building official to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 19-46) 
Sec. 11-29. - Repairs or alterations. 
Repairs or alterations to gas facilities or gas appliances shall be made with such materials, by such methods and according to such standards as are provided for by this chapter for new work except when in the opinion of the building official it is impractical to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 19-52) 
Sec. 11-30. - Exceeding rated capacity. 
In no case shall a gas appliance be fired or adjusted to pass a greater amount of gas than the rated capacity of the particular gas appliance. 
(Code 1967, § 19-51) 
Sec. 11-31. - Unauthorized devices. 
No person shall sell or offer to sell, lease, connect or install within the corporate limits of the city any device purporting to reduce gas consumption when such device is intended as an adjunct or addition to a gas appliance which in any way will reduce the effectiveness of ignition of the gas issuing from the burner or impair the combustion of such burner. 
(Code 1967, § 19-54) 
Sec. 11-32. - Devices for reducing gas consumption. 
No person shall install or use any device intended as an adjunct or addition to a gas appliance or to be suspended above or wholly or partially to enclose any burner of a gas appliance in such manner as to reduce the effectiveness of the ignition of the gas issuing from the burner or impair combustion of said burner. No person shall cause gas supplied by the utilities department to bypass the meter by which the amount of gas supplied by the department is measured. 
(Code 1967, § 19-55) 
Sec. 11-33. - Vents as nuisances. 
No person shall permit or suffer any vent to unduly annoy the residents, occupants or owners of any building in the neighborhood. If such annoyance is caused by any vent, the building official shall cause the vent to be altered, relocated or improved, or carried to such height as may be necessary for the protection of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1967, § 19-48) 
Sec. 11-34. - Conversion of appliances to gas. 
Before a gas supply is furnished by the city to a consumer who has previously been using butane or other liquefied petroleum gases, the city shall properly adjust all appliances to insure safe operation of the burners and proper combustion of the gas. When converting to liquid petroleum gas from natural gas all appliances shall be properly adjusted to insure safe operation of the burner and combustion of petroleum gas. 
(Code 1967, § 19-53) 
Sec. 11-35. - Heating appliance conversion. 
All heating appliances which are converted to gas shall be vacuumed, cleaned and brushed down. 
(Code 1967, § 19-49) 
Sec. 11-36. - Refusal of service. 
The utilities department is authorized to discontinue or refuse to supply gas for any gas facility or gas appliance which it may find to be defective or leaky or in such condition as to endanger life, health, safety or property. In such case, the utilities department shall immediately give written notice of discontinuance or refusal of service to the building official and to the consumers. The building official shall immediately make an investigation of the conditions reported by the utilities department and it shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect said gas facility or appliance until authorized by the building official. 
(Code 1967, § 19-47) 
Sec. 11-37. - City's facility. 
No person, unless in the employ of the city gas system, shall repair, alter or open a gas facility of the city or set or remove a gas service meter or do any other work on the gas supply system of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 19-36) 
Sec. 11-38. - Liability of the city. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee thereof any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas facility or appliance or by any work in connection therewith; nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder or by the issuance of any certificate of approval, permit or license hereunder by the building official. 
(Code 1967, § 19-32) 
State Law reference— Powers, duties and liabilities of cities, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-301 et seq. 
Secs. 11-39—11-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS FITTERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 11-55. - Gas fitter's license. 
No person shall construct, install, extend, alter, repair or improve any gas facility or gas appliance within the city unless such person has first procured a gas fitter's license therefor from the building official as provided in this article. All applications for such license shall be in writing upon forms to be prescribed by the building official. All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire within one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked as herein provided, shall be nontransferable and shall be posted conspicuously to public view in the principal place of business of the licensee. The provisions of this section apply only to such work as is performed on the property or premises of consumers. 
(Code 1967, § 19-64) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to license building trades, § 2-9(ll). 
Sec. 11-56. - License fee. 
The license fee for a gas fitter shall be fixed by the council. 
(Code 1967, § 19-65) 
Sec. 11-57. - Surety bond. 
Before any license is granted to any person under this article there shall be filed with the building official a bond or policy of public liability; such bond or insurance policy shall be written in limits not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) each person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each accident for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each accident for property damage liability and shall include coverage for the hazard of explosion executed by the applicant and a surety company authorized to do business in this state as surety, running to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the licensee of all work in full compliance with all provisions of this article and any person injured by failure of said licensee to comply with the provisions of this article shall have the right of action against the licensee and his surety in his name. Provided, however, that any person wishing to avail himself of the benefits of the surety bond shall commence action thereof within one (1) year after the date of the completion of the work alleged to have been improperly performed. The bond herein required shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next following its approval by the city clerk and thereafter by the first day of January of each year a new bond, in form and substance as herein required, shall be given by such person to cover all work he shall perform during each year. Any such bond shall be approved as to form and legal content by the city attorney. A license as hereinabove provided may be issued upon approval of such surety bond, provided the requirements hereof are fulfilled. 
(Code 1967, § 19-66) 
Sec. 11-58. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
Any license granted under provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked by the building official whenever it shall be made to appear to him that the person to whom the license is issued has violated any of the provisions of this article. In the event the building official shall suspend or revoke said license he shall cause to be served upon the licensee a formal order of suspension or revocation of said license which order shall recite the reason therefor. An appeal from any order of the building official suspending or revoking a license granted hereunder may be taken to the council within five (5) days after service upon the licensee of the order of suspension or revocation. Action by the council upon such revocation or suspension shall be deemed final. The suspension or revocation of a license shall not entitle the licensee to a refund of any unearned portion of the fee paid. Any order provided for in this article shall be served either by delivering a copy personally upon the licensee or by leaving a copy with some person of suitable age and discretion at the place of business of the licensee or, if no person may be found at the place of business of the licensee, by leaving such order in a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of the order to the licensee at his place of business as set forth in his application for a license. 
(Code 1967, § 19-67) 
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to prescribe and enforce health and sanitation standards, § 2-9(hh). 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, Ch. 4; barbers, beauticians and hair dressers to be free from contagious disease, § 15-58; report of treatment of wounds, § 23-15; solid waste, Ch. 25; collection of pet litter, § 25-62; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Code Ann., § 2-6102; immunization of school children, Ga. Code Ann., § 32-911. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of food service establishments, Ga. Code Ann., § 88-1002. 

Sec. 12-16. - Health certificate—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or from the city to engage in the business of serving food or preparing it for the public consumption in or from any cafe, lunch room, lunch stand, boarding house, hotel, mobile food vendor or any other place where the public is invited to enter or be served from; or for any person to engage in the sale or handling of any meats, fish, oyster, soft drinks, ice cream or soda water or to be employed as a cook or nursemaid in a private home, until and after such person shall be examined by the health officer and a certificate furnished him or her establishing his or her freedom from any disease which might be transmissible through the operation of the business or the performance of the work engaged in. 
(Code 1967, § 12-4; Ord. No. O-02-18, 9-10-18) 
Sec. 12-17. - Health certificate—Annual physical. 
Each person engaged in any of the businesses enumerated in this article shall at all times hold a certificate from the health officer showing a physical examination within twelve (12) months of said time and a freedom from contagious disease. 
(Code 1967, § 12-5) 
Sec. 12-18. - Health certificate—In holder's possession; special examination; revocation. 
Each person engaged in any of the enumerated businesses shall at all times, keep his or her certificate of health in his or her possession and submit the same for inspection to any officer of the city when called upon. In addition to provisions hereof, all persons engaged in the business or businesses enumerated in this article shall at all times be subject to further inspection as to the matter in which such business or businesses are conducted, and the health officer shall at all times have the right to require other and special examinations of such persons, in his discretion, and upon examination, he may revoke any certificate previously given to such persons. 
(Code 1967, § 12-6) 
Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
(a)  Commissary shall mean an approved catering establishment, restaurant, or other approved place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. 
(b)  Mobile food vendor shall mean a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a commissary and is readily moveable, is a motorized wheeled vehicle, or a towed wheeled vehicle designed and equipped to serve food. 
(c)  Pushcart shall mean a non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving commissary prepared or prepackaged food and non-potentially hazardous food, unless the equipment is commercially designed and approved to handle food preparation and service. Pushcarts shall not be required to comply with mobile vehicular safety requirements. 
(d)  Temporary food establishment shall mean a retail food establishment, other than a licensed mobile food vendor or pushcart, that is not intended to be permanent and that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than three (3) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(e)  Ice cream truck shall mean a motor vehicle in which ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind are carried for the purpose of retail sale on the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, 9-10-18) 
Sec. 12-20. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food of any type from a commissary, mobile retail food establishment, pushcart or temporary food establishment without a license first having been granted under this section, except for city-sponsored events. 
(b)  An application for a license or a permit hereunder shall be submitted to the city manager or his or her designee setting forth all information required hereunder and in compliance with this ordinance. The city manager or his or her designee shall develop a form of application for the purpose of compliance with this article. 
(c)  The following information shall be provided with each application for a mobile food vendor permit: 
(1)  Name of the mobile food vendor; 
(2)  Make, model, and license plate number of vending unit; 
(3)  Owner's contact information; (cell phone, email address mailing address) 
(4)  Operator's contact information; (cell phone, email address mailing address) 
(5)  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit); 
(6)  Copy of approved permit from the Berrien County Health Department; 
(7)  List of operating locations and times; 
(8)  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property; 
(9)  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, 9-10-18) 
Sec. 12-21. - Prohibited conduct and requirements. 
(a)  Except for ice cream trucks, no mobile food vendor shall conduct business or operate in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  A mobile food vendor shall not operate on any private property without the prior consent of the owner. 
(c)  A mobile food vendor shall maintain a one million-dollar ($1,000,000.00) liability insurance policy. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Georgia, protecting the mobile food vendor, the public and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without thirty (30) days' advanced written notice to the city. 
(d)  Except for ice cream trucks, a mobile food vendor shall not make sounds or announcements to call attention to the mobile food vehicle either while traveling on the public rights-of-way or when stationary. At all times said mobile food vendor shall be in compliance with the City of Nashville noise ordinance. 
(e)  The license under which a mobile food vendor is operating must be firmly attached and visible on the mobile food vendor or pushcart at all times. 
(f)  Any driver of a mobile food vendor motorized vehicle must possess a valid Georgia driver's license. 
(g)  Except for ice cream trucks, mobile food vendors are allowed only in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(h)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk or ten (10) feet of any driveway. 
(i)  No sale or offer for sale shall be made by any mobile food vendor between 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. unless such sale is in conjunction with a city-approved special event or film production permit. 
(j)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(k)  No sale or offer for sale of food ice cream, frozen milk, frozen dairy or ice confection products shall be made from a mobile food vendor unless each side of the vehicle is marked, in letters and numbers at least three (3) inches in height, with the name and address of the mobile food vendor licensee. 
(l)  The mobile food vendor shall comply with all state, federal and local health and safety regulations and requirements and shall obtain and maintain any and all licenses required by any other health, organization or governmental organization having jurisdiction over this subject matter. 
(m)  The following safety regulations shall apply to any and all vehicles operating under this article or used for mobile retail food establishments: 
(1)  Every vehicle shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm with a sound distinguishable from the surrounding noise level. 
(2)  Every vehicle shall be equipped with two (2) rear-vision mirrors, one (1) at each side, firmly attached to the outside of the motor vehicle, and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway to the rear, along both sides of the vehicle. 
(n)  The mobile food vendor may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, 9-10-18) 
Sec. 12-22. - Indemnity. 
As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit set forth herein shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the City of Nashville, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, 9-10-18) 
Sec. 12-23. - Revocation and suspension. 
The city shall have the right to revoke or suspend any license granted hereunder effective immediately which said suspension may be appealed by permittee within ten (10) days to the council. Provided however, said suspension shall remain in effect until over turned upon hearing before the council. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, 9-10-18) 
Sec. 12-24. - Fee. 
The fees for applications for license under this section shall be set by resolution. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, 9-10-18) 
Secs. 12-25—12-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRUGS AND DRUG APPARATUS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Controlled Substances Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 79A-801 et seq. 

Sec. 12-35. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meaning unless the context otherwise requires: 
Apothecary means a licensed pharmacist as defined by the laws of this state and, where the context so requires, the owner of a store or other place of business where narcotic drugs are compounded or dispensed by a licensed pharmacist; but nothing in this article shall be construed as conferring on a person who is not registered nor licensed as a pharmacist any authority, right or privilege that is not granted to him by the pharmacy laws of this state. 
Coca leaves includes cocaine and any compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture or preparation of coca leaves, except derivatives of coca leaves which do not contain cocaine, ecgonine or substances from which cocaine or ecgonine may be synthesized or made. 
Dentist means a person authorized by law to practice dentistry in this state. 
Drugs means coca leaves, opium, isonipecaine, marijuana and every other substance neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from them and any other drugs to which the federal laws regulating narcotic drugs may not apply; and any drug found by the state board of pharmacy to have an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine or cocaine; Methylphenidate NCI (Ritalin); Phencyclindine NCI (PCP); Methylbenzilate; Diethyltryptaimine (DET); N-Methyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate (HCI) (LBJ, JB-336); N-Ethyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCI (JB-318); Benactylzine HCI (DMZ); 3, 4-Methylendedioxy amphetamine HCI (STP, DoM); Dipropyltryptamine (DPT); Chlordiazepoxide (Librium); Asmadore; any drug, which under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (52 Stat. 1040 (1938)), Title 21, United States Code, section 301, or under any law of this state, may be dispensed only upon prescription; any drug which the state board of pharmacy shall determine to be dangerous or detrimental to the public health when taken in accordance to directions. 
Hospital means an institution for the care and treatment of the sick and injured approved by the state board of pharmacy as proper to be intrusted with the custody of narcotic drugs and the professional use of narcotic drugs under the direction of a physician, dentist or veterinarian. 
Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannibis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plants, any other compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
Opium includes morphine, codeine and heroin, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of opium, but does not include apomorphine or any of its salts. 
Physician means a person authorized to practice medicine in this state and any other person authorized by law to treat sick and injured human beings in this state and to use narcotic drugs in connection with such treatment, including osteopaths who are authorized to secure a federal narcotic permit as allowed physicians and other persons. Provided, however, osteopaths shall be allowed to purchase, prescribe, dispense and administer, for the alleviation of pain only, certain narcotic drugs, to-wit: Those narcotic drugs or their derivative, the sale or dispensing of which is regulated by the federal act known as "The Harrison Narcotic Act," as amended, said Act being set out in 26 U.S.C.A., Internal Revenue Code, Section 3220 et seq. 
Veterinarian means a person authorized by law to practice veterinary medicine in this state. 
(Ord. of 4-24-72, § 5) 
State Law reference— Pharmacists, Ga. Code Ann., § 79A-401 et seq.; dentists, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-701 et seq.; medical practitioners, § 84-901 et seq.; veterinarians, § 84-1501 et seq. 
Sec. 12-36. - Unlawful possession of drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a person described in Ga. Code Ann., section 79A-814, under the caption registration requirements, to possess drugs known as: 
(1)  Methylphenidate HCI (Ritalin)  Phencyclidine HCI (PCP)  Methylbenzilate  Diethyltryptamine (DET)  N-Methyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCI (LBJ, JB-336)  N-Ethyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCI (JB-318)  Benactylzine HCI (DMZ)  3, 4-Methylenedioxy amphetamine HCI (MDA)  4-Methyl-2, 5-dimethoxyamphetamine HCI (STP, DOM)  Diprohyltryptamine (DPT)  Chlordiazepoxide (Librium)  Asmadore 
(2)  Any drug which, under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (52 Stat. 1040 (1938)), Title 21, United States Code, Section 301, or under any law of this state, may be dispensed; 
(3)  Any drug which the state board of pharmacy shall determine to be dangerous or detrimental to the public health when taken in accordance to directions; 
unless (1) such drug was obtained upon a valid prescription and is held in the original container in which such drug was delivered; or (2) such drug was delivered by a practitioner in the course of his professional practice and the drug is held in the immediate container in which said drug was delivered. 
(Ord. of 4-24-72, § 4) 
Sec. 12-37. - Unlawful possession of drug apparatus generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any apparatus, device or instrument for the unauthorized use of drugs. Use shall not be unauthorized if authorized by a physician, dentist, veterinarian or hospital. 
(Ord. of 4-24-72, § 1) 
Sec. 12-38. - Hypodermic needles and syringes—Possession. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a dealer in surgical instruments, physician, apothecary, dentist, veterinarian or nurse, attendant or intern of a hospital, sanatorium or institution in which persons are treated for disability or disease, at any time to have, possess or buy a hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe unless said possession or purchase is authorized by the prescription or the certificate of a physician, dentist or veterinarian. It shall be unlawful to sell a hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe unless such sale is authorized by prescription or certificate of a physician, dentist or veterinarian and the prescription or certificate is not to be refilled unless authorized by the prescriber; provided that this action shall not apply if possession, sale or purchase was for a harmless purpose. 
(Ord. of 4-24-72, § 3) 
Sec. 12-39. - Same—Destruction. 
All hypodermic syringes and hypodermic needles must be destroyed when no longer in use for medical purposes, and it shall be unlawful not to destroy them. Hypodermic needles shall be broken off from the hub, glass hypodermic syringes shall be broken and disposable hypodermic syringes shall be incinerated. 
(Ord. of 4-24-72, § 2) 
Secs. 12-40—12-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MODEL GLUE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for this article, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1806. 

Sec. 12-56. - Definition. 
The term "model glue," as used in this article, shall mean any glue, cement, solvent or chemical substitute containing one (1) or more of the following chemicals: acetone, amyl chloride (iso- and tertiary), benzene, carbon disulfide, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, ether, ethyl acetate, ethyl alcohol, ethylene dichloride, isopropyl acetate, isopropyl alcohol, isopropyl ether, methyl acetate, methyl alcohol, propylene dichloride, propylene oxide, trichlorethylene, amyl acetate, amyl alcohol, butyl acetate, butyl alcohol, butyl ether, diethylcarbonate, diethylene oxide (dioxan), dipropyl ketone, ethyl butyrate, ethylene glycol menoethyl ether (cellosolve), ethylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (methyl cellosolve acetate), isobutyl alcohol, methyl amyl acetate, methyl amyl alcohol, methyl isobutyl ketone, or toluene. 
(Ord. of 5-8-72, § II) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1802. 
Sec. 12-57. - Possession, buying, selling or transferring of model glue prohibited. 
No person shall intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession or receive possession of any model glue for the purpose of violating or aiding another person to violate any provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-8-72, § III) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1803. 
Sec. 12-58. - Purchase by minors. 
No person shall sell or transfer possession of any model glue to another person, under eighteen (18) years of age, nor shall any person under eighteen (18) years of age possess or buy any model glue unless purchase is for model building or other lawful use and the person under eighteen (18) years of age has in his possession and exhibits to the seller or transferor the written consent of his parent or legal guardian to make said purchase or take possession of said model glue; provided, any minor who shall transfer possession of said model glue to another minor for model building or other lawful purpose shall not be held criminally liable for failing to require exhibition of the written consent of the transferee-minor's parents or for failing to keep same available for inspection by law enforcement officials. 
(Ord. of 5-8-72, § IV) 
Cross reference— Minors and premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, § 3-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1804. 
Sec. 12-59. - Consent of parent for purchase; records. 
The person making a sale or transfer of possession of model glue to a person under eighteen (18) years of age must require such purchaser to exhibit the written consent of his parent or guardian and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by this article shall be kept available by the seller for inspection by law enforcement officials for a period of six (6) months. 
(Ord. of 5-8-72, § V) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1805. 
Sec. 12-60. - Inhaling. 
No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from any model glue as defined in section 12-56; provided, that this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-8-72, § I) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1801. 
Secs. 12-61—12-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY 

Sec. 12-77. - Cross-connection and contamination of public water supplies. 
(1)  No person shall construct, maintain or operate a physical arrangement whereby a public water system is or may be connected directly or indirectly with a nonpotable water system or non-permitted water system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, liquid, gases, sewage or other waste of unknown or unsafe quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as the results of backflow, bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary, permanent or potential connections through which or because of which back-flow or back-siphonage could or would occur. 
(2)  A supplier of water or any person having possession or control of facilities which may cause the contamination of a public water system has the responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources or any contaminants from entering the public water system by such physical arrangements cited in paragraph (1) of this section. 
(3)  Any person connecting to and purchasing water from a public water system and reselling it to others is considered a supplier of the water so purchased as well as a consumer, and is also responsible for the quality of such water. 
(4)  A supplier shall, when requested by the code enforcement officer for the City of Nashville (hereinafter C.E. Officer), develop a control program for the elimination and prevention of all cross-connections. A written plan for the program shall be submitted to the C.E. Officer for review and approval within two (2) weeks or less in accordance with a written request by the C.E. Officer. When the plan is approved, the owner shall implement the program immediately. 
(5)  The procedures for back-flow and back-siphonage prevention and cross-connection control shall conform to those recommended by the American Water Works Association, Manual 14, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Cross-Connection Manual. 
(6)  The supplier shall require that all backflow prevention assemblies installed pursuant to this section be field tested following installation, repair, or relocation and at least annually thereafter. 
(7)  After December 1, 2006, all required field testing shall be performed by persons who are certified in the testing of backflow prevention assemblies by the Georgia Statewide Backflow Prevention Assembly Certification Program, as approved by the division, the American Backflow Prevention Association (ABPA), the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) or the University of Florida TREEO Center. 
(8)  Gauges used in the testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested for accuracy annually in accordance with the University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control or American Water Works Association Manual 14. Public water systems shall require testers to include test gauge serial numbers on "test and maintenance" report forms and ensure testers have gauges tested for accuracy. 
(9)  Each water supplier shall maintain records of the following for a minimum of three (3) years: 
(a)  Most current hazard assessment, conducted pursuant to Section 608 of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code); 
(b)  Locations and types of backflow protection and associated hazards; 
(c)  Results of all backflow prevention assembly field testing and air gap inspections; and 
(d)  Repairs made to, or replacement or relocation of, backflow protection. 
(10)  Summaries of the information in subsection (9)(a)—(d) shall be available to the C.E. Officer on request for a minimum of three (3) years. 
(11)  The supplier shall ensure that backflow prevention assemblies that fail the field test are repaired or replaced within thirty (30) days. 
(12)  The supplier shall ensure that bypass piping installed around any approved backflow preventer is equipped with a backflow preventer providing an equivalent level of protection. 
(13)  Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in any location subject to possible flooding. This includes pits and/or vaults which are not provided with a gravity drain to the ground's surface that is capable of exceeding the discharge rate of the relief valve. 
(14)  Each supplier shall notify the C.E. Officer of any known incident of backflow into the public water system as soon as possible but no later than the end of the next business day upon discovery of the incident. If requested to do so by the C.E. Officer, the supplier shall submit a written report of the incident describing the nature and severity of the backflow, the actions taken by the water supplier in response to the incident, and the action plan intended to prevent such incidents in the future. 
(15)  The supplier of water shall deny or discontinue water service to a commercial consumer if a required backflow prevention device is not installed or properly maintained. Water service shall not be restored to such premises until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated to the satisfaction of the supplier and the C.E. Officer. Residential connections shall be maintained in accordance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code). 
(16)  To assist in the implementation and enforcement of this section and to ensure that the City of Nashville is aware of all potential contaminating sources, no person, firm, business or other entity recognized under statute law shall own, dig, install, reopen or operate any private well system which may result in contamination of any public water system without first obtaining a private well permit from the C.E. Officer for the City of Nashville. An application for such permit shall be filed with the C.E. Officer on a form provided by the City of Nashville pursuant to procedures established by the C.E. Officer. The permit may be issued within two (2) weeks provided the C.E. Officer determines the proposed well is in compliance with the applicable local, state and federal laws, poses no significant or reasonably definable threat to the public water supply as contemplated herein, and is consistent with the policies and procedures adopted by the city council for the City of Nashville. The cost of such permit shall be $_____. 
(17)  If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this section shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portion of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-11-06, §§ (1)—(17); Ord. of 2-14-11) 
Sec. 12-78. - Outdoor watering of landscape. 
(1)  Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld containers; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration or irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
(2)  Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 1-3-11) 
Chapter 13 - HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Being not specifically amendatory of the Code, the provisions of an ordinance enacted July 25, 1988, have been treated as superseding the provisions of former §§ 13-1 and 13-2, which pertained to the adoption of the Standard Mechanical Code and conflicts between said code and other ordinances, rules and regulations. Sections 13-1 and 13-2 were derived from provisions presumably enacted during the 1980 codification. 
State Law reference— Warm air heating contractors, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-3801 et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - Code adopted. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the desire of Nashville City Council to adopt, in all aspects, the various Georgia codes relating to building, gas, energy, housing, mechanics, plumbing and electricity. The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the City of Nashville, Berrien County, Georgia, relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  Adoption be reference. The Georgia State Mechanical Code is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(c)  Conflicts and effect. Any matters in said codes which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed, and this section shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its adoption and publication as provided by law. 
(d)  Transfer of responsibility. Within said code when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein those designated officials of the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88, §§ 1—3) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to adopt published codes by reference, § 2-9(nn). 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-23; electrical code, § 9-33; fire prevention code, § 10-39 et seq.; gas code, § 11-16 et seq.; housing code, § 14-1; plumbing code, § 22-19 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt state standard codes, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6014—84-6017; authority to continue to operate under other codes or adopt more restrictive provisions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6013, 84-6015. 
Sec. 13-2. - Mechanical fees. 
(a)  Air conditioning: 
(1)  Up to 3 ton ..... $30.00 
(2)  Up to 10 ton ..... 40.00 
(3)  Over 10 ton ..... 50.00 
(4)  Boiler or incinerator ..... 60.00 
(b)  Heat, electric: 
(1)  Up through 10 kw ..... $20.00 
(2)  Over 10 kw through 20kw ..... 30.00 
(3)  Over 20 kw ..... 40.00 
(c)  Heat, gas: 
(1)  Up to 75,000 Btu ..... $20.00 
(2)  75,000 through 125,000 Btu ..... 30.00 
(3)  Over 125,000 through 200,000 Btu ..... 40.00 
(4)  Boiler or incinerator ..... 60.00 
(Ord. of 7-25-88; Ord. of 12-27-05) 
Chapter 14 - HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Being not specifically amendatory of the Code, the provisions of an ordinance passed and adopted July 25, 1988, have been treated as superseding the former provisions of Ch. 14, §§ 14-1 and 14-2, which pertained to the adoption of the housing code and conflict between it and other laws, rules and regulations, and which derived from an enactment presumably done during the 1980 codification and from Code 1967, § 13-1. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide public housing; Ga. Code Ann., § 2-6012. 

Sec. 14-1. - Housing code adopted. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the desire of Nashville City Council to adopt, in all aspects, the various Georgia codes relating to building, gas, energy, housing, mechanics, plumbing and electricity. The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the City of Nashville, Berrien County, Georgia, relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. The Georgia State Housing Code is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(c)  Conflicts and effect. Any matters in said codes which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed, and this section shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its adoption and publication as provided by law. 
(d)  Transfer of responsibility. Within said code when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein those designated officials of the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88, §§ 1—3) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate the construction and repair of housing and to adopt housing codes by reference, § 2-9(ll). 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-23; electrical code, § 9-33; fire prevention code, § 10-39 et seq.; gas code, § 11-16 et seq.; heating and air conditioning code, § 13-1; plumbing code, § 22-19 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt state standard codes, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-6014—84-6017; authority to continue to operate under other codes or adopt more restrictive provisions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6013, 84-6015. 
Chapter 15 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The schedule of license taxes is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to levy license fees and taxes on occupations, § 2-9(r). 
Cross reference— Building contractors, § 5-42 et seq.; electrical contractors, § 9-51 et seq.; gas fitters, § 11-55 et seq.; plumbing contractors, § 22-43 et seq.; license of contract solid waste collectors, § 25-133; taxation generally, Ch. 27. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-1. - Levy of tax. 
For the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of the government of the city, the license taxes specified and listed in the ordinance from which this article is derived are hereby levied and are to be collected for each fiscal year beginning January 1 and ending December 31. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 1) 
Editor's note— The schedule of license taxes is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— License to erect monuments, § 6-5. 
Sec. 15-2. - Violation by company or corporation. 
Should any offender under this article be a company or corporation, resident or nonresident, the officers, agents or representatives of such company or corporation acting for or representing it shall be deemed guilty of any violation by the company or corporation. 
(Code 1967, § 14-4; Ord. of 1-14-74, § 20) 
Sec. 15-3. - Applicability of tax. 
The license taxes are levied against and are to be paid by all persons, whether residents or nonresidents of the city, who may engage in, prosecute, follow or carry on within the corporate limits of the city, either by themselves or through agents or other representatives, any trade, business, calling, vocation or profession specified and scheduled in the ordinance from which this article is derived. The amount of said license tax levied by this article on the respective trades, businesses, callings, vocations and professions, or on persons engaged in, prosecuting or carrying on the same, are set forth in the schedule on file in the office of the city clerk, which schedule is specifically made a part of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 14-9; Ord. of 1-14-74, § 2) 
Sec. 15-4. - Wholesalers selling at retail. 
Operators of trucks paying a wholesale license fee for delivery shall be charged a retail license fee also if they make sales to individuals in competition with merchants. The retail license fee shall be the same as the wholesale license fee. 
(Mo. of 12-29-75) 
Sec. 15-5. - Each location of a business taxed. 
Should any person engage in, prosecute or carry on any trade, business, calling, vocation or profession at different places in the city, each place shall be subject to the license tax herein provided. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 17) 
Sec. 15-6. - Doing business in the city defined. 
Every person operating or maintaining a factory, office, plant or business property of any nature, without the corporate limits of the city, who has an office or place of transacting business, or is represented by an officer, agent, employee or servant, in the city, or who makes deliveries of his products in the city limits, by his automobile or other vehicles or his own servants or agents, or solicits business, or who maintains a city salesman in the city for the purpose of soliciting business, or who does business in the city, by retailing or wholesaling his goods, wares or merchandise, shall register with the city clerk and secure a license as provided by this article and pay the same license tax as paid by any person having a similar factory, office, plant or business within the corporate limits of the city, and in default thereof, the said officers, agents, employees or servants for such person shall be subject to be prosecuted and subject to the same penalties as other persons who fail to register and secure from said city clerk a certificate or license. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 14) 
Sec. 15-7. - All businesses at one location taxed. 
In every case where more than one (1) of the trades, callings, businesses, vocations or professions, which are taxed by the terms of this article, shall be pursued or carried on or practiced in the same place by the same person at the same time, the rate and amount severally prescribed in the schedule regulating the same for each trade, business, calling, vocation or profession, and for each different and separate line and character of goods especially enumerated and set out in said schedule, shall be paid. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 15) 
Sec. 15-8. - Registration with city clerk. 
All persons who may engage in, prosecute, follow or carry on any of the trades, businesses, callings, vocations or professions listed in the tax schedule shall, prior to entering upon or continuing such trades, businesses, callings, vocations or professions, register with the city clerk their names together with the trade, business, calling, vocation or profession in which they are engaged, or propose to engage. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 3) 
Sec. 15-9. - Failure to register. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any person to register with the city clerk and pay the license tax when due as provided in this article, said city clerk shall, from the best information obtainable, register the same, and such registration when made shall have all the force and effect as if the defaulting person had duly registered as provided in section 15-8 of this article. There shall be a ten-percent penalty for payment after January first. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of thirty (30) days after such default, or sooner if said city clerk deems necessary to protect the interest of the city, he shall issue a fi fa for the amount of said license tax with interest, as other tax fi fas in favor of the city are issued; thereupon, said city clerk shall turn the same over to the chief of police and it shall be his duty to force collection of the same by levy and sell the same as other tax fi fas in favor of the city. Said city clerk and chief of police shall be entitled to and there shall be paid to them the same items of cost as on other fi fas issued by the city. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, §§ 9, 10) 
State Law reference— Executions, Ga. Code Ann., Title 39, § 81A-169. 
Sec. 15-10. - Misrepresentation. 
Any person who shall use any deceitful means or misrepresentation in the obtaining of a license or permit from the city to do business in the city, shall be guilty of violating this article. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 11) 
State Law reference— Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 106-701 et seq. 
Sec. 15-11. - Fraudulent claim of indigence or disability. 
Any person who shall fraudulently and deceitfully use the official certificate of any indigent or disabled veteran of any war, or blind person, issued to such indigent or disabled veteran of any war, or blind person, under a statute of the state, for the purpose of peddling or conducting any business as provided by the laws of the state, shall be guilty of violating this article. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 12) 
State Law reference— Disabled veterans and blind persons to peddle or conduct business or profession without license, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-2011 et seq.; fraudulent claim of exemption from state tax, Ga. Code Ann., § 92-9922; deceit as giving right of civil action, Ga. Code Ann., § 105-302. 
Sec. 15-12. - Taxation of businesses not specified in schedule. 
All local and itinerant traders, canvassers or agents and all other persons not specifically mentioned in this article shall, before entering upon, engaging in, prosecuting or carrying on any trade, business, calling, vocation or profession in the city, register with the city clerk and secure a certificate or license as provided by this article and pay to said city clerk a license tax fixed by the council for the fiscal period. Provided, however, should any person deem said license tax excessive, upon such person filing with said city clerk an affidavit as to the exact nature of the trade, business, calling, vocation or profession proposed to be engaged in, prosecuted or carried on, it shall be the duty of said city clerk to forthwith notify the chairman of the licenses and business regulations committee, who may immediately convene said committee in extra session for the purpose of fixing a reasonable license tax, or same may be taken up at a regular meeting of the city council, whose findings shall be final. 
(Code 1967, §§ 14-6—14-8; Ord. of 1-14-74, § 16) 
Sec. 15-13. - Issuance of certificate or license. 
Upon the persons registering with the city clerk as provided in this article, said city clerk shall issue to said person so registering a certificate or license certifying that such person has paid the license tax, said certificate or license to be in such form as said city clerk may determine; provided, however, the same shall be signed by him as such city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 4) 
Sec. 15-14. - Conditions for issuance of certificate or license. 
The city clerk shall issue a certificate or license only: 
(1)  When satisfied that the business, trade, calling, vocation or profession does not, and will not, violate the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city; and 
(2)  Upon the fulfillment of the registration requirements of this article; and 
(3)  Upon the payment of the license tax levied by this article. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 5) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A. 
Sec. 15-15. - Oath of licensee. 
The city clerk may administer an oath to all persons taking out a license under this article or cause the same to be administered in his presence, as to the nature of the trade, business, calling, vocation or profession proposed to be engaged in, prosecuted or carried on; and where the amount of the license tax levied by this article depends upon amount or quantity, said oath shall also include statements necessary to determine or arrive at the license tax to be paid; and if the person applying for such license is acting for or on behalf of any firm, company or corporation, such person shall state his connection with such firm, company or corporation, and said city clerk shall be satisfied that such person has authority to represent such firm, company or corporation and has knowledge of the facts of which he deposes. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 13) 
Cross reference— Duties of city clerk generally, § 2-44. 
Sec. 15-16. - Payment of tax; interest; returned checks. 
The license taxes are due and payable in advance, the same to be due and payable to the city clerk at the time of registration or when such registration should have been made; and said license tax, if not paid when due, shall bear interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum from March first of the year of issue, or from the date of beginning business in the city if said business is begun after March first. There will be an automatic penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the license fee in any instance where a check given in payment of said license is returned to the city clerk by the bank on which it is drawn for any reason whatsoever. 
(Code 1967, § 14-5; Ord. of 1-14-74, § 6) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to add interest to taxes not paid when due, § 7-3. 
State Law reference— Criminal issuance of a bad check, Ga. Code Ann., § 26-1704. 
Sec. 15-17. - Commencement of business after August first. 
No license will be issued for less than one (1) year, except after August first, at which time when any new business is started, the license may be issued on the basis of six (6) months, except as otherwise specified in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 14-2; Ord. of 1-14-74, § 7) 
Sec. 15-18. - Posting or carrying of certificate or license; inspection. 
Every person to whom a certificate or license is issued by the city clerk under authority of this article shall post the same in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which the same was issued or on the premises where the trade, business, calling, vocation or profession covered by said certificate or license may be engaged in, prosecuted, followed or carried on by the person to whom the same was issued, and in the event he should have or maintain no such place, he shall at all times have and carry the same with him while engaging in, prosecuting, following or carrying on his trade, business, calling, vocation or profession; said certificate or license is at all times subject to be inspected by and on demand of the chief of police or of anyone of the police force. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 8) 
Charter reference— Enforcement of ordinances by members of police department, § 5-7. 
Sec. 15-19. - Authority of chief of police. 
The chief of police shall have full authority to stop vehicles and/or work or carrying on of business in any manner, to impound any vehicle or machinery being used in violation of this article and/or arrest any violator of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 9) 
Charter reference— Arrest powers of police include hot or fresh pursuit, § 5-7. 
Cross reference— Police department, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Arrest, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 27-2, Ch. 27-8. 
Sec. 15-20. - Transfer of certificate. 
A certificate or license issued by the city clerk under the authority of this article may be transferred as assigned, except as noted in the schedule of taxes, provided the person conducts the business for which the license was issued at the same place and pays to said city clerk ten (10) percent of the amount of the license tax provided in this article for the carrying on of said business. If the business is moved to a different location, with the same owner and operators, the license may also be transferred to said new location by notifying the city clerk or the city clerk's office. In the event that the proper authorities are not notified, an additional ten (10) percent fee shall be charged for the transfer. 
(Code 1967, § 14-3; Ord. of 1-14-74, § 7) 
Sec. 15-21. - License valid for only one calendar year. 
No business or professional license to operate within the city shall have an extent of coverage to exceed a single calendar year. 
(Code 1967, § 14-1) 
Sec. 15-22. - Suspension or revocation. 
All licenses, permits or other authority to engage in, prosecute or carry on any trade, business, calling, vocation or profession for which a license tax is levied by this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the council if and when the council may find or determine that the same is being used for a purpose not intended, or that it is in the public interest of the city that same be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 18) 
Sec. 15-23. - Farm products. 
While the legal right of the producer to sell the product of his own farm is distinctly recognized, this right shall not be construed so as to authorize any person to purchase goods or produce or other things of value within or without the city and bring the same within the city and offer same for sale to either merchants or customers. He shall be deemed a peddler and shall be required to obtain a license as such, whether he offers for sale eggs, chickens, farm products or other things of value. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 23) 
State Law reference— Farm products exempt from taxation, Ga. Code Ann. § 92-201. 
Sec. 15-24. - Proceedings under prior ordinance. 
So much, and such parts of ordinances heretofore passed as provided for the issuing and enforcement of execution for and tax assessment, or part of tax assessment, required by any such ordinance, and now remaining unpaid, shall continue and remain in force so as to authorize the issuance of such execution, and the collection of the same, until such taxes or assessments shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74, § 22) 
State Law reference— Executions, Ga. Code Ann., Title 39, § 81A-169. 
DIVISION 2. - OCCUPATION TAXES, ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND REGULATORY FEES 

Sec. 15-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meaning. 
Administrative fee: The component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
City: The City of Nashville. 
Employee: An individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Location or office: A fixed place located within the City of Nashville from which a person conducts business, but shall not include a work site located in the city for less than six (6) months for the purpose of serving a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax: A tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the City of Nashville. 
Occupation tax certificate: A document issued by the City of Nashville acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations: Those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. section 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee: A fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city. 
Regulatory fee certificate: A document issued by the City of Nashville acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1; Ord. of 12-11-95) 
Sec. 15-26. - Administrative fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-27. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in Appendix A must pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth in Appendix A. 
(b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this division shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or city clerk upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Editor's note— Appendix A referred to above has not been included herein but can be found on file for inspection in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 15-28. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the State of Georgia is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporated limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the State of Georgia in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one (1) occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this division shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business' or practioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business or practitioner which has locations in Georgia subject to occupation tax by more than one (1) local government in Georgia shall only be subject to occupation tax by the City of Nashville for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s). 
(4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one (1) municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later then December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this division only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1; Ord. of 8-22-05) 
Sec. 15-29. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this division shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-30. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this division shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 15-28 above or shall pay an occupation tax of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per practitioner. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1; Ord. of 8-22-05) 
Sec. 15-31. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carries pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within ninety (90) days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this division shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-32. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state license before the city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-33. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-34. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before December 31 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this occupation tax ordinance shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within thirty (30) days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee(s). 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-35. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under article 4 of chapter 18 of title 50 of the Official Code of Georgia. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order of for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-36. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this division shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this division which is unpaid for ninety (90) days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-37. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this division, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this ordinance and to summon violators of this division to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioner for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owning. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one (1) percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by city clerk of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed to, entitled to have or collect any fees or charged whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this division shall be subject to a fine and penalties. 
(e)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business. 
(f)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this division shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person or business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain, make a return for, or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-38. - Public hearing. 
After January 1, 1996, the city shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in section 15-28. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-39. - Prior ordinance. 
To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this one, such amount remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 15-40. - Severability. 
In the event any portion of this division shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the city council of the City of Nashville that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this division which shall remain in full force and effect as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally part of the division. 
(Ord. of 12-27-94, § 1) 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-41. - Nursery schools. 
Whenever more than six (6) children are kept as a home occupation, the location shall be deemed a nursery school for the purposes of city ordinances, and a license for such occupation shall be required. 
(Mo. of 1-28-74) 
Editor's note— The amount of the license tax is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Immunization of children attending day-care centers, Ga. Code Ann., § 99-223. 
Sec. 15-42. - Drive-in movies. 
No open-air theater shall be permitted in the city unless it is equipped with individual speakers set up at each parking space, and the volume then toned down to such a degree that it will not disturb the citizens living in that immediate vicinity. The license for this type theater is to be the same as that charged for a theater in a building. 
(Code 1967, § 14-23) 
Editor's note— The license tax schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 15-43. - Auctions in public, open places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell at public auction or outcry any kind of new or secondhand cloth, clothing, hats, shoes, merchandise, notions, wares or anything else of value on the streets, lanes, alleys or vacant lots of the city. 
(b)  All auctioneers or other persons selling at public outcry or auctioning anything by any method known shall conduct said business in an enclosed space other than a warehouse, in the city and shall pay to the city a license tax fixed by the council and the license shall be procured and tacked over the door where such business is carried on each morning before said business is begun for the day. 
(Code 1967, § 14-29) 
Editor's note— The amount of the license tax is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Auctioneers and apprentice auctioneers, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-301a et seq., jewelry auctions, § 84-1701 et seq. 
Sec. 15-44. - Sunday closing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, or the agent, servant or employee of any person, to keep open, operate or participate in keeping open or operating any place or premises, whether open or enclosed, for the purpose of selling, bartering, exchanging or demonstrating, exhibiting or negotiating for sale, barter or exchange, within the corporate limits of the city, on the first day of the week, commonly called Sunday, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The following trades, businesses and enterprises are exempted from the provisions of this section, subject to the conditions herein provided: 
(1)  Drugstores wherein doctors' prescriptions are filled, or wherein medical supplies are sold; 
(2)  Restaurants, cafes, lunchrooms, coffee shops, dining rooms and similar places wherein food is prepared and served for human consumption; 
(3)  Ice cream parlors; 
(4)  Automobile filling stations and garages; 
(5)  Motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Landscape nurseries; 
(7)  Neighborhood food stores, curb stores, minute markets and similar establishments; 
(8)  Sale of newspapers, magazines and books; 
(9)  Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
(c)  The exemptions hereinabove provided shall apply only to those establishments which employ not more than three (3) full- or part-time personnel working at any one time on Sunday, including the owner and operator of such establishment. 
(d)  The following trades, businesses and enterprises are hereby exempted from the operation of this section: 
(1)  Hospitals; 
(2)  Medical and dental clinics; 
(3)  Funeral homes; 
(4)  Hotels, motels and places of lodging. 
(Code 1967, § 14-21) 
Cross reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages prohibited on Sundays, § 3-7. 
State Law reference— Violating the Sabbath day, Ga. Code Ann., § 26-9908; Sunday operation of businesses, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 106-801 et seq., 106-9912. 
Secs. 15-45—15-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BEAUTY AND BARBERSHOPS 

Sec. 15-56. - Scope of division. 
This division shall apply to any person within the city operating a barbershop, beauty parlor or beauty salon or as a hairdresser, or operating the same in a private dwelling. 
(Code 1967, § 14-54) 
State Law reference— Barbers, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 84-4; cosmetologists, Ch. 84-44. 
Sec. 15-57. - City license required. 
The owners and operators of a barbershop, beauty shop or beauty salon, and hairdressers, shall secure a special city license annually, on the first day of January, from the city clerk, to operate a barbershop, beauty shop or beauty salon or as a hairdresser within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 14-55) 
Sec. 15-58. - State certificate or license prerequisite to issuance of license; freedom from contagious disease. 
The owners and operators, at the time of application for a city license, shall furnish the city clerk a statement in writing that all barbers, beauticians and hairdressers, practicing in the shop for which the license is to be used, shall have a state license or certificate of registration to practice the occupation of a barber, beautician or hairdresser and that all barbers, hairdressers and beauticians are at the time of application free from contagious and infectious diseases. 
(Code 1967, § 14-56) 
Secs. 15-59—15-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 15-70. - Definitions. 
Taking orders for anything whatsoever, except religious items, for future delivery or shipment, or seeking donations or information, shall be deemed canvassing or soliciting. If deliveries are made the license for salesmen will apply as covered in the license tax schedule on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 14-35) 
State Law reference— Peddlers regulated, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 84-20. 
Sec. 15-71. - Registration generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor, calling at or telephoning to residences, offices or businesses without the previous consent of the occupant, for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or business of any kind, or seeking for information or donations, without first having registered at the city hall with the city clerk or his designated authority. Each registrant shall be required to fill out a registration form giving complete identification, signature, name of employer, product sold, manufacturer of products or name of organization he is representing and proposed method of operation in the city, and such other identification or information as may be requested. 
(Code 1967, § 14-37) 
Sec. 15-72. - Registration fee. 
Each registrant shall pay to the city clerk or his designated representative a registration fee fixed by the council. 
(Code 1967, § 14-38) 
Editor's note— The amount of the registration fee is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 15-73. - Identification card; issuance; use. 
Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and who pays the registration fee provided shall be furnished an identification card indicating he has registered and showing the expiration date. Each person shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the registration card and shall exhibit same whenever requested to do so by any municipal authority or by any person being solicited. Possession of this registration card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 14-39) 
Sec. 15-74. - Revocation of card, permit. 
Any identification card or permit may be revoked by the city clerk or the chief of police or their designated representative because of any violation by the registrant (or any one (1) of a group of registrants) of this division, or of any ordinance of the city, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and good character required in this division for the original registration. 
(Code 1967, § 14-40) 
Sec. 15-75. - Hours of soliciting. 
There shall be no soliciting before 8:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m. 
(Code 1967, § 14-41) 
Sec. 15-76. - Applicability of provisions. 
Nothing in this division shall apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal governments or the school system or any subdivision thereof, when an official business; nor shall it apply to any person holding a regular business license in the city; nor to any local nonprofit organization such as boy scouts, civic clubs, school organizations and the like, when the membership of said club or organization does the soliciting itself; but it shall apply when the soliciting is done by a paid solicitor or by a solicitor on contract with an organization with only a percentage or portion of any sales or collections to go to the benefit of said nonprofit club or organization. 
(Code 1967, § 14-36) 
Secs. 15-77—15-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, THEATRICAL TROUPES 

Sec. 15-88. - Approval of council. 
(a)  Any person desiring to have a permit for a circus, carnival or theatrical performance shall apply in writing to the council for such permit. 
(b)  Such permit shall be issued upon the approval of a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the council. 
(Code 1967, § 14-63) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate theatrical performances, § 2-9(uu). 
Sec. 15-89. - Time of carnivals. 
(a)  All carnivals are hereby prohibited from showing in the city during the months of July, August, September and October, except at fairs that are sponsored by local or civic organizations, and then only by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the mayor and council. 
(b)  This section shall apply to carnivals and shows that have merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels, rides, concessions, etc. 
(Code 1967, § 14-62) 
Secs. 15-90—15-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FIREARM AND WEAPON SALES 

Sec. 15-101. - Compliance by seller. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell to any purchaser any pistol, dirk or switch-blade knife without complying with sections 15-102 and 15-103. 
(Ord. No. 9-76, § I, 6-28-76) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate or prohibit the sale of firearms, § 2-9(vv). 
Sec. 15-102. - Statement required from purchaser. 
The merchant or dealer from whom a prospective buyer shall seek to purchase a pistol, dirk or switch-blade knife shall, before making a sale to such prospective purchaser, obtain from such prospective purchaser his name, place of residence, age, occupation and a statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime of violence or charged with the violation of criminal law in this or any other state. 
(Ord. No. 9-76, § I, 6-28-76) 
Sec. 15-103. - Information furnished to police department. 
It shall be the duty of the merchant or dealer promptly to deliver to the police department a duplicate of the questions propounded to the purchaser of a pistol, dirk or switch-blade knife, together with a duplicate of the answers made by him, all as recorded in the printed form provided therefor. Where such a sale is made, a description of the item sold, including serial number, if any, shall be entered on said form by said seller in the place provided. 
(Ord. No. 9-76, § I, 6-28-76) 
Cross reference— Police department, Ch. 23. 
Secs. 15-104—15-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HOTEL-MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 8, 2009, enacted new provisions to be designated §§ 15-220—15-231. Inasmuch as there already exists sections with these designations, the new provisions have been redesignated as §§ 15-115—15-126. Original section numbering has been maintained in the history notes following each section. 

Sec. 15-115. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date of occupancy, and the amount of rent charged for each date, together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method of payment. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guestroom or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for more than ten (10) continuous days next preceding such date. No person shall become a permanent resident until such person shall have occupied a guestroom in a hotel for more than ten (10) continuous days. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the state, and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-220) 
Sec. 15-116. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five (5) percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 15-118. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-221) 
State Law reference— Hotel-motel tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 15-117. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator renting guestrooms in this city shall collect a tax of five (5) percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 15-118. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other taxes applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-222) 
Sec. 15-118. - Exemptions. 
The tax levied by this article shall be subject to the exemptions provided by law. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-223) 
State Law reference— Exemptions generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51 et seq. 
Sec. 15-119. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the finance director on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date that the ordinance from which this article is derived becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business, and other information that would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the finance director. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person. In case of ownership by an association or partnership, the registration shall be signed by a member or partner. In case of ownership by a corporation, the registration shall be signed by an officer. The finance director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate of authority shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-224) 
Sec. 15-120. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  Failure to pay tax by due date. When a person fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, and an additional five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction of thirty (30) days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent or twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in the aggregate, whichever is greater. If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the finance director, and if an affidavit form is attached to the return and if remittance is made within ten (10) days of the due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of such penalties and interest. In case of a false or fraudulent return or a failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(b)  Included as revenue. All civil penalties and interest added to any tax imposed under this article and collected by the city shall be included as revenue derived from such tax for purposes of expenditure requirements imposed upon the city as provided or required by state law. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-225) 
State Law reference— Payment of tax to city, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.2; due date of taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.6; commission for dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 15-121. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director is not satisfied with the returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the finance director may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the possession of the finance director or that may come into the possession of the finance director. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. The penalty and interest for failure to pay tax based upon a recomputation as authorized pursuant to this section shall be the same as that provided in section 15-120. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of notice. The finance director shall give to the operator written notice of the finance director's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-226) 
Sec. 15-122. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return and pay the tax as provided in this article, or makes a grossly incorrect return, or makes a return that is false or fraudulent, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information that is or may come into the possession of the finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 15-121(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. The penalty and interest for failure to pay tax based upon a recomputation as authorized pursuant to this section shall be the same as that provided in section 15-120. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-227) 
Sec. 15-123. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes to be liens. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and in addition to any and all other remedies that the city may have with respect to the collection of delinquent taxes under this article, such taxes shall be a lien upon the real and personal property of the person obligated to pay such tax, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as are other liens for taxes owed to the city. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, he shall make a final return and payment of taxes owed under this article within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. Such seller's successors or assigns, if any, shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover the amount of the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this article and unpaid until the seller produces either a receipt from the city showing that the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this article have been paid, or a certificate from the city stating that no tax, interest, or penalty is due hereunder. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase as required by this section, he shall be personally liable for the payment of any taxes, interest, and penalties accruing under this article and unpaid by the former owner. The personal liability of the purchaser in such a case shall not exceed the amount of the total purchase money, but the property being transferred shall in all cases continue to be subject to the full amount of the tax lien arising from the delinquency of the former owner. Paid executions may be transferred and enforced as otherwise provided by law. 
(d)  Credit for tax, penalty, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the finance director. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the finance director, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the finance director, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-228) 
Sec. 15-124. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of finance director. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting a guestroom in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption, and such other documents or books of account as the finance director may prescribe, and in such form as the finance director may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or any person authorized by her in writing may examine, at all reasonable hours, the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms, and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Any examination by the city of the records of a person for the purposes of this article shall be based primarily upon the most recent sales tax audit report on the hotel as may be furnished pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-2-16. Information secured by the city and its employees incident to any such examination shall be confidential and privileged to the same extent as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-15. 
(d)  Authority to retire reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the finance director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guestrooms that are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when required by said official and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the finance director may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-229) 
Sec. 15-125. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect, or refuse to collect the tax provided in this article, either by himself, or through his agents or employees. In addition to the penalty of being liable for or paying the tax himself, any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person required by this article to make, render, sign, or verify any return to make a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax levied by this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person subject to this article to fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made by this article or to fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city under this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person subject to this article to fail to keep records or fail to open records to inspection as require by law. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any other provision of this article for which punishment is not otherwise provided. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-230) 
Sec. 15-126. - Proceeds of the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
(Ord. of 6-8-09, § 15-231) 
Sec. 15-127. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 15-128. - Display of license in vehicle. 
Each city taxicab license must be framed and conspicuously displayed within the interior of the vehicle to which it applies. 
(Ord. No. 1-76, 3-8-76) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate and license vehicles operated for hire, § 2-9(y). 
Sec. 15-129. - Applicability of license to vehicles; fees. 
All taxicab licenses shall be nontransferable and not interchangeable between vehicles operated by the same ownership, for which reason the specific identification number of the license granted to a particular vehicle shall be painted or otherwise affixed to the exterior of the commercial vehicle to which it was issued. The license fees shall be fixed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1-76, 3-8-76) 
Editor's note— The amount of license fees is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 15-130. - Identification of vehicles. 
Each vehicle for hire shall be clearly marked "Taxi" for identification and better supervision by the police. 
(Ord. No. 1-76, 3-8-76) 
Sec. 15-131. - Operating taxi under the influence of alcohol. 
Any driver operating his taxi under the influence of alcohol shall have his license automatically revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1-76, 3-8-76) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Drivers with ability impaired by alcohol or drugs, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 68A-902, 68A-902.1. 
Secs. 15-132—15-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - TRANSIENT OR ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1-82, §§ 1—11, enacted Dec. 13, 1982, enacted the provisions codified as Div. 8, §§ 15-143—15-152, above. Since said ordinance did not specifically enact an amendment or addition to the Code, the manner of codification has been at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations applicable to canvassers and solicitors, § 15-70 et seq. 

Sec. 15-143. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor as defined in section 15-144 of this division to engage in such business within the City of Nashville without obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 1, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-144. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor is defined as any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, and who displays samples, model goods, wares or merchandise in any lot, building, room or structure of any kind whether fixed or mobile and who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering such goods, wares or merchandise. Provided that such definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation, who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. Provided further that such definition shall not be construed to include any organization, firm or corporation, who is a nonprofit service organization or charity. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this division merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. Provided further that such definition shall not be construed to include any person having a yard sale or garage sale where such person displays and sells merchandise belonging to such person and provided that such sale is held on property owned by such person. Provided further that such definition shall not be construed to include any person displaying and selling perishable goods or produce within the City of Nashville, provided such person is a resident of Berrien County, Georgia, and provided that such perishable goods or produce shall have been grown by such person. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 2, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-145. - Application. 
Applicants for license under this division, whether a person, firm or corporation shall file a written sworn application, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation, with the city clerk, showing: 
(a)  The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated; 
(b)  At least three (3) letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the County of Berrien, Georgia, certifying as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of the city clerk the good character and business responsibility of such person or persons; 
(c)  The place or places in the City of Nashville where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted; 
(d)  The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where applicant within the six (6) months next preceding the date of said application conducted a transient business stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted; 
(e)  A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by applicant in the City of Nashville, the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise; whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or from stock in possession and by sample, at auction, by direct sale or by direct sale and by taking orders for future delivery; where the goods or property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed; 
(f)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by the city clerk, copies of all said advertising whether by handbills, circular, newspaper advertising or otherwise shall be attached to said application as exhibits thereto; 
(g)  Whether or not the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor; 
(h)  Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposed to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative; and 
(i)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the city clerk may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this division in the protection of the public good. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 3, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-146. - Investigation and issuance. 
Upon receipt of such application, the city clerk shall cause such investigation of such person's or persons' business responsibility or moral character to be made as he deems necessary to the protection of the public good. Issuance of license shall be solely within the discretion of the city clerk; provided, that under no circumstances shall a license be issued unless the applicant has complied fully with the provisions of this statute. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 4, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-147. - Bond. 
Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this division, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a bond running to the City of Nashville in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) executed by the applicant as principal, and by a corporate insurance or bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, as surety, said bond to be approved by the city clerk conditioned that said applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Nashville and the statutes of the State of Georgia, regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against said applicant for any violation of said ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person or persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether said misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents, or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through an advertisement of any character whatsoever printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the aggrieved person. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 5, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-148. - Service of process. 
Before any license, if herein provided, shall be issued for engaging in business as an itinerant merchant as herein defined in the City of Nashville, such applicant shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk, or the person performing the duties of such position, his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of said applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under said license and the bond given as required by section 15-147 of this division or for the performance of the conditions of said bond or for any breach thereof, which said instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that said applicant for said license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to be valid as if personally served upon the person or persons applying for the license under this division, according to the law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason on such acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the city clerk shall send to the licensee at his last-known address, by registered mail, a copy of said process. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 6, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-149. - Exhibition of license. 
The license issued under this division shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons applying for said license shall desire to do business in more than one (1) place within the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 7, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-150. - Fees and transfer. 
(a)  Licensees under this division shall pay a license fee equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day upon which business will be conducted under this division. 
(b)  No license shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 8, 9, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-151. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this division may be revoked by the city council of the city, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise; 
(3)  Any violation of this division; 
(4)  Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting the business licensed under this division in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be served on the licensee by handing the same personally to the person in charge of the licensed business, or by mailing the same, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at his last-known address, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  The giving of such notice shall suspend the license pending the outcome of the hearing, and business operations under the license shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 10, 12-13-82) 
Sec. 15-152. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the terms of this division, or violating any of its provisions, shall be punished as provided in section 6 of Ordinance 2-74 of the City of Nashville. 
(Ord. No. 1-82, § 11, 12-13-82) 
Secs. 15-153—15-162. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - LIFE INSURERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2-83, §§ 1—6, adopted Dec. 12, 1983, enacted the provisions codified as Div. 9, §§ 15-163—15-168, above. Since said ordinance did not provide for the exact number of inclusion of its provisions into Code, the manner of codification has been at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Taxation generally, Ch. 27. 

Sec. 15-163. - License fees—Generally; "insurer" defined. 
(a)  There is hereby levied each year an annual license fee upon each life insurer doing business within the City of Nashville in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00). For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 15-164, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00). 
(b)  For the purposes of this division, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). 
(Ord. No. 2-83, § 1, 12-12-83; Ord. of 12-13-93, § 1) 
Sec. 15-164. - Same—For life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing, and, in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of fourteen dollars ($14.00) per location for each year. 
(Ord. No. 2-83, § 2, 12-12-83) 
Sec. 15-165. - Same—Life insurance agencies, independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00) upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 15-163 hereof for each such location within the City of Nashville in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2-83, § 3, 12-12-83; Ord. of 8-22-05; Ord. of 2-27-06) 
Sec. 15-166. - Gross premiums tax—Imposed on life insurers; term defined. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the City of Nashville in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
(b)  "Gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 15-163 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2-83, § 4, 12-12-83) 
Sec. 15-167. - Same—All other insurers; term defined. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the City of Nashville in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(b)  "Gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Ord. No. 2-83, § 5, 12-12-83) 
Sec. 15-168. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in Sections 15-163 through 15-165 of this division shall be due and payable on the first day of March, 1984, and on March first of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2-83, § 6, 12-12-83) 
Secs. 15-169—15-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Being not expressly amendatory of the Code, the provisions of §§ 1—3 of Ord. No. 3-83, enacted Dec. 28, 1983, have been codified, at the editor's discretion, as Div. 10, §§ 15-179—15-182. 

Sec. 15-179. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.11% of the gross receipts of said institutions as defined. Notwithstanding any other provision of this division the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depositor financial institutions pursuant to this division shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 3-83, § 1, 12-28-83) 
Sec. 15-180. - "Gross receipts" defined. 
For purposes of this division, "gross receipts" shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized below during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by the division is due. 
(Ord. No. 3-83, § 2, 12-28-83) 
Sec. 15-181. - Items included in the calculation of and deducted from gross receipts. 
(a)  Banks. Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
(1)  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(2)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
(3)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
(4)  Interest on other bonds, notes and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the State of Georgia or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States; 
(5)  Dividends on stocks; 
(6)  Income from direct lease financing; 
(7)  Income from fiduciary activities; 
(8)  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
(9)  Other service charges, commissions and fees; and 
(10)  Other income. 
(b)  Savings and loan associations. Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
(1)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others; 
(2)  Interest on mortgages, participations or mortgage-backed securities; 
(3)  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
(4)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
(5)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the State of Georgia or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(6)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
(7)  Loan fees; 
(8)  Loan servicing fees; 
(9)  Other fees and charges; 
(10)  Gross income from real estate owned operations; 
(11)  Net income from office building operations; 
(12)  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
(13)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
(14)  Miscellaneous operating income; 
(15)  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans and other assets; and, 
(16)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(c)  Deductions from gross receipts. The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section: 
(1)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
(2)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to Article 5(a) of Chapter 1 of Title 7 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; 
(3)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
(4)  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia; and 
(5)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (2), (3), and (4) of this paragraph, any deductions taken under subsection (1) of this paragraph shall be reduced by the same proportions that the deductions in subsections (2) through (4) of this paragraph bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (1) through (4) above. 
(Ord. No. 3-83, § 2, 12-28-83) 
Sec. 15-182. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the City of Nashville shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March first of the year following the year in which gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in Subsection (d) of Section 48-6-93 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The tax levied pursuant to this division shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this division shall be April 1, 1984, and April first of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 3-83, § 3, 12-28-83) 
Secs. 15-183—15-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 15-191. - Findings—Public purpose. 
The City Council of the City of Nashville finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to enact regulations to reduce the possible adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. However, the mayor and council also find that the outright prohibition of such establishments could improperly infringe upon protected forms of expression. Therefore, the purpose of this division is to reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments in a manner that serves the legitimate governmental interest of reducing criminal activity and protecting property values without unreasonably infringing upon the protected rights of adult entertainment and their patrons. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 1) 
Sec. 15-192. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult entertainment. Performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are characterized by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment. A nightclub, cabaret or other establishment which features adult entertainment. Any commercial establishment, which has as its primary purpose or business the offer for sale of any book, publication, or film which depicts nudity, or sexual conduct or engages in services such as bath houses, massage parlors, wrestling parlors or like activity including a night club, cabaret, lounge or other establishment which features adult entertainment. 
Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five (5) years. 
Licensed day care center. A day care center licensed by the State of Georgia and/or City of Nashville that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
Minor. Any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Operator. The manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner(s). If a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least ten (10) percent of the outstanding shares. 
Residential. Pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein. 
School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include but not be limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
Specified anatomical areas. Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 2) 
Sec. 15-193. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment license to do so. The issuance of such license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone, or make legal any activity or conduct that is illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. The annual license fee for an adult entertainment establishment shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 3) 
Sec. 15-194. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during operating hours. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 4) 
Sec. 15-195. - Employee permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed by an adult entertainment establishment without a permit issued under the terms of this division. For the purposes of this section, the term, "employee" includes an "independent contractor." 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 5) 
Sec. 15-196. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at all times during the establishment's operating hours. It shall be the duty of the attendants to not allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the Georgia Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 6) 
Sec. 15-197. - Location—Development standards. 
(a)  Adult entertainment establishments shall only be located within an adult commercial (C-A) zoning district. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any of the following: 
(1)  Any parcel of land which is zoned for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Any parcel of land upon which a church, school, licensed day care center, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located. 
(3)  Any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located. 
For purposes of this section, measurement of distances shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight line, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel (i.e. "as the crow flies"). The term "parcel of land" shall mean any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit, and duly recorded in Berrien County, Georgia. 
(c)  The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment establishment shall be one (1) acre with a minimum one hundred fifty (150) feet of road frontage on a public right-of-way. 
(d)  Buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be set back at least forty (40) feet from any property line. 
(e)  A minimum of one (1) parking space shall be provided for every one hundred (100) square feet of gross building area, or for every three (3) customer seats, whichever is greater. 
(f)  Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
(g)  Signage shall be limited to one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet of copy area (total of all sides), one (1) wall sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet. Maximum sign height shall not exceed ten (10) feet from ground level to highest point of the sign. Minimum sign setbacks shall be eight (8) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 7) 
Sec. 15-198. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this division. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee, shall not thereafter be employed by any adult entertainment establishment licensed under this article for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term convicted shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty. The term "while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the premises. 
(b)  Before any person may be employed by an adult entertainment establishment, he or she shall file an application for an adult entertainment establishment employee permit with the city clerk and receive approval. An investigation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the application. Each applicant shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of the applicant's criminal records to the Nashville Police Department. The city shall have fifteen (15) days to investigate information contained in the application. If the prospective employee is found to be of good moral character, the city shall approve the permit and the prospective employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, make appeal to the city council of the city. 
(c)  No patron, dancer, or other employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. For purposes of this section, the term "employee" shall include an "independent contractor." 
(d)  The employee permit of any employee who violates laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or any provision of this division or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Nashville, shall be subject to suspension or revocation. 
(e)  For the purposes of this division, independent contractors shall be considered employees and shall be permitted as such, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 8) 
Sec. 15-199. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk, or designated representative. The application must be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment and include the names of the operator and each owner as defined in this division. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, established from time to time by resolution of the city, to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 9) 
Sec. 15-200. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information and documentation: 
(1)  The proposed establishment's name, street address (and mailing address if different), and telephone number. 
(2)  The name and address (and mailing address if different) of the owner(s). The name, street address (and mailing address if different), and Georgia driver's license number of the intended operator. 
(3)  A general description of services and entertainment to be provided. 
(4)  The legal description of the parcel of land on which the establishment is to be located. 
(5)  The business, occupation and employment history of each owner and operator for five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(6)  If any owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or similar type of license denied, revoked or suspended, then the violation(s) that led to the denial, suspension or revocation as well as the date(s) and disposition of such, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether or not the terms of the disposition have been completed. 
(7)  If any owner or operator has been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five (5) years, a complete description of such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including fines or sentences imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)  If the establishment does or proposes to do business under a trade name, then a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. 
(9)  If the establishment is a Georgia corporation, then a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; and the most recent annual report. 
(10)  If the establishment is a foreign corporation, then a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the State of Georgia, together with all amendments thereto; and the most recent annual report. 
(11)  If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Georgia, then a certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(12)  If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents together with all amendments thereto. 
(13)  A plat by a registered engineer or surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia, certifying the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 15-197 of this article respecting location and development standards. 
(14)  The application shall contain a statement under oath that: 
(a)  The person(s) signing the application have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; and 
(b)  The person(s) signing the application have read the provisions of this article. 
(15)  The application shall be signed by the operator and each owner. 
(16)  The operator and each owner shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of their criminal records to the Nashville Police Department. 
(17)  The written consent of a registered agent as required by section 15-209 of this division. 
(18)  Items (8) through (12) above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that documents previously furnished with the original application or previous renewals thereof, remain correct and current. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 10) 
Sec. 15-201. - Owner and operator to appear. 
The operator and at least one (1) owner, as defined in this division, shall personally appear at the public hearing for consideration of the application, scheduled pursuant to section 15-202 of this division. 
Sec. 15-202. - Application—Investigation. 
(a)  Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the application, the city clerk or designee shall review the application and send a copy to all affected departments of Berrien County to determine compliance with county laws and regulations, and to the Nashville Police Department to investigate the character and reputation of each owner and operator. Each notified department shall submit a report within fifteen (15) days to the city clerk. If no report is received, it shall be concluded that there is no objection. 
(b)  The city clerk shall prepare and cause to be published, a notice of public hearing for each pending application. Such notice shall include the date, time, and place of the public hearing; the location or street number of the proposed adult entertainment establishment, and the name of each owner and operator. The applicant shall pay all publication costs. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and shall appear once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks immediately preceding the public hearing. The city clerk, or designee, shall post a "notice of public hearing sign" on the subject property during this advertisement period. 
(c)  The city may approve the license at the public hearing upon finding that: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this division. 
(3)  No owner or operator knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  Each owner and operator has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  Each owner and operator is of good moral character as defined in this division. 
(6)  No owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause involving moral character by this city or any other unit of government located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment will comply with all applicable city zoning and development standards. 
(8)  Each owner and operator is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(9)  No owner or operator is a city employee, an elected or appointed city official, or a spouse of an elected or appointed city official. 
(10)  No owner or operator has within five (5) years of the date of application, committed or knowingly allowed another to commit the crime of public indecency, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-6, upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment or similar business. 
(11)  The location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is not inconsistent with the provisions of section 15-198 of this division respecting location and development standards. 
(12)  The approval of such license will not cause a violation of this or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Nashville, State of Georgia, or the United States. 
(13)  The registered agent's written consent has been provided. 
(d)  If the license is approved, it shall be issued jointly in the name of the establishment and each owner and operator. 
(e)  The issuance of an adult entertainment establishment license shall not authorize any other conduct or activity regulated by other city ordinances, including but not limited to the Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 12) 
Sec. 15-203. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this division. The renewal fee for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15th of each year prior to January 1st of the year for which such permit is requested. The form for renewal applications shall be furnished by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 13) 
Sec. 15-204. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license. In such case, upon notification to the city, the license shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 14) 
Sec. 15-205. - Adult entertainment establishments—Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council of the city, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the city council. Such approval shall not be given unless all applicable requirements and regulations have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than the name of the business, and his name as specified on the license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and compliance with the provisions and regulations of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 15) 
Sec. 15-206. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the city clerk seeks to suspend or revoke a license, the city clerk shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation(s). 
(b)  The city clerk may suspend or revoke a license in the event of any of the following: 
(1)  A licensee gave a false or misleading information in the application or renewal process. 
(2)  A licensee knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such occurrence(s). 
(3)  A licensee violated or knowingly allowed violation of this adult entertainment establishment division, any other ordinance of the city, or any criminal law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such violation(s). 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime by the State of Georgia or City of Nashville regarding any offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this division. 
(5)  A licensee failed to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this division or any other ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event that the city clerk determines that a license violation has occurred, such license shall be suspended for thirty (30) days for the first violation. For a second violation, the license shall be suspended for sixty (60) days. For a third and all subsequent violation(s), the license shall be suspended for ninety (90) days. Any license that has been suspended three (3) or more times in any consecutive, twelve-month period, shall be revoked. In addition, any licensee found to be in violation of sections 15-196(a) and 15-198(c) of this division shall be subject to immediate license revocation. Provided however, that the license shall be allowed to continue business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (e) hereafter. No licensee or any other applicant may apply for a license for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. 
(d)  In the event of license suspension or revocation by the city clerk, the licensee may appeal the decision of the city clerk to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days from the effective date of written notice received by licensee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing, setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The city clerk may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the licensee upon appeal to the city council. The city clerk's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the city clerk's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five (5), nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the appeal. 
(e)  When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date before the city council and instruct the city clerk to give notice of hearing as may be required by law; or 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city manager shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this division. 
In either event, the hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the city council's action, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the licensee and the city clerk. 
(f)  At any hearing, the hearing officer (or the city council if a hearing officer is not appointed) shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the appeal. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the hearing officer or city council, which shall be consistent with rules applied in administrative proceedings, and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel. 
(g)  If the hearing is held before the city council, the council may sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the city clerk. Appeals from the decision of the city council shall be to the Superior Court of Berrien County, and filed within thirty (30) days of the city council's decision. The decision of the city council shall otherwise be final. 
(h)  If the hearing is held before a hearing officer, the hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not exceeding fifteen (15) days from the termination date of such hearing, submit a written report to the city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, and state the findings, conclusions and recommendation. The report shall recommend that the city council sustain, overrule, or modify the action of the city clerk. The report shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public record. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant on the same day it is filed with the city clerk. An additional copy shall be furnished to the Nashville Police Department. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten (10) days after the report is filed. The city clerk shall also notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(i)  The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. The city council shall base its determination on the hearing officer's report and other evidence in the record. No additional evidence or arguments shall be permitted at the council meeting. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a de novo hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, and in either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; or 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer, with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 16) 
Sec. 15-207. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation operating an adult entertainment establishment within the City of Nashville without having obtained a license as provided in this division, shall be guilty of a violation of this division, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day the adult entertainment establishment is operated without a license, it shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of violating this division and upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 17) 
Sec. 15-208. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this division shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence action(s) or proceeding(s) for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 18) 
Sec. 15-209. - Notices, registered agent, jurisdiction. 
(a)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Berrien County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this division to be served upon the licensee, may be served. This person shall act as registered agent for the operator and each owner collectively. This person must be a resident of Berrien County. The operator may be appointed as the registered agent if he or she is a resident of Berrien County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk as part of the license application. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a license pursuant to the terms of this division, the licensee agrees that any legal action brought by the city against the adult entertainment establishment or the licensee (which includes the operator or any owner) to enforce the provisions of the ordinances, may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in Berrien County, Georgia. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city clerk or any office, division, department or other agency under this division to any licensee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment, may be given by either: (1) personal delivery, or; (2) by certified United States mail addressed to licensee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the agent's written consent form received by the city clerk, or any notice of address change which has been received by the city clerk. If personally delivered, the notice's effective date shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the notice's effective date shall be two (2) days after the notice is placed in the mail. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 19) 
Sec. 15-210. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment approval. 
(a)  All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of Nashville, Berrien County, and State of Georgia. 
(b)  The Berrien County Health Department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable health rules and regulations and report any violation to the city clerk. 
(c)  The Nashville Fire Department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable fire regulations and report any violations to the city clerk. 
(d)  The building inspector or designee shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all provisions of this division or other applicable laws and report any violations to the city clerk. 
(e)  The Nashville Police Department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all provisions of this division or other applicable laws and report any violations to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 20) 
Sec. 15-211. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise declared to be obscene or illegal by any applicable code, regulation, or statute which violates any jurisdictional prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this division shall only be allowed if they are not obscene and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This paragraph shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this division. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this enactment are severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section hereof shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this division. 
(c)  This division shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this division are hereby repealed. This division shall become part of the Official Code of Nashville. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 21) 
Secs. 15-212—15-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - TATTOO/BODY PIERCING STUDIOS AND ARTISTS 

Sec. 15-301. - Authority. 
The legal authority for this division is section 16-5-71 and chapter 31-40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 31-40-1, 31-40-2, 31-40-3, 31-40-4, 31-40-5, 31-40-6, 31-40-7, 31-40-8, 31-40-9 and ch. 31-5). 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-302. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing tattoo and body piercing procedures and for the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards should ensure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-303. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 [O.C.G.A.], or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-304. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined by specific sections, as used in these rules and regulations the term: 
Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly. 
Appropriate disinfectant means an EPA-registered disinfectant or a 1:10 dilution of bleach and water. 
Body piercing means the creation of an opening in an individual's body other than the individual's ear, to insert jewelry or other decoration. 
City means the city council or its duly authorized agent, the code enforcement officer. 
County means the local county board of health or its duly authorized representatives. 
Currently licensed health care professional includes physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
Department means the department of human resources of the state. 
Governing body means the partnership, the corporation, the association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the tattoo/body piercing studio and who are legally responsible for the operation of the studio. 
OSHA means the Occupational Safety and Health Association. 
Permit means the authorization granted by the county to the governing body to operate a tattoo/body piercing studio. 
Plan of correction means a plan for correcting deficiencies in meeting rules and regulations of the department of human resources. 
Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
Sanitized means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provided sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count, including pathogens, to a safe level on equipment. 
Sterilization means holding an instrument in an autoclave for required length of time at fifteen (15) to thirty (30) pounds pressure at a temperature of 273 degrees Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. 
Tattoo artist means any person who performs tattooing. 
Tattoo/body piercing studio means any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business license and permit from the county board of health, wherein a tattoo/body piercing artist performs tattooing or body piercing. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-305. - Governing body. 
(a)  The governing body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. ch. 31-40, with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the county board of health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  Prior to being granted a permit, each tattoo/body piercing studio shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of management. 
(1)  Tattoo/body piercing artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
(2)  No person shall be tattooed or pierced who appears to by under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. 
(3)  No animals, except for guide dogs accompanying blind persons, shall be allowed in the tattoo studio. 
(4)  No minors are to be tattooed (O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71), or receive body piercing. 
(5)  Written report of any infection or allergic reaction resulting from the application of a tattoo or body piercing shall be forwarded to the health department within five (5) working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof. 
(6)  Tattoo artists shall not remove an existing tattoo from a person. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-306. - Minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The tattoo/body piercing studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers. 
(b)  The studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customers receiving the tattoo/body piercing adequate privacy from observers. The work area shall be separate from the waiting area. 
(c)  Tattoo/body piercing studios must have adequate ventilation. 
(d)  Walls and ceilings must be painted or covered in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Paint or covering must be light in color. 
(e)  Floors of the work area must not be carpeted. Surfaces shall be a nonabsorbent material that would allow for effective cleaning by conventional methods. 
(f)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the work area. 
(g)  The work area shall be equipped with at least one (1) sink and basin providing hot and cold running water for the use of the artists washing their hands and preparing customers for tattooing/piercing. This area shall be provided with soap, an antibacterial solution, single-use towels or air blower, and individual hand brushers for each artist. 
(h)  The work area shall be provided with adequate lighting. 
(i)  The work area shall not be used as a corridor for access to other rooms. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-307. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the tattoo/body piercing studio shall be maintained in good condition, intact, and functional. Furnishings should be made of or covered in a material that is easily cleanable and nonabsorbent. The studio shall be kept clean, neat and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon, and stencils shall be provided for each tattoo artist and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(c)  Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each tattoo/body piercing artist. 
(1)  Surfaces of all work tables and chairs shall be constructed of material that is smooth, light colored, nonabsorbent, corrosive resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)  Work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with a bactericidal solution after each application. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-308. - Supplies. 
(a)  Bulk single-use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to the human skin shall be from single-use containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-309. - [Dyes and pigments.] 
(a)  All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes and/or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. 
(b)  In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by a tattoo artist, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single-use containers shall be used for each patron. 
(c)  After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-310. - Regarding piercers jewelry. 
(a)  Client and piercer should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. 
(b)  Only appropriate jewelry should be used in piercing. Appropriate jewelry is made of implant grade, high quality surgical stainless steel (316 LVM series), solid 18K gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum. Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces that might endanger the tissues. 
(c)  Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by piercers. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-311. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Prior to the start of the tattoo/body piercing procedure the artist should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to ensure that gloves are not punctured. 
(b)  All jewelry, such as watches, rings, etc., should be removed prior to the start of the tattoo procedure. 
(c)  Before working on each client, the fingernails and hands of the tattoo/body piercing artist shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water, and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands should then be dried by either an air blower or by single-use towels prior to beginning work on each client or when interrupted in the process. 
(d)  Single-use disposable latex or neoprene vinyl examination gloves shall be worn during the tattooing process. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the application of the tattoo, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. 
(e)  Each artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron, or smock. These items shall be changed after each client. 
(f)  Tattoo/body piercing artists who are experiencing symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash or skin infection shall refrain from tattooing/body piercing activities. 
(g)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each artist for the entire day and night operation. 
(h)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area to be tattooed. 
(i)  Smoking and consumption of food or drink is prohibited in a tattoo/body piercing studio. 
(j)  Universal precautions are to be followed per OSHA standards and guidelines. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-312. - Sterilization. 
(a)  An operational sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided in each tattoo/body piercing studio. 
(b)  Nondisposible instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture-resistant container until brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, and then sterilized by autoclaving. 
(c)  The following procedures should be followed during the sterilization process: 
(1)  Prior to being placed in the autoclave, all equipment shall be bagged, labeled, dated and sealed. 
(2)  Each autoclave bag may hold no more than one (1) liner and shader tube with needle and bar inserted into a tube. 
(3)  To protect needle tips from damage, an appropriate sterile protective covering shall be placed on the needle tip. 
(4)  From a cold start, instruments shall remain in the autoclave according to manufacturer's specifications. 
(5)  If the process begins with a hot start, the instruments should be processed according to manufacture's specifications. 
(6)  To achieve proper sterilization, temperature must reach 273° Fahrenheit and fifteen (15) to thirty (30) psi. 
(7)  Spore indicators shall be used each time and the results must be kept in a log at the location for a minimum of three (3) years. 
(d)  If using pre-sterilized equipment, documentation must be on file from the equipment manufacturer describing the method of sterilization meeting the manufacturer's recommendations for storage and maintenance of sterility. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-313. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Before placing the tattoo design on the client's skin, the artist shall treat the skin area with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  If an acetate stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution for at least twenty (20) minutes and then dried with sterile gauze or dried in the air on a sanitized surface after each use. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use article only. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-314. - Body piercers. 
Body piercers shall: 
(1)  Set up equipment in front of client. 
(2)  Open sealed autoclave bags containing sterile equipment in front of client, and discard the autoclave bag. 
(3)  Disinfect all jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) with a nonhazardous hard surface disinfectant approved by the EPA. All jewelry contaminated or potentially contaminated with blood-borne pathogens (previously worn by another person) should be autoclaved, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(4)  Pre-sterilize all needles used in piercing, use only on one (1) person, at one (1) sitting, for a single piercing, and immediately dispose of in a medical sharps container. 
(5)  Pre-sterilize all forceps, tubes, etc., in sealed, dated, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one (1) person, in one (1) sitting. After one (1) such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-315. - After tattoo/body piercing application. 
(a)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  After the area has dried, apply a thick layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube. 
(c)  A bandage shall then be applied to the tattoo using sealed telfa (nonsticking) pads. 
(d)  Verbal and written instructions, approved by the county health department for the care of the body art procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection and contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and operator retaining the original with all other required records. The facility shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the county health department and the procedure for filing a complaint. The notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment application packet. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-316. - Disinfection of workplace. 
Each tattoo/body piercing studio must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. This written schedule must be based on the location within the studio, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the studio. The following procedures should be adhered to: 
(1)  Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate disinfectant after completion of tattoo/body piercing procedures and at the end of work shift when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. 
(2)  Remove and replace protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil after each tattoo/body piercing procedure. 
(3)  Inspect and decontaminate, on a regular basis, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have a likelihood for becoming contaminated. When contamination is visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately, or as soon as feasible. 
(4)  Studios should be free of insects, rodents and vermin. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-317. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  Needles, razors, or other sharp instruments used during tattoo/body piercing procedures, shall be placed in puncture resistant, closed containers immediately after use. 
(b)  Needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(c)  Containers of sharp waste shall be sent to a bio-hazardous waste facility where they are either incinerated or otherwise rendered nonhazardous in compliance with 29 CFR Part 1920.1030, Occupational Exposure to Blood Borne Pathogens. Record of disposal must be kept on-site. 
(d)  Disposable waste shall be placed in easily cleanable, closed containers provided with tight-fitting lids, to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(e)  Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use. 
(f)  Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)  The containers shall be located as near as feasible to the area of use. These containers shall not be overfilled. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-318. - Personnel/operator/artist permit. 
(a)  No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator/artist permit from the county health department. 
(b)  The operator/artist permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one (1) year and must be renewed annually unless revoked sooner by the department. 
(c)  Application for operator/artist permits shall include: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Sex; 
(4)  Residence address; 
(5)  Mailing address; 
(6)  Phone number(s); 
(7)  Place(s) of employment as an operator/artist; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program and first aid course given or approved by the county board of health; 
(10)  Physical examination; 
(11)  Criminal history report; 
(12)  Fingerprinting; 
(13)  Photograph. 
(d)  All operator/artist permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(e)  Persons performing the tattoo/body piercing operation shall be eighteen (18) years of age or older and maintain current certification in CPR first-aid and have proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the county health department. Training courses provided by professional body art organizations/associations may also be submitted for consideration. 
(f)  The above certification must be obtained prior to the permit being issued. 
(g)  The artist must obtain a physical examination by a licensed physician within twelve (12) months prior to employment or initial application for permit. The examination must be sufficiently comprehensive to assure that the artist is free of communicable diseases. 
(h)  Proof shall be provided upon request that all operators have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and that the vaccine cannot be given. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-319. - Client files. 
(a)  For each client, proper records of tattoos administered shall be maintained by the studio. 
(b)  Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, phone number, type of positive picture ID, proof of age, date tattooed, design, its location and name of artist. 
(c)  A statement of informed consent by the individual receiving the tattoo must be maintained on file. 
(d)  A statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. 
(e)  A copy of procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the tattoo shall be maintained on file. 
(f)  A copy of instructions signed by the client informing them of the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the tattoo/body piercing procedure must be maintained on file. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-320. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The governing body of each tattoo/body piercing studio shall submit to the county health department, an application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No tattoo studio shall be operated and no tattooing/body piercing performed without such a permit which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the county board of health. 
(c)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a floor sketch of the tattoo studio showing windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables and equipment placement for clients and/or staff. 
(d)  A listing of the names of all staff including the owner who will be working in the studio shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name of each staff person. 
(e)  The ownership of the studio shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. 
(f)  Zoning and other local requirements regarding proper location and establishment of tattoo studios shall be addressed by the applicant with the city code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-321. - Permit. 
(a)  The governing body of each tattoo/body piercing studio shall obtain a valid permit from the county board of health prior to beginning operation. Every year effective January 1 of each year, a permit must be obtained. To be eligible for a permit, the studio must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  Permits are not transferable from one (1) studio to another. 
(d)  A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the county board of health when the studio ceases to operate, is moved to another location, the ownership changes, or the permit is suspended or revoked. 
(e)  A studio which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to the sanctions available to the county board of health pursuant to O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5 including, but not limited to, denial or revocation of its permit by the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-322. - Inspections. 
(a)  The studio and its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the county board of health and/or the city code enforcement officer. 
(b)  A copy of the inspection report shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises and also shall be available for public inspection at the county health department wherein the studio is located. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Sec. 15-323. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5 and the Code of the city. 
(b)  No person shall engage in tattooing/body piercing except in a licensed studio. All tattoo artists must have an operator permit. No tattoo studio shall be operated without a permit. Failure or refusal to file an application for a permit shall constitute a violation of the Code of the city. 
(c)  The county board of health may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any tattoo studio that does not fulfill the minimum requirements of these rules and regulations and may revoke a permit that has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit, the applicant or permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the county board as provided in Article 1 of Chapter 5, of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
(d)  The county board of health is empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violation of any applicable provision of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or of the rules and regulations. 
(e)  Any person convicted of a violation under this division by the municipal court of the city shall be punished as set forth in chapter 18 of the Code of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-08) 
Chapter 16 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; housing, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 27; utilities, Ch. 29; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference— Uniform Standards Code for Mobile Homes Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-4801 et seq.; collection of ad valorem taxes on mobile homes, Ga. Code Ann., § 92-2101b et seq. 

Sec. 16-1. - Compliance with city ordinances by owner; taxation. 
(a)  All owners of house trailers shall comply with all city ordinances relating to health, fire, city water and sewer. 
(b)  All trailers located within the city limits and being used shall be listed for ad valorem taxes. 
(Code 1967, § 21½-4) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to levy property taxes, § 2-9(n). 
Sec. 16-2. - County permit required. 
(a)  All mobile home owners or mobile home dwellers must show proof that a county permit has been issued to them by the county tax commissioner before the city will issue a city permit for the mobile home to placed in the city limits and before the city will turn on water. 
(b)  As of April first of each year, if a current year county permit has not been issued to the mobile home owners and mobile home dwellers in the city, then the city will cut off the water of those persons who do not have the county permit. 
(Ord. No. 9.77, 12-13-77) 
State Law reference— County mobile home location permit, Ga. Code Ann., § 92-2105b. 
Sec. 16-3. - City permit required; fee, term, collection. 
(a)  House trailer owners shall secure a permit from the city clerk before parking trailers in the city. 
(b)  The fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(c)  The permits issued shall be for one (1) year. The owner shall secure a permit each year. 
(d)  No fee shall be collected for any year except the initial year secured. 
(Code 1967, § 21½-2) 
Secs. 16-4—16-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 16-4—16-6, pertaining to the parking of house trailers in certain zoning districts, the placement of trailers on residential and nonresidential lots, and location on lots, and derived from Code 1967, §§ 21½-1, 21½-3 and 21½-4, have been deleted as being covered by the zoning ordinance of the city, adopted June 19, 1989. 
Sec. 16-7. - City utility charges. 
In mobile home parks: 
(1)  A minimum water bill and sanitary fee shall be charged on each mobile home counted by the meter reader each month, plus all water used over the minimum. 
(2)  No master water meter shall be installed after January 28, 1974. 
(Mo. of 1-28-74; Mo. of 3-25-74) 
Chapter 17 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 6-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Trial for removal of city officers, § 2-48; offense—miscellaneous, Ch. 18; police department, Ch. 23; trial of solid waste violations, § 25-29; traffic, Ch. 28; 
State Law reference— Corporate, police and mayor's courts, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 69-7; judge to have powers of ex officio justice of the peace in criminal cases, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-705. 

Sec. 17-1. - Amounts of cash bonds. 
The following cash bonds shall be in effect: 
Nontraffic Violations 

 
Traffic 

 
(Ord. of 2-24-75; Ord. of 9-26-94) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide for forfeiture of bonds of offenders, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-206. 
Sec. 17-2. - Jail costs. 
The following jail costs shall be in effect: 
Turnkey and board, including all meals while in jail, in addition to fine, per day ..... $25.00 
(Ord. of 2-24-75; Ord. of 9-26-94) 
Sec. 17-3. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 9-26-94) 
Sec. 17-4. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this chapter shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this chapter as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this chapter not so held to be invalid, or the application of this chapter to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 9-26-94) 
Sec. 17-5. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 9-26-94) 
Sec. 17-6. - Technology surcharge. 
(1)  (a)  There shall be imposed by the municipal court of the City of Nashville a technology surcharge in an amount of twelve dollars ($12.00) per offense for any violation of state law except O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1. 
(b)  Said twelve-dollar technology surcharge shall likewise apply to any violation of a city ordinance. 
(2)  Said technology surcharge shall be in addition to all other fines and fees imposed by the municipal court. 
(3)  All revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be utilized by the city to provide for technology support for the city police department and municipal court functions. 
(4)  If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this section shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portion of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-13-06, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 17-7. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The Municipal Court of the City of Nashville shall convene at 9:00 a.m. on the first, second and third Wednesday of each month commencing on the second day of January, 2008. 
(b)  The presiding judge of the municipal court of the City of Nashville shall have full power and authority to enact and enforce reasonable rules and regulations necessary to ensure and secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court including, but not limited to, the hours of operation and rules of procedure. 
(Ord. of 12-10-07) 
Sec. 17-8. - General penalty, continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided; and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment in the city or county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, § 17-6) 
Chapter 17.5 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as an ordinance adopted May 10, 1993, did not specify manner of codification, inclusion herein as Ch. 17.5, §§ 17.5-1—17.5-9, 17.5-21—17.5-24, 17.5-31—17.5-36, 17.5-41—17.5-46, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for abatement of nuisances, § 2-9(rr). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17.5-1. - Definitions. 
A nuisance is anything within the city or its police jurisdiction that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one (1) of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art I, § 1) 
Sec. 17.5-2. - Enumeration of nuisances. 
(a)  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this section. 
(b)  The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort: Sounds, animals or things which interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community; 
(2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors: The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood thereof; 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter: The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground; 
(4)  Water pollution: The obstruction or pollution of any water-course or source of water supply to the city; 
(5)  Emission of dense smoke: The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading, and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three (3) on the chart, or greater, for more than six (6) minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not; 
(6)  Vacant lots: Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare; 
(7)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc.: Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used within this city contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this section, state law or city ordinance; 
(8)  Animal enclosures: Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate; 
(9)  Privies: The construction or maintenance of any surface closet, privy, cesspool, or privy vault on any premises within the city; 
(10)  Dead animals: The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city; 
(11)  Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, etc., on private or public property: The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap, building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish and trash which is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others; 
(12)  Unoccupied buildings: Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed; 
(13)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery, etc.: Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of thirty (30) days or more (except in licensed junk yards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked; 
(14)  Gutters or spouts: Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art I, § 2) 
Sec. 17.5-3. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. I, § 3) 
Sec. 17.5-4. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the city limits, or upon any property within the police jurisdiction of the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city limits or the police jurisdiction of the city which is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other person responsible therefore refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the same, the chief of police, or the officer having responsibility for the enforcement of same, may issue a summons and cause the same to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts thereof claimed to be violated thereby, and requiring such person to appear before the recorder of the city at a time, date and place specified therein, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. I, § 4) 
Sec. 17.5-5. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the recorder at the hearing shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged which constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this article or other ordinances of the city is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the recorder shall issue his order and judgment so finding, and shall order the property owner or other person responsible therefore to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the recorder. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other person responsible therefore shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition, and to take whatever action deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition, and the expense thereof shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. 
(b)  Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. I, § 5) 
Sec. 17.5-6. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. 
(a)  Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of thirty (30) days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of the City of Nashville. 
(b)  The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of the city upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owner, owners, and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or otherwise by removing it to a location without the corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. I, § 6) 
Sec. 17.5-7. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in section 17.5-4 and section 17.5-5 herein. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. I, § 7) 
Sec. 17.5-8. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the City of Nashville to proceed under section 17.5-4 and section 17.5-5 and the owner of the property or other person responsible therefore, resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 17.5-5 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten (10) days nor less than one (1) day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. I, § 8) 
Sec. 17.5-9. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the recorder to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the recorder to punish by contempt for failure to comply with his order. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. I, § 9) 
Secs. 17.5-10—17.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 17.5-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer: 
(1)  Which has been left by the owner of some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of thirty (30) days after the time agreed upon; or within thirty (30) days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within thirty (30) days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Which is left unattended on a public street, road, or highway or other public property for a period of at least five (5) days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than thirty (30) days without anyone's having made claim thereto; 
(4)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than thirty (30) days without the owner's having made claim thereto; or 
(5)  Which has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than thirty (30) days without anyone's having made claim thereto. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle means motor vehicle or trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 17.5-22. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant, or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the City of Nashville. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 17.5-23. - Removal—Required. 
Any abandoned, junked, or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten (10) days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten (10) days' written notice, the police department of the City of Nashville shall remove same or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle or motor vehicles, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two (2) bids obtained from dealers in such property. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. II, § 2) 
Sec. 17.5-24. - Same—Notice to owner and state. 
(a)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within fifteen (15) days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present locations of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three (3) days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where such other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. II, § 4) 
Secs. 17.5-25—17.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 17.5-31. - Nuisance declared. 
A violation of any provision of this article is a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 17.5-32. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the corporate or police limits of the City of Nashville, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. III, § 2) 
Sec. 17.5-33. - Treatment of collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in section 17.5-31 directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes, shall be approved by the health officer and may be one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least sixteen (16) meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress and egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven (7) days of unscreened containers together with their thorough drying and cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven (7) days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(6)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer, his agent or accredited representative. 
(7)  Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. III, § 3) 
Sec. 17.5-34. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three (3) days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. III, § 4) 
Sec. 17.5-35. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same, within three (3) days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer or his authorized agent is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. III, § 5) 
Sec. 17.5-36. - Right of entry of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the health officer, or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. III, § 6) 
Secs. 17.5-37—17.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 17.5-41. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the City of Nashville, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, brushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding twelve (12) inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. IV, § 1) 
Sec. 17.5-42. - Height permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of twelve (12) inches above the ground. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. IV, § 2) 
Sec. 17.5-43. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  In the event of a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven (7) days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States Mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification form the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. IV, § 3) 
Sec. 17.5-44. - Abatement by city; notice of abatement. 
(a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 17.5-43, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property, and the contractor is authorized to enter same, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a "lot cleaning order" to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the city. The city shall inspect the work, and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the city clerk for payment. 
(b)  The city clerk shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than forty-five (45) days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)  If payment under subsection (b) shall not have been made on or before the date named, the city clerk shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the recorder, notifying such owner to show cause before the recorder at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for its approval amount. 
(d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required of section 17.5-43 was given, that the work was performed and the cost thereof paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed, then execution shall issue for such amount, signed by the city recorder and shall be executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)  If the owner of the property is unknown, or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) shall not apply, but in lieu thereof a notice shall be published once a week for four (4) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern," shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved, a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the recorder at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. IV, § 4) 
Sec. 17.5-45. - Remedies. 
The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies which the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. IV, § 5) 
Sec. 17.5-46. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city. 
Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the city shall obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two (2) inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two (2) inches but not in excess of four (4) inches in diameter, and the mayor and city council shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder, such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, Art. IV, § 6) 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES—MISCELLANEOUS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to prohibit acts detrimental to persons and property, § 2-9(pp). 
Cross reference— Fraud by building contractor, § 5-47. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Loitering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found idling, standing, loitering or loafing within the city as follows: 
(1)  In, on or upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys, in such a manner as to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to be detrimental to the safety, health or general welfare of the city or citizens thereof. 
(2)  In or upon poolrooms, restaurants, whiskey stores or beer halls, dance halls or any legal or illegal place of business. 
(Code 1967, § 16-3) 
State Law reference— Unruly child defined, Ga. Code Ann., § 24A-401; loitering on school premises, Ga. Code Ann., § 32-9925; loitering on psychiatric hospital grounds, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 35-9902, 88-2716; loitering near convicts, Ga. Code Ann., § 77-328. 
Sec. 18-2. - Handbills; distribution. 
Before distributing handbills, application shall be made to the city council for a permit which shall be issued by the city clerk upon the approval of the application by the council. 
(Code 1967, § 16-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Curfew for minors. 
It is hereby declared to be a violation of this Code for the parent or guardian of any minor to permit him to be on the streets of the city after 12:00 midnight, unattended or unaccompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Code 1967, § 16-1) 
Cross reference— Minors and premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, § 3-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Juvenile court jurisdiction over juveniles, Ga. Code Ann., § 24A-301. 
Sec. 18-4. - Evangelistic tent revivals. 
No evangelistic tent revival shall be held in any residential district as designated by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Sec. 18-5. - Erection of political signs prohibited; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to erect, locate or maintain any political sign on any property or right-of-way of the city. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with this section shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for other violations of the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 80-2, §§ 1, 2, 9-22-80) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-2, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 22, 1980, being nonamendatory of the Code, has been codified herein as § 18-5 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 18-6. - Cash bonds for offenses. 
The following cash bonds shall be paid for offenses committed in the city: 
BONDS 

 
TRAFFIC 

 
CITY ORDINANCES 

 
(Ord. of 6-8-87; Ord. of 5-11-99, § 1; Ord. of 5-14-01, § I) 
Sec. 18-7. - Yard/garage sale regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
Yard/garage sales shall mean and include all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on any premises in any residential or nonresidential zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale. This definition does not include the operation of such businesses carried on in a nonresidential zone where the person conducting the sale does on a regular day-to-day basis and such operation is otherwise properly licensed and conducted in accordance with other applicable ordinances. 
Personal property shall mean property, which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise, which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
(b)  Property permitted to be sold. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this section, property other than personal property. 
(c)  Permit required. No yard/garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the individuals, desiring to conduct such sale obtains a permit therefore from the building/codes enforcement department. Members of more than one (1) residence may join in obtaining a permit for yard/garage sale to be conducted at the residence of one (1) of them. Permits may be obtained for any nonresidential location. 
(d)  Permit procedure. 
(1)  Application. The applicant or applicants for a yard/garage sale permit shall file a written application with the building/codes enforcement department at least three (3) days in advance of the proposed sale setting forth the following information: 
a.  Full name and address of applicant or applicants. 
b.  The location at which the proposed yard/garage sale is to be held. 
c.  The date or dates upon which the sale will be held. 
d.  The date or dates of any other yard/garage sales by the same applicant or applicants within the current calendar year. 
e.  A statement that the property to be sold was owned by the applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired nor consigned for the purpose of resale. 
f.  A statement that the applicant will fully comply with this and all other applicable ordinances and laws. 
(2)  Permit fee. An administrative processing fee of five dollars ($5.00) for the issuance of such permit shall accompany the application. 
(3)  Issuance of permit. Upon the applicant complying with the terms of this section, the building/codes enforcement department shall issue a permit. 
(e)  Permit conditions. The permit shall set forth and restrict the time and location of such yard/garage sale. No more than two (2) such permits may be issued to one (1) residential location, residence and/or family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one (1) residence join in requesting a permit, then such permit shall be considered as having been issued for each and all such residences. No more than two (2) permits may be issued for any nonresidential location during any calendar year. 
(f)  Hours of operation. Sales shall be limited in time to no more than 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on two (2) consecutive days. 
(g)  Exceptions. 
(1)  If sale not held because of inclement weather. If a yard/garage sale is not held on the dates for which the permit is issued or is terminated during the first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions, and an affidavit by the permit holder to this effect is submitted, the building/code enforcement offices shall issue another permit to the applicant for a yard/garage sale to be conducted at the same location within thirty (30) days from the date when the first sale was to be held. No additional permit fee is required. 
(2)  Third sale permitted. A third yard/garage sale shall be permitted in a calendar year if satisfactory proof on a bona fide change in ownership of the real property is first presented to the building/codes enforcement department. 
(h)  Display of sale property. Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in a garage, carport, and/or in a front, side or rear yard, but only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale at a yard/garage sale shall be displayed in any public right-of-way. A vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within such front or side yard. 
(i)  Display of permit. Any permit in possession of the holder or holders of a yard/garage sale shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place so as to be seen by the public or any city official. 
(j)  Advertising: signs permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending yard/garage sale: 
(1)  Two (2) signs permitted. Two (2) signs of not more than four (4) square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence or nonresidential site where the yard/garage sale is being conducted. 
(2)  Directional signs. Two (2) signs of not more than two (2) square feet each are permitted, provided that the premises on which the yard/garage sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and written permission to erect signs is received from the property owners on whose property such signs are to be placed. 
(3)  Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than two (2) days prior to the day such sale is to commence. 
(4)  Removal of signs. Signs must be removed at the close of the yard/garage sale activities. 
(k)  Persons exempted from section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment on a regular, day-to-day basis from or at the place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by applicable zoning regulations of the city, or under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor in which sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises, and not otherwise prohibited by other ordinances. 
(4)  Any sale conducted by a nonprofit charitable organization or religious organization who conducts such sale upon real property owned by such nonprofit charitable organization or religious organization. 
(l)  Violations and penalty. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this section shall be subject to a penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense, up to two (2) offenses. Each subsequent offense shall be subject to a penalty of two hundred-fifty dollars ($250.00) each. 
(Ord. of 11-27-06) 
Sec. 18-8. - Keeping and maintenance of a disorderly house prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons or organization to have, keep, operate or allow to be operated or maintained a common, ill-governed and disorderly premises, which serves to foster or encourage gambling, drinking, loud, lewd or boisterous behavior or other such misbehavior or other misconduct so as to create, cause or allow to continue the common disturbance of the neighborhood or which misbehavior or misconduct serves to disturb or distress the lives of orderly and law abiding citizens residing, abiding or passing adjacent to such premises. 
(Ord. of 10-9-06) 
Secs. 18-9—18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to prevent offenses against the public peace, § 2-9(tt). 
Cross reference— Vicious animals generally, § 4-2; nuisance dogs, § 4-27; vicious dogs, § 4-28. 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct and related offenses, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 26-26; crimes involving dangerous instrumentalities and practices, Ch. 26-29. 

Sec. 18-21. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of committing within the corporate limits of the city any act or acts of commission or omission generally known as disorderly conduct, as the term is generally understood and defined by the court of the state. 
(b)  Specific acts. In addition to the general broad language of subsection (a), and without restricting the language of said subsection, it is intended by this section to prohibit the commission of, and to provide punishment for, the following specific acts: 
(1)  Disturbing the peace. 
(2)  Resisting arrest, and resisting any officer of the city in the lawful performance of his duties. 
(3)  Assembling for purposes of gambling. 
(4)  Committing a breach of the peace. 
(5)  Violent or boisterous conduct calculated to disturb the peace and quiet of other persons. 
(6)  Appearing in an intoxicated condition outside of the offender's own home. 
(7)  Making unusual or unnecessary noises calculated to disturb the peace and good order. 
(8)  Using profane or obscene language toward others in such manner as to be offensive. 
(9)  Committing riotous acts. 
(10)  Maliciously interfering with pedestrians or with traffic. 
(11)  Indecent acts in the presence of others. 
It shall also be deemed to be disorderly conduct for any person to urinate, expose his or her genitals, quarrel, fight, solicit men or women for immoral purposes, use profane or vulgar language, act in boisterous, noisy and rough manner, commit any mischief or otherwise behave in a disorderly manner in or on any of the public streets, lanes or alleys in the city or in any public place or in any other place within the corporate limits of the city or to aid, assist, encourage or promote the same to be done by any other person. 
(Code 1967, § 16-24) 
Sec. 18-22. - Discharging firearms; fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, revolver, fire cracker, Roman candle, sky rocket, torpedo, or other firework within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-26) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate or prohibit the use of firearms, § 2-9(vv). 
State Law reference— Fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 92A-8; discharging firearms on or near public highways, O.C.G.A. § 26-2909. 
Sec. 18-23. - Throwing of missiles. 
No person shall throw any stone, rock or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
Secs. 18-24—18-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES RELATIVE TO PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. ch. 26-15; burglary and related offenses, ch. 26-16; theft, ch. 26-18; robbery, ch. 26-19 

Sec. 18-40. - Placing broken glass on streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break glass upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or lanes of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-67) 
Sec. 18-41. - Spitting on sidewalk, other places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate sputum (spit) upon the sidewalks of the city, or upon the floors or walls of the city hall or courthouse. 
(Code 1967, § 16-70) 
Sec. 18-42. - Littering. 
No person shall place any solid waste in the street, public place, roadway or private premises except it be in proper containers for collection or under the express prior written approval of the administrative officer of the sanitation department. No person shall place any solid waste in any stream, lake or other body of water. 
(Code 1967, §§ 11-3, 16-66; Ord. of 8-14-72, § 8-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 29-2612; ch. 85-16C. 
Sec. 18-43. - Petit theft. 
Any person who shall take, conceal, misappropriate, damage or otherwise render useless, any property (with a value not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)) belonging to another by any means or method, with the intent to deprive or defraud the true owner of said property, or the use or benefit thereof, or to misappropriate the same to the use of the taker, or any other person, shall be deemed guilty of petit theft. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 10, 2008 amended § 18-43 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 18-43 pertained to shoplifting and derived from the 1967 Code. 
Sec. 18-44. - Defacing property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark obscene signs or language, cut or otherwise deface any fence, house, building, automobile, truck or any other vehicle or tree or shrubbery within the city limits. 
Code 1967, § 16-69) 
Sec. 18-45. - Damaging city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, destroy or mutilate any water or gas meters, jail mattress, plumbing or any other city property, real or personal. 
(Code 1967, § 16-68) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 26-2613. 
Sec. 18-46. - Obstructing officials. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist or oppose the mayor, councilmen, policemen, chief of police, chief of the fire department, firemen, utilities superintendent or other officers of the city in the performance of any duty required of such officers by the Charter, or this Code, or any laws or orders of the city authorizing such duty. 
(Code 1967, § 16-52) 
State Law reference— Abuse of governmental office, O.C.G.A. Ch. 26-23; obstruction of law enforcement, Ch. 26-25; impersonating public officer, § 26-2405. 
Sec. 18-47. - Trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure or cut any tree, bush or shrub in or from any public street, parkway or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefore from the city clerk. 
(b)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(c)  Dangerous trees. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. 
Any tree or limb of a tree which is likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such trees grows or stands. 
The director of public works may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(d)  Poles and wires. Any person who maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the director of public works, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
Sec. 18-48. - Tree protection. 
(1)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that encloses a space and is intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature or as further defined in the city's building codes. 
Building inspector: The city official charged with enforcing the city's building codes and zoning ordinance. 
Caliper: Tree trunk diameter measured at a point six (6) inches above ground level. 
City: The City of Nashville, Georgia. 
City arborist: The person charged by the mayor and council of the City of Nashville with the duty of administering this section. 
Critical root zone: The land area circular in shape and centered on the trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is defined by the farthest canopy dripline. 
DBH: A tree's diameter at breast height (four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground level). If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half (4.5) feet, then each trunk is measured and counted as a separate tree. 
Development area: Under an approved tree protection plan, the portion of a tract exempted from the tree protection zone; it consists of: 
(a)  The area to be occupied by buildings; 
(b)  The area to be occupied by unenclosed accessory uses; and 
(c)  The area necessary to meet maximum parking requirements. 
Dripline or canopy dripline: A vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree's branch tips down to the ground. 
Existing density factor: See subsection (9)(b)1. 
Height: Height of mature specimens under favorable growing conditions. If expressed as a range, the midpoint of the range is the "average height" and the bottom of the range is the "minimum height." 
Large tree: A tree with a height at maturity of forty (40) feet or more. 
Replacement density factor: See subsection (9)(b)2. 
Shade tree: A broad-leaf tree having an average height at maturity of at least twenty (20) feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with pyramidal, conical or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
Site density factor: (Total site area, in acres) times twenty-five (25). 
Small tree: A tree with a height at maturity of not more than forty (40) feet. 
Tree: Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually with one (1) main stem or trunk and many branches, which has a trunk diameter of two (2) inches or more measured at a point six (6) inches above ground level and which normally attains a height of at least ten (10) feet at maturity. 
Tree protection zone: The crown width of a tree, constituting the area surrounding a preserved or planted tree that is essential to that tree's health and survival, and is protected within the guidelines of this section. 
(2)  The building inspector shall periodically, but not less often than once every ten (10) years, prepare a complete inventory of all trees growing on city property and having a caliper of at least two (2) inches or a DBH of at least two (2) inches. 
(3)  Each year the city, through the building inspector, shall organize and conduct a tree planting program, designed at least to replace trees that have been cut from city property during the previous year. Replacement trees shall have the following qualities: Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site on which they are to be planted; the species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site; replacement trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to the removed trees; and preference shall be given to specimens of no more than three (3) inches DBH. The number (expressed in units having a minimum caliper of two (2) inches) of replacement trees to be planted shall be determined with reference to the DBH of each tree that was cut during the previous year, according to the following table: 

 
(4)  (a)  The cutting or removal on city property of any tree having a DBH of two (2) inches or greater without the approval of the tree board shall be unlawful. Any person violating this section or authorizing another to violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The removal from private property of any tree having a DBH of four (4) inches or greater without a permit or except in connection with an approved tree protection plan shall be unlawful. Any person violating this section or authorizing another to violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  A person whose applications for a tree removal permit has been denied shall have the right to file a written appeal of such denial to the tree board, within thirty (30) days of the date of such denial. 
(5)  (a)  There is hereby established a tree board for the City of Nashville (hereinafter referred to as the "board"). 
(b)  The purpose of the board shall be to perform the duties specified in this section and to perform such other duties as shall be provided from time to time by ordinance. 
(c)  The board shall consist of six (6) members appointed and removable by majority vote of the mayor and council. Members of the board shall be residents of the city. 
(d)  The term of office of each member of the board shall be on a calendar year basis for a two-year period; provided that in the appointment of the first board three (3) members shall be appointed for an initial one-year term and three (3) members shall be appointed for an initial two-year term. Any member shall be subject to removal either with or without cause by the mayor and council at any time. 
(e)  Members of the board shall receive no compensation for their services except that they may be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by them in direct connection with the performance of their duties, subject to the approval of such reimbursements by the mayor and council and in accordance with such documentation and other requirements as may be imposed by the mayor and council. 
(f)  Meetings of the board shall be held quarterly or more often as may be necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. The board shall have the power to adopt such rules, policies, procedures and regulations for the transacting of its business and for the determination of issues and matters coming before the board as it deems necessary or appropriate. The board shall elect from among its members a chairman and a vice chairman. The city clerk shall serve as secretary of the board. The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and legal representative of the board and shall render such legal assistance to the board as shall be necessary. 
(g)  Should any member of the board have any personal or financial interest or relationship with respect to any person, matter or issue pending before the board, then such member shall be disqualified to participate in board deliberations in connection with such person, matter or issue. 
(h)  The board shall generally investigate and advise officials of the City of Nashville regarding the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal and disposition of trees growing on city property. The board shall develop lists of trees recommended for planting within the City of Nashville. The board shall, upon request by the mayor, investigate and advise city officials with respect to specific matters relating to trees within the city. The board shall hear and determine such issues and matters as may come before it, and exercise such powers, and perform such duties, as may be provided by this section or any other city ordinance. 
(i)  The city's annual budget shall include appropriations for the administration of this section, in such amounts as each year are determined to be appropriate. 
(6)  The city arborist with the advice of the tree board from time to time shall have the right and power to authorize the removal of a tree from city property only upon a showing that the tree has a life expectancy of less than fifteen (15) years, or that extensive decay within the trunk is present, or that the tree suffers from significant insect or pathological problems, or that the tree has suffered significant damage from lightning, wind or other causes, or that threatens to cause injury to the public or damage to existing structures, or that the tree interferes with the construction of a new structure or an addition to an existing structure, or that the tree interferes with the construction, protection, or maintenance of public utilities or streets. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall restrict or limit the right of the city to prune any tree whether growing on public or private property that threatens the safety of persons or property on city property, or that interferes with public utilities or other public improvements or the safe or convenient utilization of public streets, or that is infected with any injurious fungus, insect, pest or disease. 
(8)  A proposal for development or improvement of any tract of land involving the expenditure of at least twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall include a tree protection plan, including trees to be planted in order to meet the minimum requirements of this section. The tree protection plan may be included in the soil erosion and sediment control plan. Such plan shall be submitted to and approved by the building inspector prior to any grading, bulldozing or other removal of the existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage. The plan shall show the following: 
(a)  Names and addresses of owner(s) of record and the applicant. 
(b)  Boundary lines of the tract by lengths and bearings, streets adjoining the property, total area of the tract, north point, graphic scale and date. 
(c)  All trees ten (10) inches DBH or greater, including the crown width of each individual tree, which will remain on the site and be protected during construction; and trees less than ten (10) inches DBH which are submitted for credit against the number of replacement trees to be planted to achieve the required site density factor ("SDF"), and the common and botanical names and the size of each tree. In heavily wooded areas that will not be disturbed, the plan may show only the boundaries of each stand of trees and a list of the number, size and species of ten-inch DBH or larger trees in each stand. 
(d)  Locations of proposed buildings, structures and paved areas. 
(e)  Locations of all utility lines. Utility lines must be placed along corridors between critical root zones of trees which will remain on the site. 
(f)  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching. 
(g)  Limits of tree protection zones, showing trees to be maintained and planted, specifying species and size. 
(h)  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a tree which would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage, and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
(i)  Planting schedule. 
(9)  (a)  The minimum required quantity of trees on a site after development must produce a total SDF of twenty-five (25) units per acre. The SDF is determined as follows: 
SDF = (total site area, in acres) x 25 
(b)  The number of new trees to be planted on a site after development is determined as follows: 
1.  Using Table 1, calculate the existing density factor ("EDF") of trees ten (10) inches DBH or greater which will remain on the site and be protected during construction. Existing trees of at least two (2) inches DBH, but less than ten (10) inches DBH, which will remain on the site and be protected during construction, may be counted as one-half (0.5) unit each, provided such trees have grown in uncrowded conditions and have developed normal spread. Add together the individual units for each tree to get the EDF. 

 
2.  To calculate the replacement density factor ("RDF"), subtract the EDF from the SDF. 

 
(c)  Application of density factors to the plan: 
1.  No tree shall be planted closer to a building foundation or water, sewer, electrical or natural gas line, than as follows: 
(A)  Five (5) feet for a mature small tree. 
(B)  Ten (10) feet for a mature medium tree. 
(C)  Fifteen (15) feet for a mature large tree. 
2.  No tree shall be planted under overhead utility distribution lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater than the lowest overhead wire. 
3.  Landscape islands shall be provided within parking areas of six (6) or more spaces, but shall not be required within vehicle storage or display areas. 
(A)  The total areas of such islands shall compromise at least five (5) percent of the parking lot area in commercial and residential zoning districts or three (3) percent of the parking lot area in industrial zoning districts; plus one (1) percent of other vehicle use area on the property such as loading, storage or display areas. 
(B)  Each island shall contain a minimum of fifty (50) square feet. It shall be so shaped that a five-foot diameter circle will fit within the island. No portion of an island less than three (3) feet in width may be counted in the area. 
(C)  Landscape islands shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving. 
(D)  Vehicles may overhang a landscape island provided said island is at least three and one-half (3.5) feet in depth per abutting parking space, at least five (5) feet in depth overall (except in cases where one (1) or more large trees are present on the island in which case the island must be at least ten (10) feet in depth overall), and protected by wheel stops or curbing. Two (2) feet of said landscaped area may count as part of the required depth of each abutting parking space. 
(d)  At least one (1) shade tree shall be planted in each required landscape island, and at least one (1) tree shall be planted for every thirty (30) linear feet of length in the side and rear setback areas required by the city's zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Where trees must be added to achieve the SDF, such additions shall be made between the street and the front of the building until such additions together with the existing trees compromise one-half (½) of the SDF. 
(f)  Existing trees which are in excess of the minimum SDF requirement but are outside the development area shall not be removed unless adjacent development would cause irreparable damage to the critical root area. 
(10)  The criteria for replacement trees in sites under development shall be as follows: 
(a)  Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site on which they are to be planted. 
(b)  The species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. 
(c)  Replacement trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to the removed trees. 
(d)  Preference shall be given to specimens of no more than three (3) inches DBH. 
(e)  Where the proposed development area is so large that the minimum SDF cannot be achieved, the development area shall be reduced by removing parking spaces in excess of the minimum required, additional planting islands shall be placed within the development area, and/or the area to be occupied by buildings shall be reduced until the minimum SDF is achieved. 
(11)  Existing trees and replacement trees on a site under improvement or development shall be protected by tree protection devices and restrictions on activities and conditions within the tree protection zone. 
(a)  Each tree and groups of trees to be preserved shall be protected during site development or improvement by completely surrounding the critical root zone of each tree, using as active tree protection (required in areas in proximity to construction activity) chain link fencing, orange laminated plastic fencing, or wooden post and rail fencing, and in areas where the tree is in jeopardy of being damaged by equipment, two-inch x four-inch boards strapped around the tree trunk, and using as passive protection (in all areas other than in proximity to construction) heavy mil plastic flagging a minimum of four (4) inches wide with dark letters on a bright background reading "Tree Protection Zone - Do Not Enter" or equivalent signage on a continuous durable restraint. 
(b)  The tree protection plan shall indicate in each instance whether the protection is to be active or passive. 
(c)  No construction within a tree's dripline will be allowed, unless protective measures to ensure the survival of the tree or trees are detailed in the tree protection plan and approved by the building inspector. 
(d)  All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing or grading, and must remain in functional condition throughout all phases of the development. Such devices must be inspected and approved by the building inspector before the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(e)  Felling trees into tree protection zones or disturbance of the critical root zone is not permitted. 
(f)  No erosion or sedimentation control measures may be installed in a manner so as to result in the accumulation of sediment within a tree protection zone. 
(g)  All boring under the tree protection zone shall be done at a depth of at least thirty-six (36) inches O.C. and must begin and end outside the tree protection plan. 
(h)  Trenching outside a tree protection zone shall follow the specifications: 
1.  Crushed or torn roots shall be cleaved back to good wood and a sharp clean cut shall be made to promote regrowth. 
2.  Work in the area and foot traffic shall be confined to the side of the trench away from the tree. 
3.  All exposed root ends shall be kept moist. 
(i)  All tree pruning shall be done according to the ANSI A300 - Standard Practices for Tree Care Operations - Trees, Shrubs, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance. 
1.  All pruning shall start beyond the branch bark ridge of the tree. 
2.  Pruning shall be done so as to remove branch weight as much as possible before the final cut to prevent tearing of bark and cambium. 
3.  In all pruning, the branch collar, part of the trunk, shall remain intact and uninjured. 
(j)  All tree care operations shall comply with ANSI 2133.1 - 1994 Safety Requirements for pruning, trimming, repairing, maintaining, and removing trees and cutting brush. 
(12)  Where replacement trees are required to be placed on private property under the provisions of this section, the property owner and his successors in title shall maintain such trees and replace such trees if they die or are irreparably damaged in perpetuity. 
(13)  Violation of any provision of this section, or the violation of any provision of an approved tree protection plan, shall be unlawful and shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(14)  A person whose tree protection plan has been rejected shall have the right to file a written appeal of such rejection to the tree board, within thirty (30) days of the date of such denial. 
(Ord. of 11-15-11) 
Secs. 18-49—18-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST DECENCY AND MORALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Sexual offenses, O.C.G.A. Ch. 26-20; distributing obscene materials, O.C.G.A. Ch. 26-21; gambling and related offenses, O.C.G.A. Ch. 26-27; state literature commission, O.C.G.A. Ch. 40-31; improper language on telephone, O.C.G.A. § 104-9901; offense relating to hotels, O.C.G.A. § 52-9907 

Sec. 18-64. - Assembly for purpose of gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons to assemble in a poolroom, restaurant or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, motels, hotels or any other place, house, room or place of business for the purpose of gaming, gambling or playing poker, dice or craps for anything of value within the city. Cards, dice, poker chips and numbers found on the person in the room or on the floor, table, bed, counter or shelf shall be prima facie evidence of assembling for the purpose of gambling. 
(Code 1967, § 16-39) 
State Law reference— Gambling and related offenses, O.C.G.A. Ch. 26-27. 
Sec. 18-65. - Obscene literature, pictures. 
It shall unlawful within the corporate limits of the city for any person to publish, circulate, give or sell, or cause to be published, circulated, given or sold, or have in his possession any book, writing, print, picture, newspaper, pamphlet or other work of an obscene, licentious, lewd or libelous nature, or to publicly exhibit any lewd, obscene or indecent picture. 
(Code 1967, § 16-41) 
State Law reference— Distributions of obscene materials to minors, O.C.G.A. § 26-9901a et seq. 
Sec. 18-66. - Indecent or immoral motion pictures and shows. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or agent in charge of any motion picture theater in the city to exhibit or allow to be exhibited in such theater any indecent, immoral or obscene motion pictures. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit for a monetary consideration, to sell an admission ticket or pass or to admit for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors. 
(Ord. of 4-9-73, § 1) 
State Law reference— Distribution of obscene materials to minors, O.C.G.A. § 26-9901a et seq. 
Chapter 19 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Operation of parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities, § 2-9(w). 
State Law reference— Parks, playgrounds and recreation centers, O.C.G.A. § 69-312; gifts for public parks or pleasure grounds, O.C.G.A. § 69-504. 

Sec. 19-1. - Dedication of parks. 
The parks of the city shall be: 
(1)  The Silas T. and Mackie Peeples Tygart Memorial Park; 
(2)  Beetree Park; 
(3)  Dr. Y. F. Carter Park; 
(4)  Northside Park; and 
(5)  Heritage Park 
and the lands on which these parks are located, or any buildings located on these lands, are hereby dedicated and set apart for use as parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and for any other recreational purposes for which they can be lawfully used. 
(Ord. No. 1076, 11-22-76) 
State Law reference— Georgia recreation commission, O.C.G.A. § 99-2301 et seq.; limitation of liability of persons making land and water areas available to public for recreational purposes, O.C.G.A. § 105-403 et seq. 
Sec. 19-2. - Hours of organized recreation. 
All city organized recreation shall be completed or stopped at 12:00 midnight. 
(Mo. of 9-8-75) 
Sec. 19-3. - Group activity. 
(a)  Whenever more than twenty-five (25) members of any group, association or organization desire to use any park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or other entertainment performances, a representative of such group, association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the mayor and council for such purpose. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the said group, association or organization meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage. 
Sec. 19-4. - Fishing in city parks, etc., on Sunday. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in fishing on the Sabbath (Sunday) in any of the city parks in the city or to fish on Sunday on any other city property. 
(Ord. No. 2-75, 6-30-75) 
State Law reference— Fishing licenses, O.C.G.A. § 45-301 et seq. 
Sec. 19-5. - Signs. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
Sec. 19-6. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon or the like. 
Sec. 19-7. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to have in his possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, ch. 3. 
Sec. 19-8. - Park hours of operation/loitering after hours. 
(a)  The public parks shall be open to the public daily from sunrise to sunset. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons other than city personnel conducting city business therein to occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours except as provided in section 19-2. 
(c)  any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by either the director of public works or designee at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals if deemed necessary for the health and safety of the public at large or preservation of city property. 
(Ord. No. O-02-14, 8-11-14) 
Chapter 20 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Appointment of officers and employees by simple motion, § 4-1; officers and employees generally, § 5-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish merit system and define the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of officers and employees, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-310; applicability of workers' compensation law, Ga. Code Ann., § 114-109. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Personnel management system. 
The Personnel Management System for the City of Nashville, as drawn by the Coastal Plain Area Planning and Development Commission, is hereby adopted as a part of this chapter as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 20-2. - Status of employees; definition. 
(a)  Employees hired into continuing positions and who regularly work forty (40) or more hours per week are given career full-time appointments. Their conditions of employment are set forth in the city's personnel management system directive. The information contained therein applies to this group of employees. Certain employees are not automatically covered. They are excepted by ordinance from being subject to these conditions. Primarily these employees are the department heads in charge of the major departments listed in section 2-1. Their conditions of employment are established individually by the city council. 
(b)  The following types of employees are also excepted from the personnel management system: Employees hired as temporary, part-time, irregular or seasonal are not automatically covered by the conditions of employment set forth in the abovementioned directive. The city council may, by individual action, give any of the above excepted employees coverage under any part or parts of the provisions of the personnel management system. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 2) 
Sec. 20-3. - Position title and grade. 
(a)  The city maintains a file of job specifications. These specifications contain a position title, examples of duties, the knowledge, skills and abilities needed to perform the work and the qualification requirements to be met by applicants hired into the position. Each employee is assigned one (1) of these position titles. 
(b)  The city also has a grade or work level system composed of grade 1 through grade 15. These grade levels identify the level of difficulty, skill or responsibility of each city position as compared with other positions. The least difficult or trainee level jobs are at the bottom, and the highest skilled or responsible positions near the top of the scale. The grade of the position is one (1) of the more important factors considered in setting the salary of each position. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 6) 
Sec. 20-4. - Trial period. 
All newly hired or re-employed career full-time employees of the City of Nashville are required to serve a trial period. This period is used to closely observe the abilities and work of new employees and evaluate their potential to make satisfactory long term employees. The trial period begins with the first day of continuous full-time employment. The length of the trial period is six (6) months for any newly hired or re-employed career full-time employees of all departments of the City of Nashville other than the Nashville Police Department. The length of the trial period is one (1) year for any newly hired or re-employed career full-time employee of the Nashville Police Department. If at any time during the trial period it becomes apparent that an employee will not make a satisfactory career worker, dismissal action will be taken. Employees dismissed during the trial period do not have appeal rights. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 5; Ord. of 2-10-97, § 1) 
Sec. 20-5. - Pay. 
(a)  As chief executive, the mayor is responsible for setting the rate of pay for each employee at the time of employment. Employees are considered for raises at the beginning of each new fiscal year. Pay increases are not automatic. An employee who is not recommended or approved will continue to receive pay at the last authorized rate. Employees who are performing at an exceptional level may be given a special merit pay increase during the year. 
(b)  Overtime is paid in accordance with the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (minimum wage law). Except for policemen and firemen, overtime at the rate of one and one-half (1½) times the regular rate is paid for hours worked over forty (40) during the seven-day administrative work week. Policemen and firemen are paid overtime in accordance with the above Act. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 7) 
Sec. 20-6. - Bonus. 
Each employee who has been in the employ of the city for at least six (6) months will receive a Christmas bonus to be paid on a pro rata basis. 
(Ord. of 7-16-73) 
Sec. 20-7. - Performance rating. 
(a)  After the end of the trial period, employees will be rated annually during May of each year by the department head. The mayor will review the recommended ratings and concur or change the evaluation to reflect his own conclusions. The mayor's rating will be official. Employees will be informed of their rating. If the overall performance is not satisfactory, the employee will be warned of action which may be taken if the deficiencies are not corrected. When performance is not brought up to satisfactory, dismissal actions may be initiated. 
(b)  The following ratings will be used: Excellent, satisfactory, marginal or unsatisfactory. A record will be kept of each rating. Employees may not appeal a performance rating through the grievance procedure. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 11) 
Sec. 20-8. - Workers' compensation. 
The city carries workers' compensation insurance as required by the state's workers' compensation laws. The purpose of workers' compensation insurance is to provide protection to employees who are injured while on the job. If an employee is killed or becomes temporarily or permanently disabled while on the job, the city's workers' compensation insurance provides compensation for time lost in accordance with the schedule contained in the law. An employee who is injured while at work shall report the injury at once to his supervisor. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 15) 
State Law reference— Workers' compensation, Ga. Code Ann., Title 114. 
Sec. 20-9. - State retirement system. 
(a)  The city retirement program is provided without cost to the employee. The city carries the total expense of this program. The retirement system, a joint program established in cooperation with other Georgia cities is called the Joint Municipal Employees Retirement System, referred to as "JMERS." 
(b)  Normal retirement age is sixty-five (65). Early retirement is permitted after age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of service. All full-time employees who were employed when the plan went into effect (November 1, 1973) were immediately covered. After the implementation date of the plan, all new full-time employees become eligible for membership after one (1) year of employment, provided they are hired on or before their fifty-fifth birthday. 
(c)  The size of the pension will depend on such factors as the number of years of creditable service at the time of retirement and the monthly earnings for a five-year period prior to retirement in which the employee's earnings were (or will be) the highest. 
(d)  The plan also offers several options with respect to the type of annuity which may be selected at the time of retirement. The employee may choose to retire under the option which pays the highest monthly benefit but under which all payments cease upon death, or a joint survivor option under which the retiree receives a reduced pension but under which a designated beneficiary continues to receive part of the pension after the retiree's death. 
(e)  Employees nearing retirement and others desiring more complete information on the subject should ask the department head for further details. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 14) 
State Law reference— Joint municipal employees retirement system, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1701 et seq. 
Sec. 20-10. - Disability added to retirement plan. 
Disability provisions are hereby added to the municipal employees retirement plan. 
(Mo. of 4-8-74) 
Sec. 20-11. - Grievance procedure—Purpose; definition. 
(a)  The purpose of the grievance procedure is to establish a fair and impartial procedure by which career full-time employees may make known their complaints and have these complaints adjusted. This procedure cannot be used by part-time, temporary, seasonal or irregular employees; however, these employees should discuss any problem or complaint with their department head. 
(b)  A grievance is any complaint or dispute concerning working conditions, interpretation of personnel policies, city policies, rules and regulations and decisions relative to dismissal, demotion, suspension or oral reprimand. 
(c)  This procedure may also be used for charges of discrimination based on sex, political affiliation, race, color, national origin or religion. 
(d)  Employees may not appeal dismissal during the trial period and performance evaluation. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 13) 
Sec. 20-12. - Same—Procedure. 
(a)  An employee must notify the department head of the grievance not later than three (3) days after the incident occurs. A complaint may be submitted on a continuing condition at any time. 
(b)  An employee receiving an unfavorable decision may continue a complaint to the next step providing it is submitted within three (3) days after receiving the lower step decision. 
(c)  Procedural steps. 
(1)  Step 1. Department head meets with employee within three (3) days after receiving complaint. Employee will be advised of the decision not later than three (3) days after the meeting. 
(2)  Step 2. The mayor appoints a grievance board. The board will conduct an inquiry within ten (10) days after the grievance is received. It will talk with witnesses and look at any documentary evidence. It will submit its written recommendations to the mayor within five (5) days after the close of the inquiry. The mayor will give the employee a written decision within five (5) days after receiving the board's recommendations. This decision will be final except for dismissal, demotion and discrimination complaints, which may be appealed in writing within three (3) days to the city council. 
(3)  Step 3. The city council will appoint a committee from its members, excluding the mayor, to review the case and report its recommendations. The decision of the city council is final. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 13) 
Secs. 20-13—20-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— As to additional information on the conditions of employment of career full-time employees, see the city's personnel management system directive, on file in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 20-29. - Rules of conduct—Generally. 
Employees shall conduct themselves, both on and off the job, in a manner which will reflect favorably upon themselves and the city. Although the city does not wish to interfere in the private lives of its employees, they are expected to be honest, reliable, trustworthy and of good character and reputation. Employees are expected to be loyal to the city. The rules of conduct in sections 20-30 and 20-31 set forth in general what is expected of employees. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 12) 
Sec. 20-30. - Same—Work rules. 
Employees are expected to observe the following rules and practices: 
(1)  Be at work on time and observe the time limits established for meal and break periods; 
(2)  Do not leave work during duty hours without proper permission; 
(3)  Notify supervisors as soon as possible, but not later than one (1) hour after starting time if unable to report for work on time due to emergency or illness; 
(4)  Do not abuse sick leave privileges; 
(5)  Do not report for work under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating drugs, or use them on duty; 
(6)  Obey all proper orders from superiors. Insubordination includes refusal to obey instruction and use of abusive, profane or threatening language toward supervisory personnel; 
(7)  Do not coerce or harass fellow employees, or use profane or insulting language or gestures toward them; 
(8)  Do not engage in arguing, fighting, horseplay or conduct violating common decency or morality; 
(9)  Do not bring firearms or other weapons to work except after being given proper permission, or when required by the position of employment; 
(10)  When required by the position, report for duty in a clean, neat, correct uniform; 
(11)  Do not sleep on duty unless authorized; 
(12)  Do not use government tools or equipment for personal use or remove them from government premises or control without proper permission; 
(13)  Gambling on duty or on government property is forbidden; 
(14)  Do not knowingly give false information on reports or other required documents; 
(15)  Maintain personal hygiene so as not to offend fellow workers; 
(16)  Do not knowingly violate any safety procedure or practice; perform work so as to protect against accidents to self and others; 
(17)  Always observe all proper rules, regulations, policies, guides and laws in effect which are issued, or require compliance, by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 12) 
Sec. 20-31. - Same—Code of ethics. 
Employees shall: 
(1)  Put loyalty to the highest moral principles and to the city above loyalty to persons, party or department; 
(2)  Uphold the charter, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city and never be a party to the evasion; 
(3)  Perform a full day's work for a fully day's pay; giving one's earnest effort and best thought to the performance of one's duties; 
(4)  Seek to find and employ more efficient and economical ways of getting tasks accomplished; 
(5)  Never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not; and never accept, for self or family, favors or benefits under circumstances which might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance of governmental duties; 
(6)  Make no private promise of any kind binding upon the duties of office, since a government employee has no private word which can be binding on public duty; 
(7)  Engage in no business with the government, either directly or indirectly, which is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of governmental duties; 
(8)  Never use any information received confidentially in the performance of governmental duties as a means for making private profit; 
(9)  Expose corruption wherever discovered; 
(10)  Uphold these principles, ever conscious that a public office is a public trust. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 12) 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, Ga. Code Ann., § 89-925. 
Sec. 20-32. - Political activities. 
(a)  No employee of this city may hold an elective office in the city, nor shall such an employee offer as a candidate for elective office in any government while so employed. Neither shall an employee solicit any contributions or assessments, or services, nor publicly endorse any candidate for any government elective office. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall affect the right of employees to contribute to, hold membership in or support a political party, to vote as they choose, to express privately their opinions on all political subjects, to maintain political neutrality or to attend political meetings provided they do not participate actively. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 3) 
Charter reference— Political activities of officers and employees, § 5-5. 
Sec. 20-33. - Hours of work. 
All employees except police department and fire department personnel are assigned to work a forty-hour work week. Police department personnel are assigned to work a forty-eight-hour week. Fire department employees are assigned to a twenty-four-hour on-duty and forty-eight-hour off-duty schedule. The days and hours to be worked during the week for each employee are determined by the mayor. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 8) 
Charter reference— Mayor as chief executive officer of the city government, § 2-10. 
Sec. 20-34. - Administrative leave. 
Administrative leave may be granted with pay for such purposes as: 
(1)  Jury duty or an appearance as a witness for the city. 
(2)  Loans to the United Fund, Red Cross or other civic organizations. 
(3)  When employees are unable to work due to breakdown of government equipment, severe weather or other conditions making working conditions hazardous or unbearable. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 10) 
Sec. 20-35. - Vacation leave. 
Career full-time employees will be granted vacation time as follows: 
(1)  Employees hired after January 1 will earn leave during the first calendar year at the rate of: 
One (1) day for one (1) full quarter of work; 
Two (2) days for two (2) full quarters of work; 
Three (3) days for three (3) full quarters of work; 
Four (4) days for three (3) full; and 
One (1) partial quarter worked. 
(2)  Starting with the first full calendar year of employment, employees with up to five (5) years' continuous service will be granted leave for that calendar year equal to the number of days in their present standard work week. 
(3)  Employees with five (5) or more years of continuous service shall be granted leave for that year at the rate of two (2) times the number of days in their present work week. (For example, an employee with under five (5) years service, who works a forty-hour week, will receive forty (40) hours of vacation time off a year. A policeman with over five (5) years service, who works a forty-eight-hour week, will receive ninety-six (96) hours of vacation time off a year.) 
(4)  Employees will not be paid for vacation leave taken during the first three (3) months of employment. Normally, vacation leave will be taken within the calendar year in which it is granted. 
(5)  Employees shall submit requests for vacation leave in writing to their department head, who shall transmit them to the mayor and council for approval. 
(6)  After one (1) year of employment, employees leaving the service of the city will be paid for unused vacation leave to their credit for that year. 
(Ord. of 7-16-73; Ord. of 4-22-74, § 10) 
Sec. 20-36. - Leave without pay. 
Leave without pay may be directed or granted for such purposes as: 
(1)  Sickness, after all sick and annual leave is expended, up to three (3) months. 
(2)  Layoffs due to lack of work not to exceed six (6) months. 
(3)  Time off not to exceed one (1) year, including part of a day, for education purposes when the education will benefit the city. 
(4)  Any other purpose found to warrant such action at the discretion of the mayor. 
The mayor is the only authorizing official for leave without pay. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 10) 
Sec. 20-37. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Career full-time employees earn sick leave at the rate of one (1) day per month. Employees can accumulate unused sick leave as follows: 
Under five (5) years: Accumulate up to six (6) days; 
Five (5) years and over accumulate up to thirty (30) days. 
(b)  In order to be entitled to sick leave, an employee must be incapacitated for work due to illness, a non-job-connected injury or have a doctor or dentist appointment. Employees who are absent frequently for short periods of illness, or who are out sick over three (3) days, may be required to produce a doctor's statement verifying that the absence was necessary due to illness. 
(Mo. of 8-13-73; Ord. of 4-22-74, § 10) 
Sec. 20-38. - Holidays. 
(a)  The following holidays are observed: 
January 1 
MLK, Jr. Holiday 
Memorial Day 
July 4 
Labor Day 
Thanksgiving Day 
Christmas Day 
Special holidays may be observed at the discretion of the mayor and council. 
(b)  All career full-time employees scheduled for duty on a holiday, and whose duties permit, will receive the above holidays off with pay. Career full-time employees who are required to work on a holiday, in addition to their regular pay for that day, will receive additional pay for the hours worked at their straight-time rate, unless overtime pay is required under the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 9; Ord. of 11-26-90; Ord. of 2-11-02, § I) 
State law reference —Public and legal holidays designated, Ga. Code Ann., § 14-1809; O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1. 
Sec. 20-39. - Age limit. 
An employee, upon reaching sixty-five (65) years of age, shall be terminated, or if eligible, be retired from the career service without prejudice. The city council may authorize the immediate reemployment of such an employee under a temporary appointment, not to exceed one (1) year, when it serves the best interest of the city. Such an employee serves at the convenience of the city council and is subject to termination at any time by will of the council. The city council may exercise this authority each year at the expiration of the last temporary appointment. 
(Ord. of 4-22-74, § 4) 
State Law reference— Age requirement to hold civil office, Ga. Code Ann., § 89-101. 
Secs. 20-40—20-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOCIAL SECURITY FOR CITY EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Social security for employees of political subdivisions, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 99-21. 

Sec. 20-55. - Coverage. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the Federal Security Administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this chapter, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 761 of the 83rd Congress, and as provided for in Act No. 82, Georgia Laws 1956, approved February 13, 1956 (Ga. Code Ann., § 99-2101 et seq.). In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 17-1) 
Sec. 20-56. - Authority for agreements. 
The mayor or other chief executive officer of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia and officials as provided for in section 20-55 hereof to include any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1967, § 17-2) 
Charter reference— Mayor as chief executive officer of the city government, § 2-10. 
Sec. 20-57. - Coverage extended to policemen. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to sign all agreements, ordinances and regulations furnished by the Employees Retirement System to do whatever is necessary to provide social security coverage for policemen. 
(Code 1967, § 17-7) 
Sec. 20-58. - Excluded employees. 
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 17-6) 
Sec. 20-59. - Records and reports required. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 17-5) 
Sec. 20-60. - Withholdings. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 20-55 of this article are hereby authorized to be made in the amount and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1967, § 17-3) 
Sec. 20-61. - Appropriations from general funds. 
There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by the applicable state or federal law or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 20-56 of this article. Such funds shall be paid over to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with regulations established by said agency. 
(Code 1967, § 17-4) 
Secs. 20-62—20-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRUG- AND ALCOHOL-FREE WORKPLACE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as an ordinance adopted Feb. 22, 1993, did not specify manner of codification, inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 20-66—20-75, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 20-66. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the City of Nashville to maintain a work place that is free from the effects of drug and alcohol abuse. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-67. - Use, sale, dispensing etc. of illegal drugs and narcotics or alcoholic beverages on city premises. 
Employees are prohibited from the use, sale, dispensing, distribution, possession, or manufacture of illegal drugs and narcotics or alcoholic beverages on city premises or work sites. In addition, employees are prohibited from the off-premises use of alcohol and possession, use, or sale of illegal drugs when such activities adversely affect job performance, job safety, or the City of Nashville's reputation in the community. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-68. - Hiring practices. 
The City of Nashville will not hire, unless state or local law provides otherwise, alcoholics or drug abusers whose current use of such substances prevents them from performing their jobs or who would constitute a direct threat to the property or safety of others. Whenever applicants for employment are to be tested for the presence of such substances, they are to be informed of the test in advance and in writing. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-69. - Disciplinary action. 
Employees will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination, for violations of this policy. Such violations include, but are not limited to, possessing illegal or nonprescribed drugs and narcotics or alcoholic beverages at work; being under the influence of such substances while working; using them while working; or dispensing, distributing, or illegally manufacturing or selling them on the city premises and work sites. Employees, their possessions, and city-issued equipment and containers under their control are subject to search and surveillance at all times while on city premises or while conducting city business. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-70. - Testing for illegal drugs or alcohol. 
Employees may be required to take a test at any time to determine the presence of drugs, narcotics, or alcohol, unless such tests are prohibited by law. Testing positive for illegal drugs or alcohol is a violation of this policy. Employees subject to the drug-free workplace act who are convicted of any criminal drug violation occurring in the work place must report such conviction to the personnel department within five (5) days, and the personnel department is then to take appropriate action as required by law. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-71. - Determination of need for examination. 
Supervisors should report immediately to the personnel department any action by an employee who demonstrates an unusual behavior pattern. The personnel department will determine whether the employee should be examined by a physician or clinic and/or tested for drugs and alcohol. Employees believed to be under the influence of drugs, narcotics, or alcohol will be required to leave the premises. A police officer should be notified to arrange safe transit. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-72. - Report of use of legal drugs. 
Any employees who use legal drugs or narcotics during work, and have any reason to expect such use may affect their ability to perform their work, must report this fact to the personnel department. A determination will then be made as to whether the employee should be able to perform the essential functions of the job safely and properly. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-73. - Counselling. 
Employees who are experiencing work-related or personal problems resulting from drug, narcotic, or alcohol abuse or dependency may request, or be required to seek counseling help. City-sponsored or required counseling should be kept confidential and should not have any influence on performance appraisals. Job performance alone, not the fact that an employee seeks counseling, is to be the basis of all performance appraisals. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-74. - Leave of absence to undertake treatment. 
Any employee who is abusing drugs or alcohol may be granted a leave of absence to undertake rehabilitation treatment. The employee will not be permitted to return to work until certification is presented to the personnel department that the employee is capable to performing his job. Failure to cooperate with an agreed-upon treatment plan may result in discipline, up to and including termination. Participation in a treatment program does not insulate an employee from the imposition of discipline for violations of this or other company policies. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Sec. 20-75. - Awareness programs. 
The city will, to the extent feasible, provide continuing awareness programs for the work force about the harmful effects of drug and alcohol abuse. 
(Ord. of 2-22-93) 
Chapter 21 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance enacted May 12, 1986, repealed Ord. No. 1-75, dated June 30, 1975, from which Art. II, Flood Damage Protection, of Ch. 21 was derived. The substantive provisions of former Art. II consisted of §§ 21-18—21-25. In addition, the ordinance of May 12, 1986, also enacted new provisions which have been included as a new Art. II herein. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Planning commission created; membership; terms of office; powers and duties. 
(a)  The city does hereby authorize and create a planning commission as provided for in state enabling statutes as set forth in Georgia Laws of 1957, page 420, as amended (Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1201 et seq.). 
(b)  The planning commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor and city council with staggered terms consisting of not less than three (3) years and not more than five (5) years. 
(c)  The said planning commission shall be clothed with all the powers and duties as set out in the above mentioned enabling legislation. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9) 
Secs. 21-2—21-7. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 14, 2009, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II consisted of §§ 21-8—21-41, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted May 12, 1986. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-8. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Nashville, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. I) 
Sec. 21-9. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 21-11. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(b)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(c)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(d)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 1, 1986. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 12, 1986 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 1, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 12, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 12, 1986. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two (2) or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement officer, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 6) 
Sec. 21-10. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Nashville, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 21-11. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Berrien County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 
City Hall, 405 West Washington, Nashville, GA. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 2, § B; Ord. of 2-8-10) 
Sec. 21-12. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 21-13. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 21-14. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 21-15. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 21-16. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Nashville or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 21-17. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in section 17-8 of this Code, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 21-18—21-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 21-21. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The code enforcement officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 21-22. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the City of Nashville on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage: 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 21-32(2); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage: For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The code enforcement officer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 21-23. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 21-11, then the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 21-22(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 21-22(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 21-22(1)(c) and subsection 21-32(2) or subsection 21-34(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 21-24—21-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 21-31. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
(b)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 21-32. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 21-31(4), elevated buildings. 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water-tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 21-23(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
(a)  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Reference subsection 21-31(6) above.) 
(d)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 21-32(3)(a) and (c), above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 21-22, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(b)  Only if subsection 21-32(4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 21-33. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 21-11, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 21-11, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one (1) foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 21-31(4), elevated buildings. 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 21-34. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 2-11, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 21-32. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 21-35. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 21-11, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 21-31(4), elevated buildings. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 21-22(1)(c) and 32-22(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 21-36. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 21-37. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 4, § G) 
Sec. 21-38. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision to the superior court of Berrien County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the administrator shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the mayor and council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-14-09, art. 5) 
Secs. 21-39—21-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GREATER BERRIEN PLANNING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions formerly codified as Art. III of Ch. 21, pertaining to the South Georgia Area Planning and Development Commission, and derived from an ordinance of Feb. 14, 1966, and an ordinance of Jan. 22, 1973, have been treated as being superseded by an ordinance of March 13, 1995, which has been set out herein. 

Sec. 21-42. - Membership. 
The Greater Berrien Planning Commission shall consist of twenty (20) members. The cities of Alapaha, Enigma and Ray City shall select two (2) residents; Nashville shall select four (4) residents; and the Berrien County Commission shall select ten (10) members. The terms of the members shall be for four (4) years, except that in the appointment of the first Greater Berrien Planning Commission under the terms of this article, the cities of Alapaha and Enigma shall have one (1) three-year appointment and one (1) one-year appointment; Nashville shall have two (2) two-year appointments and two (2) three-year appointments; Ray City shall have one (1) one-year appointment and one (1) two-year appointment; and Berrien County shall have three (3) one-year appointments, three (3) two-year appointments, and four (4) three-year appointments. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the unit of government which shall also have the authority to remove any appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall service without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Ord. of 3-13-95, § 1) 
Sec. 21-43. - Organization, rules, staff, and finances. 
The Greater Berrien Planning Commission shall elect its chairman and vice-chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of any municipality of the county. The planning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with public private consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purposes by the governing authorities of the cities and the county. 
(Ord. of 3-13-95, § 2) 
Sec. 21-44. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have been organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then said planning commission shall function only in an advisory capacity to each of the respective governing authorities and perform such additional functions and services for and on behalf of each governmental entity as shall be authorized or directed from time to time by the governing authority thereof. The Greater Berrien Planning Commission duties and responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To research, review, conduct hearings and make recommendations to the board of commissioners and city councils on updates and amendments to the 2015 Greater Berrien Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  To work with various public and private organizations and agencies engaged in or interested in planning and development activities so as to provide leadership in identifying and implementing city county goals and policies for planning and development. 
(3)  To advise member units of government on environmental, public health, safety and general welfare matters which may include the adoption of land development regulations and an enforcement program. 
(Ord. of 3-13-95, § 3) 
Chapter 22 - PLUMBING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Plumbing fixtures and installations in tourist courts, § 88-1105. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Powers and duties of building official. 
(a)  The building official shall have exclusive management and control of plumbing being installed or inaugurated in the city. 
(b)  The building official is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate and determine the placing of plumbing lines in buildings and for sewer connections so as not to cause damage or to endanger life or property, and whenever in the judgment of the building official any plumbing system or equipment shall be defective by reason of damage or from any other cause, the said building official shall at once cause the immediate removal of such defects. 
(Code 1967, § 19-3) 
Cross reference— Duties of building official generally, § 5-5. 
Sec. 22-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official shall see that all fees are paid for permits and paid over to the city. He shall keep a record of all the transactions of his office, and shall be provided with proper blank applications for permits. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the building official to see that all the provisions of this chapter are enforced. He shall issue permits only to bona fide, licensed contractors within the provisions of this chapter, and shall not permit any plumbing work of any class whatever within the limits of the city except when done under the direct supervision of an individual holding a license issued in due form by the state for the current license year. 
(Code 1967, § 19-6) 
State Law reference— Licensing of plumbing contractors by municipality, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-4721; renewal of state certificates, § 84-4712. 
Secs. 22-3—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLUMBING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-23; electrical code, § 9-33; fire prevention code, § 10-39 et seq.; gas code, § 11-16 et seq.; heating and air conditioning code, § 13-1; housing code, § 14-1. 

Sec. 22-19. - Adopted. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the desire of Nashville City Council to adopt, in all aspects, the various Georgia codes relating to building, gas, energy, housing, mechanics, plumbing and electricity. The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the City of Nashville, Berrien County, Georgia, relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said city and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. The Georgia State Plumbing Code is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(c)  Conflicts and effect. Any matters in said code which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city shall prevail and all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed, and this section shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its adoption and publication as provided by law. 
(d)  Transfer of responsibility. Within said codes when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, those designated officials of the city who have duties corresponding to those of the named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— Sections 1—3 of an ordinance passed and adopted July 25, 1988, being not specifically amendatory of the Code, have been treated as superseding provisions formerly codified as §§ 22-19—22-21. Said former provisions pertained to the city's plumbing code, amendments and additions thereto, and conflicts between it and other laws, and was derived from provisions presumably enacted during the 1980 codification and from § 19-4 of the city's 1967 Code. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to establish minimum standards for plumbing and to adopt plumbing codes by reference, § 2-9(ll). 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt state standard codes, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6014—84-6017; authority to continue to operate under other codes or adopt more restrictive provisions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 84-6013, 84-6015. 
Secs. 22-20, 22-21. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 22-19. 
Sec. 22-22. - Permit required; changes after inspection. 
No alteration or change shall be made in the plumbing of any building, nor shall any plumbing systems be placed in any building without first securing from the building official a permit therefor, nor shall any change be made after inspection without notifying the building official and securing a permit therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 19-9) 
Sec. 22-22.1. - Plumbing permit fees. 
Plumbing permit fees for new residential and commercial structures shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per fixture. 
(Ord. of 7-25-88; Ord. of 12-27-05) 
Sec. 22-23. - Old work to be brought to standard. 
The building official shall have the authority to require the repair or removal of any old and faulty plumbing that he may adjudge as dangerous to health and property, or that may be found placed contrary to the ordinances of the city. He shall have the power to require the correction of defects in old work, where a defect consists of violations of provisions of this chapter. If considerable additions are required to be made to buildings where plumbing is found defective or not up to required standard, old work may be required to be brought up to standard. 
(Code 1967, § 19-18) 
Sec. 22-24. - New work connected to old. 
Where any plumbing work is an addition to an existing plumbing system, the type of work to be installed shall be governed by this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 19-17) 
Sec. 22-25. - Inspections. 
The building official shall make such necessary inspection of the work as it progresses to be satisfied that the requirements of this chapter are fulfilled, and in the event he shall, upon such inspection, find such plumbing not to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, he shall immediately notify the plumbing contractor under whose supervision the work is being done, and such notice shall be in writing and shall specify wherein such work or construction is found to be defective. 
(Code 1967, § 19-5) 
Sec. 22-26. - Payment of fees prerequisite to certificate of approval. 
All payments for plumbing inspections shall be made before the building official shall give a certificate of approval to the owner, agent or occupant, and such certificate of approval shall only be given upon the presentation of a receipt from the city for the payment of the amount required under this article. 
(Code 1967, § 19-8) 
Sec. 22-27. - Application to city of state law relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A., § 8-2-26(d), relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the City of Nashville [sic]. 
(Ord. of 6-10-96) 
Secs. 22-28—22-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBING CONTRACTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Plumbing contractors, Ga. Code Ann., § 84-4701 et seq. 

Sec. 22-43. - Contracting business defined. 
A plumbing contracting business within the provisions of this article is defined to be a business engaged in by an individual, firm or corporation to do plumbing work of any kind. 
(Code 1967, § 19-10) 
Sec. 22-44. - All work to be done under supervision of licensed plumber. 
A person holding a state license shall be deemed to be a certified plumber or plumbing contractor; provided, that in any firm or corporation one (1) member or employee thereof holding a state license shall be authorized to do business in its firm or corporation name; but provided further, that the actual work or installation undertaken shall be under the direct supervision of such certified plumber. 
(Code 1967, § 19-12) 
Sec. 22-45. - Improper use of licensee's name. 
Any person who shall knowingly permit any other person, not holding a license as provided for in this article, to secure a permit in the name of such licensee to do any plumbing work of any kind whatsoever in the city, which said contract or work shall not be, bona fide, the work, contract or employment of such licensee, shall, upon proof thereof before the building official, forfeit such certificate and shall not thereafter receive a certificate for a period of one (1) year. 
(Code 1967, § 19-13) 
Sec. 22-46. - State license prerequisite to city license. 
No license to do business in the city as a plumbing contractor shall be issued by the city clerk except upon the presentation of a valid statewide license and the payment of the requisite license fees. 
(Code 1967, § 19-16) 
Sec. 22-47. - Plumbing contractor to have place of business in city. 
Every licensed plumbing contractor doing business in the city shall have an established place of business within the limits of the city, provided that the contractor having fixed places of business without the limits of the city may erect a temporary booth or structure to be used as offices, which shall be maintained as long as such contract work shall be in progress and until the same has been duly inspected and passed by the building official. 
(Code 1967, § 19-11) 
Chapter 23 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police department, §§ 2-10, 5-7. 
Cross reference— Enforcement of business license regulations, § 15-19; report of weapon sales, § 15-103. 

Sec. 23-1. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and personnel as the mayor and council shall prescribe. 
Sec. 23-2. - Police chief—Appointment and powers. 
The police chief shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the council, and shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and council. In the exercise of his duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
Sec. 23-3. - Police chief—Duties. 
The police chief shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To attend all meetings of the city council and all trials before the recorder's court; 
(2)  To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments and rules of the city council; 
(3)  To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the recorder's court; 
(4)  To see that the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced; 
(5)  To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof; 
(6)  To protect the rights of persons and property; 
(7)  To oversee the conduct of the officers and members of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department; 
(8)  To keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department including a log of all questions, activities and investigations; 
(9)  To submit a monthly report to the city council outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances and the number of arrests made and cases reported by each police officer; 
(10)  To submit monthly to the Georgia Department of Public Safety the "Uniform Crime Report" prescribed by state law; and 
(11)  To discharge such other duties as may be required of him by authority of the city charter. 
State Law reference— Uniform crime reporting system, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-2501 et seq. 
Sec. 23-4. - Police chief—Resignation, removal, death or disability. 
In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. 
Sec. 23-5. - Qualifications of officers. 
Any person employed or certified as a peace officer shall: 
(1)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States, except as otherwise provided by law; 
(3)  Have a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent; 
(4)  Not have been convicted by any state or by the federal government of any crime, the punishment for which could have been imprisonment in a federal or state prison or institution; nor shall he have been convicted of sufficient misdemeanors to establish a pattern of disregard for the law; provided the same shall not apply to violation of traffic laws and cases involving the operation of motor vehicles when the applicant has received a pardon; 
(5)  Be fingerprinted and a search made of local, state and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record; 
(6)  Possess good moral character as determined by investigation under procedure provided for by law; 
(7)  Have an oral interview with the mayor and council to determine such things as applicant's appearance, background and ability to communicate; 
(8)  Be found, after examination by a licensed physician or surgeon, to be free from any physical, emotional or mental conditions which might adversely affect his exercising the powers or duties of a peace officer; 
(9)  Successfully complete a job-related academy entrance examination provided for and administered by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Council in conformity with state and federal law. Such examination shall be administered prior to entrance to the basic course provided for in Georgia Code Annotated, section 92A-2109 and section 92A-2110. Officers who do not perform satisfactorily on the examination shall be ineligible to retake such examination for a period of six (6) months after an unsuccessful attempt; 
(10)  The provisions of subsection (9) of this section establish only the minimum requirements of academy entrance examinations for peace officer candidates in this state; the police department is encouraged to provide such additional requirements and any pre-employment examination as it deems necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. of 2-10-97, § 1) 
State Law reference— Qualifications for peace officers, O.C.G.A. § 92A-2108. 
Sec. 23-6. - Duties of officers. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to acquire a full knowledge of and to enforce all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable therein, to become familiar with the rules and regulations established by the police chief concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care and management of the police department, and to respect and obey all orders of the police chief not in conflict with the law or ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 23-7. - Conduct of officers. 
Every member of the police department shall conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and shall avoid the use of unnecessary force. Prohibited conduct shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Absence from regular hours of duty without permission; 
(2)  Sleeping on duty; 
(3)  Insubordination or disobedience of orders; 
(4)  Drinking any malt or intoxicating beverage while on duty or in uniform; 
(5)  Willful maltreatment of any person; 
(6)  Using profane language; 
(7)  Giving out or releasing any information covering the affairs, business or operation of the police department without the consent of the police chief; 
(8)  Receiving or accepting a reward from any person for any services rendered in the line of duty; 
(9)  Accepting bribes of money, gifts or other articles of apparent or actual value, or accepting any fee, reward or gift of any kind from a person arrested or from any friend in his behalf while he is in custody or after his release or discharge; or 
(10)  Active participation in any political campaign to the neglect of his official duty. 
Sec. 23-8. - Penalties for improper conduct. 
Any police officer violating the rules or regulations of the police department or of this Code, upon conviction therefor by the city council, after due notice and hearing, or upon the plea of guilty, shall be reprimanded, fined, suspended or dismissed by the city council. Any one (1) or more of said penalties may be imposed in the discretion of the city council. 
Sec. 23-9. - Arms and uniforms. 
Each officer and member of the police department shall be furnished with such uniform, arms and police equipment as provided for by the city council. Uniforms shall be kept clean and pressed and shall be worn on duty at all times, unless otherwise ordered by a superior officer. The equipment, arms, and uniforms furnished by the city shall be, and always remain the property of the city and shall be, when a change is ordered or on retirement from office, returned to the city except as expressly otherwise provided in section 23-9.1. The members of the department shall be liable for any loss or careless destruction of or damage to their arms and uniforms. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 10-22-18) 
Sec. 23-9.1. - Retention of weapons and badges upon retirement. 
(a)  Upon the retirement of any member of the police department who has accumulated twenty (20) or more years of service as a certified peace officer with the department and is otherwise vested under the city's normal retirement plan, and leaves the department under honorable conditions, such member shall be entitled, as part of their retirement compensation, to retain their service weapon, badge and a police "retired" identification credential pursuant to regulations promulgated by the chief of police. 
(1)  Alternatively, such member shall be authorized to substitute, in lieu of the member's duty badge, a badge of same or similar design as standard issue with the additional "RETIRED" panel applied at the department's expense. 
(2)  Such member shall also be authorized to purchase a badge(s), through the department, of same or similar design as standard issue with additional "RETIRED" panel applied, at the member's own expense. 
(b)  Any member who leaves the department under honorable conditions who is required to take a medical retirement after having attained vested status in the retirement system, such member shall be entitled, as part of his retirement compensation, to the same benefits and privileges indicated in paragraph (a) pursuant to regulations promulgated by the chief of police. 
(c)  Upon the death of any active member of the police department in good standing, such member's beneficiary shall be entitled to retain the deceased officer's badge pursuant to regulations promulgated by the chief of police. 
(d)  Upon the death of any active member of the police department in good standing who otherwise is eligible for retirement under the city's normal retirement plan, and who served under honorable conditions for a minimum of ten (10) years and otherwise met all criteria, such member's beneficiary shall be entitled to retain the deceased officer's weapon and badge, provided that the beneficiary is otherwise eligible to possess the weapon by law and pursuant to regulations promulgated by the chief of police. 
(e)  Upon the death of any active member of the police department killed in the line of duty, such member's beneficiary shall be entitled to retain the deceased officer's weapon and badge, provided that the beneficiary is otherwise eligible to possess the weapon by law and pursuant to regulations promulgated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, 10-22-18) 
Sec. 23-10. - Arrests. 
An arrest for a crime may be made by an officer, either under a warrant, or without a warrant, if the offense is committed in his presence, or the offender is endeavoring to escape, or for other cause there is likely to be failure of justice for want of an officer to issue a warrant. In exercising such power of arrest, all police officers shall see that all required warnings are given to the accused. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 27-207. 
Sec. 23-11. - Entering private dwellings. 
No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
Sec. 23-12. - Disposition of stolen, abandoned or impounded property. 
(a)  All personal property which comes into the custody of the police department, where said property has been stolen or impounded or where the ownership is unknown, shall be held for a period of sixty (60) days awaiting claim by its owner. The owner of said property, upon proving ownership and paying all expenses and costs, including reasonable charges for storage, shall have the right to have such property returned to him. 
(b)  If after the expiration of sixty (60) days the property is unclaimed, the chief of police shall give notice in a public place that the property is for sale. Such notice shall take place at least seven (7) days before the date set for the sale and shall give a description of the property to be sold and specify the time and place of sale. If the property is still unclaimed by the time of the sale, it shall be sold as advertised and the proceeds shall be placed in the city treasury. 
Sec. 23-13. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
All physicians and all hospital superintendents in the city are hereby required to report to the police department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. 
Sec. 23-14. - Failure to comply with terms of probation. 
This section shall authorize the Nashville Police Department to arrest and incarcerate any person convicted in Nashville Municipal Court and placed on probation and who subsequently fails to comply with the terms of said probation. Upon any failure to comply with the terms of probation, said probation can be revoked and the offender shall be in contempt of court. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93) 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as an ordinance adopted May 10, 1993, did not specify manner of codification, inclusion herein as § 23-14 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 23.1 - PRECIOUS METALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 81-1, §§ 1—17, adopted March 9, 1981, enacted provisions codified as Ch. 23.1 herein. Since said ordinance did not expressly amend the Code, the manner of codification has been at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 15. 

Sec. 23.1-1. - Gold and silver buyers defined. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "gold and silver buyers" shall mean any persons engaged in the business of purchasing, or otherwise dealing in gold or silver, or other precious metals of any kind or description, from members of the general public within the corporate limits of the city. Included in this definition are buyers of second-hand jewelry and gems. Isolated transactions between persons not engaged in the business are not covered by the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-2. - Buying of gold, silver, etc., affected in the public interest. 
Engaging in the business of buying gold, silver, other precious metals, precious gems, or jewelry within the corporate limits of the city is hereby declared to be affected in the public interest because of the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 2, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-3. - Penalty for failure to register, noncompliance with chapter provisions and failure to obtain license. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed a period of ninety (90) days, to engage in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems, or jewelry from members of the general public within the corporate limits of the city without first complying with the registration and other provisions of this chapter and obtaining a license as herein provided. Each day such offense occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 3, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-4. - Advertising before compliance with chapter prohibited; penalty. 
No person, partnership, corporation or other entity covered by this chapter shall advertise, either in the news media, or by portable signs, or in any other manner, the buying, selling, trading or otherwise dealing in precious metals, precious gems, or jewelry until they have complied with the provisions of this chapter. The violation of this section shall be unlawful and punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, and each day such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 4, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-5. - Surety bond required. 
Every person, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems, or jewelry shall file with the chief of police for the city a surety bond, executed by such applicant and secured by a corporate surety company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, in an amount not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and upon the prompt report of all suspicious persons dealing with the obligor, and of stolen property or property suspected of being stolen, and for the returning to the chief of police or to the true and lawful owner of any such property or making payment therefor. The bond shall be taken in the name of the city, and the city or any person injured by the breach of said bond may bring an action on said bond in its or his own name to recover damages therefor. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 8, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-6. - Purchases from persons less than eighteen (18) prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code for any person, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems or jewelry to purchase any of said items from a person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 16, 3-9-81) 
Cross reference— Minors and premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, § 3-61 et seq. 
Sec. 23.1-7. - Registration with chief of police required. 
All persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities engaging in the business of buying precious metals, precious gems, or jewelry shall register with the chief of police on a form to be provided by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 5, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-8. - Application for registration; additional information. 
All applicants for registration under the provisions of this chapter shall furnish, in addition to such other information as the chief of police shall require, the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and local address of the applicant; 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each member of the partnership; 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of each stockholder, each officer, and each director of the corporation; 
(5)  The name and address of each employee of the applicant who is actively engaged in the performance of such services; and 
(6)  If a resident, the length of time the applicant has been a resident of the State of Georgia and the City of Nashville. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 6, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-9. - Investigation of applicant; issuance of license; fee. 
Within five (5) days after receipt of an application as provided for herein, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and his proposed operation. If upon investigation the chief of police shall find that the applicant is of good moral character and has never been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and has met all of the requirements of this chapter, he shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant. The license shall be issued, and the license tax, as provided by Chapter 15, shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 9, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-10. - Conviction of felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
No person shall engage in the business or activity for which this license is required, or shall be a member of a partnership, or an officer, stockholder or director in a corporation engaged in such business, who shall have been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 7, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-11. - Notice to law enforcement agencies. 
If the license required by the provisions of this chapter is approved, the applicant shall file a notice with all law enforcement agencies of the county and city within fifteen (15) days after approval. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 10, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-12. - Register of purchases; required information. 
Every licensee under this chapter shall keep a register upon which the licensee shall record the name, address, social security number or driver's license number, a brief description of the person, and other identification, of every person from whom the licensee purchases any precious metals, precious gems or jewelry, together with the date and time of day of said purchase, a description of each article purchased, including the name, make and serial or other identifying number or mark, and the amount paid therefor. Such entry shall be made at the time the transaction occurs. Before buying any precious metals, precious gems, or jewelry, the licensee shall require positive identification from the seller, either from a driver's license or other document. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 11, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-13. - Daily reports; duty of chief of police; penalty for failure to report. 
Each licensee under this chapter shall file daily written reports at 10:00 a.m. with the chief of police, showing the name and description of the persons from whom precious metals, precious gems, or jewelry were purchased by the licensee during the preceding twenty-four (24) hours, and a description in detail of the nature, type, and quantity of the precious metals, precious gems or jewelry. It is hereby made the duty of the chief of police to obtain such reports promptly each day. It shall be unlawful and an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days for any licensee to fail or refuse to make such daily reports in the manner described by this section, and such failure shall be grounds for the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 12, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-14. - Disposing of precious metals, etc., by second-hand dealers. 
No articles of personal property made of gold, silver, or other precious metals, or precious gems or jewelry shall be sold, melted, altered, or otherwise disposed of by any second-hand dealer until ten (10) days have elapsed from the time the chief of police has been given a copy or transcript of the register in which such articles of personal property made of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals, or gems or jewelry are entered and said articles shall not be transferred from within the city limits of Nashville during said ten-day period of time. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 13, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-15. - Surrender of items to owner or police. 
In the event it is determined that any item covered by this chapter is the subject of any theft, embezzlement or other crime, the licensee shall surrender same upon demand to the owner or the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 15, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-16. - Transfer of license prohibited. 
Licenses issued hereunder shall not be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 14, 3-9-81) 
Sec. 23.1-17. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the mayor upon recommendation of the chief of police for the violation of or the failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or for the violation of any provision of law, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given the licensee. The chief of police shall immediately notify any licensee of such suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 17, 3-9-81) 
Chapter 24 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-04-18, adopted Sept. 24, 2018, amended ch. 24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 24 pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 9, 2013. 

Sec. 24-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "The City of Nashville Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § I, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Alapaha Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 24-4(c) of this chapter. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural operations as described in subsection 24-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority (LIA): The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this section. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Alapaha Soil and Water District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(a)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(b)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(c)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § II, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than tenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsection 24-4(c)(15), (16) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § III, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-4. - Minimum requirements for soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this section and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection (b) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority (LIA) or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in paragraphs (c)(15), (16), and (17) below, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraphs (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twetny-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: Provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least eighteen (18) percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than five hundred (500) square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in [EPD Rule] 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority (LIA) from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § IV, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this section, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the Nashville Code Enforcement Officer (NCEO) to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the NCEO and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 24-4(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two (2) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 24-4(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 24-4(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this section. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this section, any variances required by subsections 24-4(c)(15), (16), and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 24-5(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this section, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this section. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § V, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The Nashville Code Enforcement Officer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The Nashville Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninrty (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § VI, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this section without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this section, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this action and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 24-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this section, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this section under county ordinances approved under this section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § VII, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this section. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19(b)(4), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § VIII, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-9. - Administrative appeal/judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Nashville Municipal Court within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Berrien County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § IX, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 24-10. - Validity and liability. 
(a)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this section shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this section. 
(b)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this section, nor the compliance with provisions of this section shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. O-04-18, § X, 9-24-18) 
Chapter 25 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the collection of garbage, rubbish and refuse, § 2-9(ee). 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 12; nuisances, § 12-77 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal services, Ga. Code Ann., § 2-6102; Solid Waste Management Act, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 43-16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Short title and applicability of chapter. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Nashville Sanitation Ordinance of 1972." It shall apply to the preparation and storage, collection, transportation and disposal of all refuse in the area under jurisdiction of the city as presently or hereafter established. It shall prescribe rules and regulations therefor; regulating the private collection of garbage and refuse; providing for the licensing and regulation of private garbage and refuse collection; prescribing rules and regulations for hauling garbage, refuse and other waste material within or through Nashville and the county; prohibiting the deposit of litter within the incorporated area of the city and providing penalties for violation thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72) 
State Law reference— Policy and intent of the Solid Waste Management Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 43-1602. 
Sec. 25-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
Administrative officer means the appointed agent of the sanitation committee of the council, his appointed representatives and agents; should the city obtain a city administrator, the administrative officer shall be the city administrator. Further, he may appoint a director of sanitation, who shall effect the daily operation of the sanitation department under the provisions of this chapter; however, if no director of sanitation is appointed, said administrative officer shall effect the daily operation of the sanitation department under the provisions of this chapter. 
Ashes means the residue from burning of combustible materials for fuel. 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without remuneration, does the work of collecting and/or hauling solid wastes. 
Commercial container means a manufactured Rebel container or four-yard or more dumpster for mechanical pick-up which is approved by the director of sanitation. Any business must furnish its own commercial container for pick-up approved by the director of sanitation. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel; motel; apartment house; rooming house; or business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single dwelling unit/residential unit. 
Compactor means a mechanical device to shred or compact solid waste. 
Compactor container means a manufactured container of any size which is designed to be used in conjunction with a compactor. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of solid organic waste material under aerobic conditions. 
Department means the department of natural resources, division of environmental protection, solid waste management section of the state, or its successors at law. 
Director of sanitation means the operations agent of the administrative officer. He shall have the authority and responsibility of the administrative officer to effect the daily operations of the sanitation department under this chapter: Provided, he shall not act in a quasi-judicial function in any administrative proceeding under this chapter. 
Disposal area means a site, location, tract of land or facility, used or intended to be used for the final disposal of solid waste, garbage, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except that it shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling on which the owner, occupant or lessee of said land or facility resides. 
Dwelling unit means a house or other structure or a portion of any building or structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one (1) or more persons living in a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residents. 
Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means material in a solid or semi-solid state resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use), pathological wastes, chemical wastes, flammable or explosive materials and similar waste material in a solid or semi-solid state, that the department or county board of health may consider a likely hazard to the public health or safety, except radioactive waste materials as provided in rules of the department, entitled "Radioactive Materials." 
Industrial waste or industrial solid waste means the solid waste materials from factories, processing plants and manufacturing enterprises, and includes food processing waste, meat and poultry processing waste, hatchery waste, construction and demolition waste, condemned food, ashes and cinders from power plants, agriculture products waste, land clearance waste and similar waste. 
Interlocal agreement means a form of executed agreement document to implement a joint cooperative venture between two (2) or more cities, counties or cities and counties, public or quasi-public sanitation associations or authorities for the disposal of solid wastes. 
Litter means any solid waste, defined in this section, which is not properly confined and which is willfully or negligently scattered about on public or private property in such a manner as to offend the community sense of order and cleanliness. 
Owner means any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises in the jurisdiction of the council. 
Permit means written authorization granted to a person by the department to operate a waste collection or waste disposal system, or both, for the collection or disposal of solid waste; to operate a waste collection or waste disposal system, or both, to dispose of putrescible wastes; to operate a waste collection or waste disposal system or both to dispose of hazardous wastes, or to maintain and operate a disposal area. 
Person means the state or any agency or institution thereof, any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, individual, partnership, association or other entity, and includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision or public or private corporation. 
Premises means land, buildings or other structures, vehicle water craft, or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms to cause nuisances. Kitchen wastes, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes and dead animals are examples of putrescible wastes. 
Refuse means garbage and trash collectively. 
Residential container must be a Rebel container only as furnished by the city. 
Residential unit means any structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one (1) family. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Scavenger or commercial sanitation firm means any person collecting or disposing of refuse. 
Special industrial waste container means any container such as a metal box, bucket, an open bed container or special container used for transporting chemicals, paint, metals, glass, oil products, plastics or any type of material that requires special handling and cannot be incinerated. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible waste except human body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery or dunnage ashes), street refuse, dead animals, industrial wastes (waste materials generated in industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in these rules and regulations. 
Trash means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials such as, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, wood, glass, crockery and similar materials. 
Waste means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
Yard trash means nonputrescible solid wastes which are completely organic in composition such as, but not limited to, yard clippings (grass and weeds), pine straw, leaves, tree trimmings, woody branches, pine cones and similar materials. Further, this form of solid waste must be free of all other manner of garbage and trash. 
(Code 1967, § 11-1; Ord. of 8-14-72, §§ 1.1—1.35; Ord. of 3-25-74) 
State Law reference— Definitions applicable to the Solid Waste Management Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 43-1603. 
Secs. 25-3—25-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Administration and enforcement of Solid Waste Management Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 43-1604. 

Sec. 25-19. - Sanitation department created. 
There is hereby created the department of sanitation. 
(Code 1967, § 19-1) 
Sec. 25-20. - Responsibility for administration. 
The council, in order to protect the health and safety of the people of the city, authorizes and directs its administrative officer, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of this enactment, to control the storage, collection and disposal of solid waste in the city. He shall plan, organize, procure equipment and personnel and manage a publicly owned and operated solid waste collection and disposal service and/or make recommendations to the council regarding contracts for solid waste collection and/or disposal between the council, private collectors and public equipment and/or disposal site owners and/or operators, and shall regulate the establishment, maintenance and operation of public or private solid waste collection and/or disposal systems, methods and sites. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 2.1) 
Sec. 25-21. - Functions of administrative officer. 
Collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste shall be under the supervision and control of the administrative officer. He shall have authority to establish routes and days of collection; types and locations of solid waste containers; and such other regulations pertaining to collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste as he may find necessary and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided such measures are not contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 2.2) 
Sec. 25-22. - Regulations. 
The administrative officer is hereby authorized and directed, after a public hearing has been held in accordance with the laws governing the conduct of public hearings by the council, to adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such regulations shall be published once in a newspaper published within the city and, if there should be no such newspaper, then such regulations shall be posted for one (1) week in three (3) public places of the city. The administrative officer shall file a certified copy of all regulations which he may adopt with the city clerk, and such regulations shall be made available for the inspection of the public on request. Such regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as hereafter provided. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 6.1) 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of rules by state agencies, Ga. Code Ann., § 3A-104. 
Sec. 25-23. - Right of entry. 
The administrative officer, after identifying himself, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 5.1) 
State Law reference— Investigation of violations of Solid Waste Management Act, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 43-1609, 43-1616. 
Sec. 25-24. - Sanitation inspectors. 
The administrative officer shall have the right to appoint sanitation inspectors who shall have authority, and whose duty shall be, to make routine inspections of residential containers, commercial containers and refuse collection, storage and disposal areas and determine the serviceability and condition of said containers and collection areas. Such inspectors, upon determining that a container or area is becoming or has become unserviceable or unsanitary or likely to cause an unsanitary condition, shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which said container or condition exists to inform him of the condition existing. It shall be the duty of the inspector to issue a summons directed to the owner or occupant to whom such notice has been issued and who fails within a reasonable time to correct same or seek a hearing to appear in the municipal court to answer the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 3.2) 
Sec. 25-25. - Health hazard emergencies. 
Whenever the administrative officer finds that an emergency exists involving a serious health hazard which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue a written order citing the existence of such an emergency and the conditions violating this chapter which require corrective action to remove such health hazard. If such corrective action has not been taken the administrative officer may take such action as may be necessary to protect the public health, including stoppage of processing operations. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the administrative officer shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, but in any case not later than three (3) days after the petition was filed. After such hearing, depending upon his finding as to whether or not the provisions of this chapter and of the regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the administrative officer shall continue such other in effect or modify it or revoke it. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 4.5) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to proclaim and deal with emergencies, § 2-9(d). 
Sec. 25-26. - Private disposal sites—Permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any solid waste, excepting waste from his own home, without having first obtained a disposal area permit as required by rules and regulations of the department and acceptance of the site for such use and purpose by the administrative officer. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 14.1) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the issuance of permits, § 2-9(s). 
Sec. 25-27. - Same—Maintenance; inspections. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. The administrative officer or authorized representative of the department shall be permitted to enter private disposal sites at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with these and all other pertinent laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 14.2) 
Sec. 25-28. - Penalties. 
No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any regulation adopted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 18.1) 
Sec. 25-29. - Criminal trial of violations. 
Inspectors appointed by the administrative officer, and the administrative officer shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this and shall issue a summons to any violator of any provision to appear in the municipal court to answer to the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this chapter, after notice and hearing as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 3.3) 
Cross reference— Municipal court, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 25-30. - Civil enforcement—Generally. 
The administrative officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. He may call upon the chief of police and other responsible authorities for assistance in its enforcement. All regulatory actions of the administrative officer shall be subject to review and approval by the council. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 3.1) 
State Law reference— Civil penalties for violation of Solid Waste Management Act, Ga. Code. Ann., § 43-1615. 
Sec. 25-31. - Same—Service of notices and orders, hearings. 
(a)  Whenever the responsible authority determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant hereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be put into writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the holder of a permit issued under this chapter, or upon the owner or his agent or the occupant of any premises within the area of political subdivision; provided, that such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when a copy thereof has been served personally, or in accordance with any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state. 
(c)  Such notice may: 
(1)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  State that, unless conditions or practices described in such notice shall cease, a permit which has been issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 4.1) 
Sec. 25-32. - Petition for hearing. 
Any person who is affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or in any regulation adopted pursuant hereto, may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the administrative officer: Provided, that such person shall file in the office of the administrative officer a petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the ground therefor, within ten (10) days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition, the administrative officer shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten (10) days after the day on which the petition was filed: Provided, that, upon application of the petitioner, the administrative officer may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when, in his judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 4.2) 
State Law reference— Hearing under Solid Waste Management Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 43-1612. 
Sec. 25-33. - Orders of administrative officer. 
After a hearing, the administrative officer shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon his finding based on such hearing as to whether or not the provisions of this chapter and of the regulations adopted pursuant hereto have been complied with. If the administrative officer sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing has not been filed in the office of the administrative officer within ten (10) days after such notice was served. In the case of any notice which states that a permit required by this chapter may be suspended or revoked, the administrative officer may suspend or revoke such permit if an order is issued and corrective action has not been taken within the time specified in the notice. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 4.3) 
Sec. 25-34. - Record of decisions. 
The proceedings at a hearing, including the findings and decision of the administrative officer, shall be summarized, put into writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the administrative officer. Such record shall include also a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 4.4) 
Sec. 25-35. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the administrative officer may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 4.4) 
State Law reference— Judicial review under Solid Waste Management Act, Ga. Code Ann., § 43-1613. 
Secs. 25-36—25-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORAGE OF WASTES 

Sec. 25-52. - Generally. 
(a)  Refuse shall be stored in Rebel containers. Small amounts of yard trash may be mixed with garbage; all garbage must be stored in approved Rebel containers. Exceptions may be granted in writing by the administrative officer upon the direction of the mayor and council only. 
(b)  Any water customers and users in the city using the city water, will be required to maintain a Rebel at their home if someone is living in the house, and be required to pay for said sanitation service at the rates as set forth in the city sanitation ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 11-2; Ord. of 4-13-92) 
Cross reference— Determination of fees, § 25-154. 
Sec. 25-53. - Maintenance of containers. 
Container means a Rebel container, to be put on the curb or whichever location may be advised by the administrative officer for pickup on a certain day. The container must be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and shall be furnished by the city. However, the homeowner will be responsible for the Rebel container, and any abuse or damage beyond normal wear will be the responsibility of the homeowner. 
(Code 1967, § 11-2; Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.1) 
Sec. 25-54. - Placement of containers for pickup. 
Residential Rebel containers shall be placed on the curb or other site suitable for route pickup as advised by the administrative officer only. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.8; Ord. of 3-25-74) 
Sec. 25-55. - Placement of container after emptying. 
The Rebel container will be left at the curb after emptying in a truck for the owner to replace. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.8; Ord. of 3-25-74) 
Sec. 25-56. - Approval of bulk containers. 
Use of bulk solid waste containers property designed for available mechanical pickup equipment may be approved by the administrative officer for apartment houses, commercial places, institutions and similar locations where large amounts of solid waste are generated. Approvals for use of bulk containers shall be based upon durability of construction, adaptability to mechanical pickup equipment, adequacy of capacity, ease of maintenance, proposed location and any other factors upon acceptability of the proposed bulk container. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.2) 
Sec. 25-57. - Garbage containers to be kept clean. 
Solid waste containers containing garbage of any sort shall be washed thoroughly after being emptied and shall be treated with an insecticide, or they shall be lined with a suitable paper or plastic material. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.13) 
Sec. 25-58. - Materials prohibited in containers. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.11) 
Sec. 25-59. - Tampering with containers. 
No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the administrative officer, or an employee of a person holding a contract with the city for collection of solid waste, shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where same shall have been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 8.7) 
Sec. 25-60. - Yard debris. 
No grass clippings, shrubbery clippings, tree limbs, bushes or any similar yard debris may be deposited into the container for household solid waste for disposal. All such yard debris shall be removed by the property owner/resident/commercial collector or deposited on the street or curbside for pick up by the City of Nashville. No yard debris shall be placed or disposed of by the owner/resident/commercial collector on the street or curbside in such manner as to impair, impede or obstruct in any manner the City of Nashville storm drainage system. Violation of this section may result in a citation and fine in accordance with the applicable schedule of fines for the City of Nashville. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 27, 2008, amended § 25-60, which pertained to tree and brush waste and derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 14, 1972, in its entirety to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 25-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 27, 2008, deleted § 25-61 which pertained to the storage of trash and leaves in bags and derived from ordinances adopted Aug. 14, 1972; Mar. 25, 1974; and Aug. 26, 1974. 
Sec. 25-62. - Collection of pet litter. 
Pet litter will not be collected unless placed in a securely closed plastic or paper bag. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.12) 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 25-63. - Liquid wastes. 
Liquids will not be collected by the city and shall be disposed of by other means. The administrative officer shall assist persons in finding a solution to disposal problems involving them. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.7) 
Sec. 25-64. - Accumulation of refuse generally. 
Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse and litter upon the property occupied by him or public thoroughfares adjoining his property, or water drainage ditches. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 7.10) 
Sec. 25-65. - Unauthorized accumulation of waste as nuisance. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premise is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within such reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice of the administrative officer shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 8.6) 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances in cities, Ga. Code Ann., § 72-401. 
Secs. 25-66—25-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND MULTIPLE DWELLINGS 

Sec. 25-82. - Approval of refuse storage arrangements. 
Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment or multiple dwelling, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the administrative officer and furnished by the establishment. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 8.1; Ord. of 3-25-74) 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5; issuance of building permits, App. A, § 102. 
Sec. 25-83. - Location of commercial containers. 
Commercial containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings shall be placed at locations approved by the administrative officer for collection by the sanitary department. The city will not collect refuse from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 8.2) 
Sec. 25-84. - Collection of cardboard boxes. 
Cardboard boxes shall be flattened and placed in containers; exception to this must be obtained in writing from the administrative officer. All exceptions must have an increase in fee. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 8.2) 
Sec. 25-85. - Maintenance of area around shared containers. 
Where the occupants of two (2) or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or commercial container, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 8.3) 
Sec. 25-86. - Maintenance of area around multiple dwelling containers. 
Where multiple dwellings are served by commercial containers, it shall be the responsibility of the management of such property to maintain the area surrounding such commercial containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse and litter. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 8.4) 
Secs. 25-87—25-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POLLUTION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust, § 2-9(ii). 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide air pollution control services, Ga. Code Ann., § 2-6102; unlawful activities relating to fires, Ga. Code Ann., § 26-9926a; Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-701 et seq.; air quality generally, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 43-27. 

Sec. 25-103. - When burning permitted. 
A permit for burning shall be granted by the fire department in such cases as follow: 
(1)  Reduction of leaves on the premises on which they fall by the person in control of the premises, after notice to the fire department, unless prohibited by local ordinance and/or regulation; 
(2)  Destruction of combustible demolition or construction materials either on site or transported to a burning facility approved by the department of natural resources, unless prohibited by local regulations; 
(3)  For recreational purposes or cooking food for immediate human consumption; 
(4)  Fires set for purposes of training public fire-fighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental entity and the guidelines set forth by the department of natural resources are strictly observed; 
(5)  Disposal of tree limbs and other loose materials resulting from storm damage. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 15.3; Mo. of 8-26-74) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 25-104. - Outdoor burning of garbage. 
No garbage or other materials from which offensive or nuisance odors emanate during combustion shall be burned outside of any building. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 15.2) 
Sec. 25-105. - Fires on solid waste disposal or storage site. 
No person shall set fire to or burn any papers or other solid waste deposited at any storage or disposal site or on the grounds thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 15.1) 
Sec. 25-106. - Bonfires on streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or make any fires in or upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-13) 
Secs. 25-107—25-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COLLECTION OF REFUSE 

Sec. 25-123. - Collection and disposal generally. 
Refuse may be collected, for disposal by the city, by individuals or commercial sanitation firms licensed by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 11-6; Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.1) 
Sec. 25-124. - Frequency of collections. 
The city and its licensed scavengers will collect refuse under the following conditions: 
(1)  Refuse will be collected at least twice each week from residential units; yard trash will be collected once weekly on a day specified by the administrative officer. 
(2)  Refuse will be collected as often as five (5) times a week from commercial establishments. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.2; Ord. of 3-25-74) 
Sec. 25-125. - Curbside pickup—Designation of days. 
When curbside pickup service is designated within a pickup route or district the administrative officer shall designate in writing the days of the week upon which curbside pickup will be made; the days are to be the same in each week and shall not be changed to a different day or days without at least ten (10) days' notice in writing to each owner or occupant on the route. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.7) 
Sec. 25-126. - Same—Fee. 
(a)  The fee for curbside pickup of refuse on a complete route basis as described and defined in this article shall be determined by the council. 
(b)  Sanitation fees for regular curbside pick-up for ninety-five-gallon containers will be: 
Residential: Thirteen dollars and fifty cents ($13.50) per month, per container. 
Beauty shop: Thirteen dollars and fifty cents ($13.50) per month, per container. 
Commercial: Fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40) per month, per container. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.9; Ord. of 8-22-05) 
Sec. 25-127. - Same—Placement of refuse on curb. 
On the days designated for curbside pickup it shall be the duty of each owner to carry his refuse to the curb in front of his residence before 8:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the pickup crew. Any bag or container of refuse placed on the curb after the departure of the pickup crew shall be at the peril of the owner and he shall be subject to prosecution for violation of section 18-42 should the street become littered from the contents of this bag or container. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.8) 
Sec. 25-128. - Holidays. 
Collections shall not be made on the following holidays unless otherwise specified by the administrative officer: New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.6) 
Sec. 25-129. - Collection of dead animals. 
Small dead animals, not over thirty (30) pounds in weight, if kept separate from garbage and rubbish, will be collected without charge upon notice to the administrative officer, provided that a charge will be made for such animals collected from animal hospitals, kennels, pet shops and the like. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.3) 
Sec. 25-130. - Discontinuance when containers unfit. 
Collection service shall be discontinued where residential containers or commercial containers are inadequate or have been condemned as unfit by a sanitary inspector and notice of same has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises who has refused to correct the situation then existing. 
(Code 1967, § 11-2; Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.4) 
Sec. 25-131. - Materials not collected by city. 
The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock or discarded furniture and appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors except on a special fee basis as may be established by the council. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.5) 
Sec. 25-132. - Contract collectors. 
Any person may contract with the council to engage in the business of collection, transporting or disposing of solid waste, provided such person has applied for and obtained an appropriate solid waste permit in accordance with rules and regulations of the department. Persons contracting for solid waste collection and disposal shall, before engaging in such business, be licensed by the city and shall conform to all regulations providing for safe and sanitary collection and transportation of waste to a point of disposal, and shall execute a bond to the city in the amount stipulated by his specific contract specifications but in no case less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with a responsible surety company duly authorized to do business in the state, to be approved by the council, establishing conditions for the full and faithful performance of all agreements and covenants in said contract. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.10) 
Sec. 25-133. - License for collection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to collect solid waste within the city, except from his own residence or business or industrial property, without first obtaining a license for such business operation from the city. 
(b)  Written applications for licenses shall be filed with the administrative officer two (2) weeks prior to the date of any action required with respect thereto, with the following three (3) exhibits: 
(1)  A collector's permit as required under solid waste regulations; 
(2)  The required license tax as set forth in the occupational license tax schedule on file in the office of the city clerk; and 
(3)  Evidence executed by representatives of a duly qualified insurance company attesting that liability and property damage insurance has been issued to the applicant in amounts acceptable to the administrative officer, to remain in effect for the term of the license, and that the administrative officer shall be notified not less than thirty (30) days prior to any change in, expiration of or cancellation of such insurance. The administrative officer shall cause to be made an appraisal of the application including, but not limited to, the qualification of the applicant, equipment proposed to be used, service to be provided, methods of operation and capacity to finance the proposal; when the requirements herein specified are found to be met and the best interests of the city to be satisfactorily served, the administrative officer shall approve the application and forward same with fees to the city clerk, who shall issue the license. All such licenses shall expire on December thirty-first of the year of issue. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 9.1) 
Sec. 25-134. - Transportation of refuse—Requirements for vehicles. 
Vehicles to be used in streets and highways for solid waste collection, transportation or disposal shall be kept clean and shall be certified in regard to highway safety by the motor vehicle division of the Georgia Department of Public Safety. Such vehicle bodies shall be in good condition and repair, covered and constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. The outside of the body shall be painted and identified by the name, telephone number and permit number of the person owning the collection business in letters and numbers not less than three (3) inches high and easily legible. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 10.11) 
Sec. 25-135. - Same—Securing material transported. 
It shall be unlawful for any person including city collectors and sanitary contractors to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 11.1) 
Sec. 25-136. - Same—Unlicensed collection. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, not licensed by the city, to collect and haul any refuse, other than that arising from his own accumulation, within any area of the city in which refuse collection service is maintained by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 11.2) 
Secs. 25-137—25-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SANITATION FEES 

Sec. 25-153. - Sanitary docket. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk or his authorized deputy to prepare, maintain and keep for public inspection a complete record of the name of each owner, the address of the premises served, either by street address or by tax map reference if no street address is available, the amount of the sanitation fees, the amount of each payment and an entry showing when each payment was made. This record shall be called the sanitary docket. Each docket shall be cumulative of all unpaid monthly installments. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 17.2) 
Sec. 25-154. - Determination of fees. 
Fees for the collection and disposal of solid waste by the city shall be set and determined by the council after appropriate public hearing. 
(Code 1967, § 11-4; Ord. of 8-14-72, § 16.1) 
Editor's note— The schedule of solid waste collection fees is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 25-154.1. - Sanitation deposit charge. 
There shall be a sanitation deposit charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) to guarantee the payment of monthly sanitation charges for commercial and residential customers who do not pay for water or gas services with the City and do not have a water or gas deposit. When service to customer is discontinued permanently, this deposit, less any amounts still due the city for sanitation service, shall be refunded without interest. Should customer failed to pay their bill, service will be discontinued with container being picked up and amount due city will be deducted from deposit. Customer will be responsible for any balance due after deposit has been applied. 
(Ord. of 8-28-06) 
Sec. 25-155. - Mailing and payment of statements. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk or his authorized deputy to prepare and mail to each owner or commercial lessee in the sanitary district of Nashville who receives sanitary service a statement showing the amount due and the amount in arrears, if any. Such statements shall be prepared in advance. Each payment shall be paid in advance by the owner, and such payment shall become delinquent upon the first day of the next succeeding month. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 17.1) 
Sec. 25-156. - Records available for public use. 
Upon the request of any person interested in examining the title of any parcel of real estate within the city, the person in charge of the maintenance of the sanitary docket under the supervision of the city clerk or his authorized deputy shall furnish to him a form statement showing the information required in this article, which form statement shall be signed by the person maintaining said docket and said authorized deputy as to the correctness of the information contained therein. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 17.3) 
Sec. 25-157. - Termination of service when fees unpaid. 
On premises being served by the sanitation department where there is a delinquent sanitary installment, after the owner or commercial lessee thereof has been notified by the inclusion of the amount of the past due installment in a current statement or on a separate bill or other notice and the owner or commercial lessee refuses to promptly pay same, the administrative officer shall have the authority to refuse sanitary pickup at such premises. Regardless of whether the installment remaining delinquent was incurred by a prior owner or commercial lessee, the sanitary service shall not be restored until such delinquent and current installments are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 17.5) 
Sec. 25-158. - Issuance of executions; liens. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk or his authorized deputy to make an annual audit of the sanitary docket during the last quarter of each calendar year, but not later than December 15, and issue a fi. fa. or execution against the property served, which fi. fa. or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as fi. fa.s or executions issued for city taxes. Each monthly installment shall immediately become a lien against the property served upon the date it fall due. 
(Ord. of 8-14-72, § 17.4) 
State Law reference— Executions and proceeding thereunder, O.C.G.A., tit. 39; liens, tit. 67, part VII. 
Chapter 26 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of mayor and city council with respect to streets and sidewalks, § 2-9(u). 
Cross reference— Curbside pick-up of solid waste, § 25-125 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 28; utilities, Ch. 29; classification of streets, App. A, § 63; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference— Neglect of streets, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-306; authority of city to construct, open, extend and close public streets, alleys and sidewalks, § 69-312; street improvements, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-401 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Obstructing streets, sidewalks. 
No person shall place in any street or alley or upon any sidewalk of the city, any boxes, casks, goods, wares or merchandise or other obstruction of any kind, or use any hand vehicle on any sidewalk so as to prevent the free and safe passage of persons. 
(Code 1967, § 20-2) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to control obstructions upon or adjacent to streets, § 2-9(v). 
State Law reference— Without express legislative authority, a municipality may not grant to any person the right to erect or maintain a structure or obstruction in a public street, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-304. 
Sec. 26-2. - Removal of obstructions. 
The mayor is hereby given full authority to order the removal of any and all obstructions on the streets and sidewalks of the city, including telephone and light posts, filling stations, trees, awnings and their supports and any other obstructions which are now or in the future may be in the way of, or may hinder, the proper paving and improving of the streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-1) 
Sec. 26-3. - Permits for street cuts; fees; inspections. 
(a)  Permits. The building official shall issue permits, to cover cost of repairing streets and alleys, to a person where said person finds it necessary to dig holes, ditches or other excavations in order to place pipe lines, sewer lines, water lines, electric, telegraph or telephone wires under or across any street or alley within the city limits. The amount of the permit shall depend upon the cost of repairing a street or alley to its former condition, immediate to the time of issuing the permit. 
(b)  Fees. No permit shall be issued for less than three dollars ($3.00). Permit fees shall be based on costs of repair, and fees shall be twenty (20) percent of such costs. 
The building official shall see that all fees are paid for permits and paid over to the city. He shall keep a record of all transactions of his office and shall be provided with proper blank applications for the convenient listing of information regarding the work for which the permit is being issued. 
(c)  Inspections. The building official shall make inspection on jobs for which he has issued permits, from time to time, and shall see that, at the completion of the work, conditions are the same as before work started. 
All payments for such inspections shall be made before the building official shall give a certificate of inspection to the person having the permit for such work. 
(Code 1967, § 20-3) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the issuance of permits, § 2-9(s). 
Secs. 26-4—26-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET PAVING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to construct and improve streets and sidewalks, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-312. 

Sec. 26-20. - Additions, etc., on streets and roads; regulation; application. 
(a)  All additions, detractions, alterations, installations, construction, repairs, renewals, removals and any other acts of maintenance to, in, along, over or under any street, road or highway belonging to the city shall be done in a manner so as to comply with the regulations of such activity, which said regulations are set up by the state department of transportation under the authority given said department by Ga. Code Ann., § 95A-205. 
(b)  Subsection (a) hereof shall apply to all public, private or cooperative operations, activities and equipment including publicly-owned fire and police signals and street lighting systems, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 20-5) 
Sec. 26-21. - Curbs and gutters prerequisite to paving. 
(a)  Policy declared. It shall be the policy of the council, whether by petition or otherwise, that no streets that have not been paved will be paved in the city until they have been curbed and guttered and an assessment made against the property owners for the cost of same; old streets which have been paved in the past will not be repaved until they have been curbed and guttered. 
(b)  Payment. The property owners, when assessed upon completion of such curb and guttering, shall pay cash, and in cases where the owners of the property do not deem it advisable to pay cash for the curb and gutters they will have a privilege after the assessment is made of paying the assessment in twelve (12) monthly installments, as part of the utility bill, at the maximum lawful rate of interest. 
(Code 1967, § 20-4) 
State Law reference— Maximum lawful rate of interest, Ga. Code Ann., § 57-101. 
Sec. 26-22. - Street improvements—Resolution. 
Whenever it shall be necessary to open, lay out, widen, grade, straighten, vacate, close, abolish, curb, pave, drain, alter, pave and renew paving and improve the public streets, alleys and lanes and sidewalks, of the city, and to put down, repair and renew curbing, side grades, cross drains, crossings and other improvements thereon; and to charge, assess and collect expense thereof for paving curb and guttering and improving the streets, alleys and sidewalks and repaving same in said city, the mayor and council shall pass a resolution naming the streets wherein the paving, curb and guttering, resurfacing, straightening and draining are to take place and the cost of same. The property owners fronting on the streets shall receive a copy of such resolution. 
(Code 1967, § 20-21) 
Sec. 26-23. - Same—Notice. 
The notice of the resolution shall be served personally or by certified mail on all of the city owners, at their last known address, by the chief of police, and show cause on a date and hour certain, before the mayor and council why they should not be assessed per linear foot for the curb, gutters and paving. 
(Code 1967, § 20-22) 
Sec. 26-24. - Same—Assessment of costs. 
The resolution and notice given thereof as provided and no objections having been made by the property owners affected, before the city council on the date and hour set for the hearing, an assessment for the cost of the curbs, gutters, paving and repairing shall be made by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-23) 
Sec. 26-25. - Petition for paving; contents; fee; presentation to council. 
(a)  Any citizen who shall own real property in the city, who may want the street in front of his property paved, shall first file with the city clerk a written petition. The petition shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of all of the real property owners of the street to be paved; 
(2)  The name of the street; 
(3)  The width and length; 
(4)  The total number of feet owned by each property owner fronting the street to be paved; and 
(5)  That all (one hundred (100) percent) of the real property owners who front on the street are willing to share in the cost of paving. 
(b)  When the petition is filed with the city clerk, it shall be accompanied by a minimum deposit of one dollar ($1.00) per front foot of the length of the street to be paved and a rough drawing of the street. The petition must contain a statement that the real property owners will pay two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the cost of paving. The city clerk shall present the petition to the city council at its next meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 20-15) 
Sec. 26-26. - Payment of one-third of cost by city. 
(a)  The city council, by this article, is authorized to pay one-third ( 1/3 ) of the street-paving cost, from the general funds of the city, provided: 
(1)  The petition is in order, the deposit is made with the city clerk and the other conditions of the petition are met. 
(2)  The petition must be approved by the head of the utilities department and have his written approval. 
(3)  The petition must be approved by the head of the street department and have his written approval, that it is advisable and feasible. 
(4)  The city has on hand funds or funds are available for such purpose. 
(b)  The city council, if satisfied that all provisions of this section have been complied with, may authorize the paving and payment of one-third ( 1/3 ) of the cost. 
(Code 1967, § 20-16) 
Sec. 26-27. - Bids; approval; expenses; contracts. 
(a)  When petitions are approved by the city council for the paving of streets as provided in section 26-25, the city clerk shall secure bids from paving contractors and notify the council and all of the real property owners of the cost of paving. All bids received by the city clerk shall be passed upon by the city council. All of the real property owners as set out in the petition shall agree to the cost of paving. 
(b)  All expenses of securing bids for paving, easements, attorney fees in drawing contracts and examining titles shall be paid by the petitioners. 
(c)  All contracts shall have the approval of the head of the utilities department and the head of the street department, and all contracts shall be satisfactory to the city attorney, in form and substance. 
(Code 1967, § 20-17) 
Sec. 26-28. - Contractor's bond. 
(a)  All contractors who are awarded contracts shall be required to give bond in double the amount of the bid with two (2) good and solvent securities or to furnish a corporate bond in the amount of bid for the faithful performance of the contract and to indemnify the city for any damages occasioned by a failure to perform the paving contract. 
(b)  The bond shall provide for the use of the city and of all persons doing work for or furnishing skill, tools, machinery or materials under or for the purpose of such contract, conditioned for the completion of the contract in accordance with its terms, for saving the city free from all costs and charges, that may accrue on account of the doing of the work, specified for the payments as they become due, of all just claims for work, tools, machinery, skill and materials furnished by persons under or for the purpose of such contracts. 
(c)  The bond shall provide for the use of the city, that the contractors shall indemnify said city against all damages, injury and loss to which said city may be subjected by reason of any wrongdoing, misconduct, want of care and skill, negligence of said principal, his agents and employees in and about the execution of said contract. 
(Code 1967, § 20-18) 
State Law reference— Bond for public contractors, Ga. Code Ann., § 23-1705 et seq. 
Sec. 26-29. - Deposit of additional funds. 
Upon final approval, by the property owners and the mayor and council, of the cost of paving of the street set out in the petition, the property owners shall deposit any additional funds that may be needed to meet their share of paving with the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 20-19) 
Sec. 26-30. - Completion notice. 
The contractor, when the work is completed, shall notify the head of the street department, who shall make an inspection of the work and upon his written approval and acceptance, the clerk is authorized to pay the contractor the amount set out in the contract. 
(Code 1967, § 20-20) 
Secs. 26-31—26-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NUMBERING 

Sec. 26-47. - Property owners to number improvements. 
All property owners within the city limits shall be responsible and required to place numbers on their improvements on their property which correspond with the street numbering system in the city. For example, the owner of the house at 512 Giddens Avenue shall be responsible for placing the number 512 on the front of the house in a prominent place so that it can be seen from the street. 
(Ord. No. 3-77, 5-9-77) 
Sec. 26-48. - Height, color of numbers; supplied by city. 
The numbers required by this article shall be a minimum of two (2) inches in height and shall be in contrast in color with the rest of the building. The numbers will be made available to the residents of the city at no charge and can be picked up at the city engineer's office or at the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 3-77, 7-25-77) 
Sec. 26-49. - Duty of meter reader. 
The meter reader shall have the responsibility of checking each building in Nashville to ascertain whether or not the numbers have been placed on the buildings. If they have not, then he shall report this to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 3-77, 5-9-77) 
Sec. 26-50. - Notice of violation. 
When any house, trailer, commercial building or any other type of improvement in the city limits does not have a number prominently displayed, the owner will be notified by the city clerk in writing that he has thirty (30) days to comply with this article after which time he will be in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-77, 7-25-77) 
Secs. 26-51—26-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREVENTION OF DAMAGE IN EXCAVATIONS AND DEMOLITION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Blasting or excavating near underground gas pipes, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1301 et seq. 

Sec. 26-67. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the "Underground Utility Damage Prevention Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 1, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 26-68. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Damage includes the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including augering, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, back hoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
Operator means any person who owns or operates a utility. 
Person means any individual, any corporation, partnership, association or any other entity organized under the laws of any state; any subdivision or instrumentality of a state; and any employee, agent or legal representative thereof. 
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewage. 
Working day means every day except Saturday, Sunday and national and legal holidays. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 2, 9-12-77) 
State Law reference— Public and legal holidays designated, Ga. Code Ann., § 14-1809. 
Sec. 26-69. - Filing requirements of utility operators. 
(a)  Within ninety (90) days after the effective date of all other sections of this article, each operator having underground utilities in the city shall file with the city clerk a list containing the name of every section within the city in which it has underground utilities (including those utilities that have been abandoned in place by the operator but not yet physically removed), the name of the operator and the name, title, address and telephone number of its representative designated to receive the written or telephone notice of intent required by section 26-72. 
(b)  Changes in any of the information contained in the list filed under subsection (a) hereof shall be filed by the operator with the city clerk within five (5) working days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 5, 9-12-77) 
State Law reference— Gas companies to file certain information, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1303. 
Sec. 26-70. - Duty to locate underground utilities. 
Except as provided in section 26-76, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public place, a private easement of an operator or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building, without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in sections 26-72 and 26-75 the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 4, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 26-71. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) hereof, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 26-70 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 26-70 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary, to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire departments. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 11, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 26-72. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 26-76, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 26-70, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three (3), but not more than ten (10), full working days: 
(1)  On each operator which has filed a list required by section 26-69 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition; or 
(2)  If the proposed area of excavation or demolition is served by an association provided for in section 26-74, on such association and on each operator which has filed a list required by section 26-69 indicating that it has underground utilities in the proposed area of excavation or demolition that is not receiving the services of the association; provided, 
where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) hereof must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators and associations notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 6, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 26-73. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 26-72, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 26-70 shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utilities; and 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 10, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 26-74. - Operator associations. 
Operators may form and operate an association providing for mutual receipt of section 26-72 notifications of excavation or demolition operations in a defined geographical area. An association that provides such service on behalf of operators having underground utilities within the city shall file with the city clerk the telephone number and address of the association, a description of the geographical area served by the association and a list of the names and addresses of each operator receiving such service from the association. 
Sec. 26-75. - Response to notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
Each operator or designated representative (including an association established in accordance with section 26-74) notified in accordance with section 26-72 shall, not less than two (2) working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 8, 9-12-77) 
Sec. 26-76. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 26-72 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to decrease an imminent danger to life, health or property, provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area (or to an association provided for in section 26-74, that serves as operator) where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health or property will result before the procedures under sections 26-72 and 26-75 can be fully complied with. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 9, 9-12-77) 
State Law reference— Blasting or excavating in event of emergency, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1309. 
Sec. 26-77. - Permits. 
A permit issued pursuant to law, authorizing excavation or demolition operations, shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8-77, § 3, 9-12-77) 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide for the issuance of permits, § 2-9(s). 
State Law reference— Duties of persons engaged in blasting or excavating, Ga. Code Ann., § 92A-1305. 
Chapter 27 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to levy taxes and to contract for services in connection therewith, § 2-9(n); finance and taxation generally, § 7-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverage taxes, § 3-50 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Taxing power restricted, Ga. Code Ann., § 2-6103; sales for municipal taxes, redemption of property sold, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 92-44; exemption of personalty from ad valorem tax, § 92-239. 

Sec. 27-1. - Interest on unpaid taxes. 
Unpaid city taxes shall bear interest at the maximum lawful rate after January 20th of each year, and the delinquent taxpayer shall also pay fi fa costs. 
(Ord. of 1-14-74) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to add interest to taxes not paid when due, § 7-3. 
Sec. 27-2. - Report of sale of real estate. 
Every person selling real estate owned by such person shall, within thirty (30) days from the date of such sale, report such sale, giving a description of the property, where located, the sale price and the name of the purchaser, to the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 21-2) 
Chapter 28 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to regulate and control public ways, § 2-9(v). 
Cross reference— Use of city vehicles, § 2-45; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Georgia Rules of the Road adopted. 
Pursuant to Georgia Code, Title 68A, Section 68A-1503 through Section 68A-1507, the entire Title 68A of the Georgia Code, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, is hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
Sec. 28-2. - Authority of police and firemen. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that, in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire department may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 15-2) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 10-21 et seq.; police department, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 28-3. - Obedience to officers directing traffic. 
All persons are required to observe the directions of all authorized officers when engaged in directing traffic within the city. This includes county officers and also includes authorized air raid wardens and civil defense workers in time of emergency. 
(Code of 1967, § 15-3) 
Cross reference— Civil defense, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 28-4. - Obedience to signs; devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey or to disregard any stop sign, traffic light or parking sign as follows: 
(1)  To fail to stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  To cross an intersection when the light is red. 
(3)  To park where a parking sign has printed thereon "no parking." 
(4)  To remain parked for a longer period of time than indicated by the parking sign. 
(Code 1967, § 15-4) 
Sec. 28-5. - Unregistered vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to occupy the driver's seat of any vehicle which is not properly registered under the laws of the state or not otherwise entitled to be operated in the state. 
(Code 1967, § 15-8) 
Sec. 28-6. - Noisy vehicles. 
No cutouts shall be allowed upon the street while motor vehicles are in use upon said streets. Unusual and unnecessary noises made by motor vehicles shall not be permitted, and neither may unusual and unnecessary blowing of automobile horns be permitted. 
(Code 1967, § 15-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 68-1716, 68-1717. 
Sec. 28-7. - Application of chapter to bicycles. 
Every person riding a bicycle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1967, § 15-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 68A-1202. 
Sec. 28-8. - Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals to obey traffic regulations. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter with reference to the equipment of vehicles and except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1967, § 15-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 68A-105; authority of city to regulate persons propelling pushcarts, § 68A-1502(a)(17). 
Sec. 28-9. - Responsibility of parents, guardians, employers; duty of police. 
Any parent, guardian or other person, or employer who has charge of or control over, either or both, any child or employee under the age of seventeen (17) years, and who knowingly and willfully allows such child or employee to operate any motor vehicle, including bicycles, motorcycles and motor scooters, propelled by motor power over and upon the streets and public places within the city contrary to the ordinances and laws of the city with regard to the operation of motor vehicles upon the public streets and public places of the city and with regard to the restrictions thereof and the regulations thereof by city ordinances and laws, shall be guilty of a violation of such ordinance and law. 
(Code 1967, § 15-7) 
State Law reference— Juvenile courts, Ga. Code Ann., Title 24A. 
Sec. 28-10. - Passengers. 
No person shall be allowed to drive a passenger automobile or motor vehicle upon the streets of the city when the same contains more passengers than can be seated upon the regular seats originally provided and constructed therein by the manufacturer. In buses, taxicabs and other public conveyances operated by motor, not more than two (2) passengers shall be allowed to occupy the front seat with the driver, and all other passengers carried therein must be seated while the same is in operation. 
(Code 1967, § 15-10) 
Sec. 28-11. - Projecting loads. 
No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any highway with any load carried thereon extending more than six (6) inches beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of such vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 15-14) 
Sec. 28-12. - Spilling loads, etc. 
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
(Code 1967, § 15-13) 
Sec. 28-13. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1967, § 15-11) 
Sec. 28-14. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 15-12) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate persons upon skates, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles, Ga. Code Ann., § 68A-1502(a)(18). 
Sec. 28-15. - Pedestrians crossing streets; right-of-way over certain vehicles. 
Pedestrians shall cross the streets of the city wherever possible only at intersections. They shall cross only at right angles. Pedestrians crossing streets in marked and designated crosswalks shall at all times have the right-of-way over vehicles making turns into the streets being crossed by the pedestrians. 
(Code 1967, § 15-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., §§ 68A-502, 68A-503. 
Sec. 28-16. - Pedestrians interfering with traffic. 
Pedestrians shall not carelessly or maliciously interfere with the proper use of the public streets. 
(Code 1967, § 15-15) 
Sec. 28-17. - Search of vehicles of persons arrested. 
All officers of the city shall impound all automobiles and all other types of motor vehicles, public or private, occupied by, driven by or in the custody of any person violating any municipal ordinance or state statute, shall remove the defendant therefrom and shall cause a complete inventory and search of said vehicle to be made at the city hall, or at such other place as shall be convenient to such officer. Said officers shall make a complete inventory of all articles and items therein contained for storage and safekeeping, shall file the original thereof with the city clerk and shall deliver to the defendant from each motor vehicle searched a copy of such inventory of said motor vehicle seized. 
(Ord. of 5-8-72, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 28-18. - City council support for speed detection devices. 
The city council fully supports enforcement of speed laws and encourages the use, by trained police personnel, of speed detection devices to apprehend those motorists who disobey the laws in disregard for safety. 
(Res. No. 1-79, 2-1-79) 
Editor's note— Res. of Feb. 1, 1979, being not expressly amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 28-18 in the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 28-19—28-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to prevent the blocking of public ways, § 2-9(v). 
Cross reference— Off-street automobile parking and storage, App. A, § 65; off-street loading and unloading, App. A, § 66. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, Ga. Code Ann., § 68A-1502(a)(1). 

Sec. 28-34. - Vehicles interfering with traffic. 
No vehicle shall so occupy any street or part thereof as to unreasonably interfere with or interrupt the free passage of other cars or vehicles or persons. 
(Code 1967, § 15-47) 
Sec. 28-35. - Stop lines at traffic lights. 
A stop line shall be painted at all traffic lights to enable large vehicles to make a proper turn. No driver shall stop a vehicle beyond such line. 
(Mo. of 3-25-74) 
Sec. 28-36. - Parking spaces. 
Every vehicle parked in an area where parking spaces have been designated or marked off shall be parked entirely within a single such space. 
(Code 1967, § 15-30) 
Sec. 28-37. - Parking prohibited at certain places. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or with the provisions of this chapter or in compliance with the directions of a traffic officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within ten (10) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of roadway. 
(8)  Within twenty (20) feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when properly signposted. 
(9)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(10)  Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a street. 
(11)  At any place where signs prohibit stopping. 
(12)  Upon any street, other than an alley, leaving less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that an operator may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or material. 
(Code 1967, § 15-31) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 68A-1003. 
Sec. 28-38. - Parking in alleys. 
No driver, operator or person having charge of any motor vehicle shall park the same in or along any alley in the city except for such time as may be necessary for the purpose of immediately taking on or discharging passengers or freight. 
(Code 1967, § 15-33) 
Sec. 28-39. - Parking on private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on private property or in a private parking lot, private throughway, private road or private driveway where a sign is posted prohibiting such parking in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the passageway through these private parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 4-77, 8-15-77) 
Sec. 28-40. - Standing in street or alley for purpose of repairs. 
No vehicle shall be left in any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground in such a manner as to obstruct the free use of the same for the purpose of being repaired, or for any other purpose except in case of unavoidable necessity, when the same shall be removed within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1967, § 15-35) 
Sec. 28-41. - Parking vehicle for sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street any vehicle displayed for sale. 
(Code 1967, § 15-34) 
Sec. 28-42. - Parking regulations at specific locations. 
The mayor and chief of police may from time to time regulate, restrict or prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles on specified streets or portions of streets or in specified areas. When signs or markings are in place giving notice of such regulations, restrictions and prohibitions, it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with such signs or markings. 
(Code 1967, § 15-32) 
Sec. 28-43. - No parking areas. 
Parking at any time is prohibited in the following areas: 

 
(Code 1967, § 15-36; Ord. of 10-12-70, § 3; Ord. of 2-12-96; Ord. of 7-8-96) 
Sec. 28-44. - Parking on courthouse square and side streets. 
(a)  The following plan is adopted and shall be implemented as soon as possible: 
(1)  East Avenue, one-way west—cut back sidewalks and parking on both sides of avenue. 
(2)  West Avenue, one-way west—cut back sidewalks and parking on both sides of avenue. 
(3)  North Avenue, one-way north—cut back sidewalks and parking on both sides of avenue. 
(4)  South Avenue, one-way south—cut back sidewalks and parking on both sides of avenue. 
(5)  West Washington Avenue, two-way traffic—cut back sidewalks and parking on both sides of street. 
(6)  East Washington Avenue, two-way traffic—cut back sidewalks and parking on both sides of street. 
(7)  South Jefferson Street, two-way traffic—cut back sidewalks and parking on both sides of street. 
(b)  All parking on the square and for one (1) block off the square shall be limited to two (2) hour parking only, except for the two (2) hour parking limit around the inside square at the county courthouse; this parking area shall be used for courthouse business parking. 
(Ord. of 7-9-73) 
Sec. 28-45. - Abandonment of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended for a period in excess of ten (10) days any motor vehicle on any street. 
Sec. 28-46. - Travel and parking of all trucks, truck trailer combinations and refrigerated trucks. 
(a)  [Unlawful.] 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for all trucks or trailer combinations having more than six (6) wheels [to travel] on the city streets except on the following highways and streets: 
U.S. Highway 129 (Davis Street), Georgia Highway 125 (Tifton Highway), Georgia Highway 76 (Marion Avenue and Adel Road), Spells Street, Georgia Highway 168 (East McPherson Avenue), East Smith Avenue to Old North Coffee Road, Avera Mill Road, Marie McGill Road, Old North Coffee Road south to North Mathis Street, North Mathis to Marion Avenue, East Dennis to South Davis Street, Industrial Blvd., Langdale Drive, Hull Avenue, Enigma Road, Watson Street, Middle School Circle, West Washington to Dogwood Drive, Dogwood Drive, Cecil Road, Exum Street, County Farm, Anderson Road, Hazel Avenue and Old Milltown Road. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for refrigerated trucks, regardless of number of wheels, to be parked in any residential area except for loading and unloading of goods. 
(b)  [Regulations.] 
(1)  Trucks, as herein defined, may use any street or alley for the purpose of picking up or unloading goods. 
(2)  Trucks can be driven to and from residences by the shortest or least congested routes as determined by the Nashville Police Department. A permit, to be renewed annually, will be issued to authorize the driver to operate only on the designated route. Only persons named in the permit may operate the truck on the designated route. Cost of the annual permit is fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. An operator who has a current City of Nashville business license must obtain the above permit but will not be required to pay the fifty-dollar permit fee. 
(3)  Trucks must be parked at least five (5) feet from the surface of any street. 
(4)  Trucks will not be parked in such a manner as to block the vision of drivers of other vehicles at any intersection. 
(5)  Trucks will not be parked immediately in front of another citizen's residence. 
(6)  Trucks shall not be operated in a residential area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. 
(7)  Truck repairs and servicing must not create a disturbance in the neighborhood. This includes the revving-up of engines or other noises that disrupt a normally quiet neighborhood. Noxious odors will not be allowed. 
(8)  Violations of this section will result in permanent revocation of the permit. This includes any act that may create a disturbance in a residential area. 
(c)  [Signs.] Signs indicating restrictions on trucks shall be permanently placed in areas where restrictions apply. 
(d)  [Violations.] Persons violating this section shall be cited by the Nashville Police Department to the city court and shall be fined not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation plus court cost. 
(Ord. of 7-14-03) 
Secs. 28-47—28-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-62. - Right-of-way at unmarked intersections. 
The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection not controlled by stop or yield signs or traffic-control signals shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different street. 
(Code 1967, § 15-59) 
Sec. 28-63. - Through streets, stop intersections and limited or restricted traffic areas. 
(a)  The mayor and the chief of police may from time to time designate through streets and stop intersections. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from said through highway or which are approaching so closely on said through highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on said through highway shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the through highway. 
(c)  The chief of police, upon approval of the mayor and council, is authorized to establish and designate certain long-term, temporary, seasonal, or permanent, limited or restricted traffic areas such as reduced or no through traffic, no turn(s) at certain times, or other traffic control measures to facilitate safe and improved traffic flow during peak school or business traffic hours, or other unsafe traffic conditions requiring alteration of previously established traffic routes. 
(1)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(2)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1967, § 15-57; Ord. of 11-9-09) 
Sec. 28-64. - Yield intersections. 
The mayor and the chief of police may from time to time designate "yield right-of-way" intersections. 
(Code 1967, § 15-56) 
Sec. 28-65. - No-passing zones. 
(a)  Passing prohibited. No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side or the right side of any vehicle overtaken on any street designated as a "no-passing zone street". 
(b)  Marking. The no-passing zone street shall be marked by a solid barrier line, placed at the right-hand element of a combination strip along the center or lane line; the barrier line shall be yellow. 
(c)  Areas designated. North Davis Street, from Marion Street to the north city limits, is hereby designated as a "no-passing zone street". 
(Code 1967, § 15-66) 
Sec. 28-66. - General duty to drive carefully. 
It shall be the duty of such operator to have his vehicle in full and complete and immediate control, and to keep and maintain a constant watch for other vehicles, and for pedestrians, and exercise all reasonable precautions to prevent collision and injury. 
(Code 1967, § 15-55) 
Sec. 28-67. - Speed limits—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle upon, on or along any of the public or private, local or state routes of the city at a faster rate of speed than that established under the attached list of roadways for the city prepared by the Georgia Department of Transportation and identified as List Number 0220174690 consisting of four (4) pages classifying and identifying on-system and off-system roads within the corporate limits of the city and specifying the applicable speed limits as set forth therein is hereby adopted and approved by the mayor and council for the city. 
(Code 1967, § 15-53; Ord. No. O-01-17, 4-10-17) 
Editor's note— List Number 0220174690 hereinabove referenced is attached to Ord. No. O-01-17, incorporated by reference, and on file with the city. 
Sec. 28-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-17, adopted Apr. 10, 2017, deleted § 28-68 which pertained to speed limits on state routes, and derived from ordinances adopted Aug. 27, 1973; Oct. 29, 1973; Res. No. 1-79, adopted Feb. 1, 1979; and Ord. No. 81-2, adopted Mar. 9, 1981. 
Sec. 28-69. - Speed limits—Where posted. 
In addition to the areas designated in this article, when appropriate signs are posted giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to exceed the posted speed limits. 
(Code 1967, § 15-54) 
State Law reference— Municipal alteration of speed limits, Ga. Code Ann., § 68A-804. 
Sec. 28-70. - Drag racing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, herself or in a contest with another to engage in dragging, in drag racing, in a drag race or to meet, assemble or be at any point or place within this city for the purpose of engaging in dragging, drag racing or in a drag race, or for aiding, abetting or for taking any part in dragging, or a drag race, or for the purpose of witnessing, as a spectator, any dragging, drag racing or drag race, or for remaining at any place, as a participant or as a witness thereto, after to would or should appear to an ordinary person from an ordinary inquiry in the exercise of ordinary care and inquiry that dragging, or drag racing, or a drag race was taking place, or was about to take place. 
(Code 1967, § 15-60) 
Sec. 28-71. - Driving while drinking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink beer, wine or intoxicating liquors and operate an automobile, truck or any other vehicle upon the public streets, sidewalks or alleys in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-6) 
Charter reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 28-72. - Towing. 
No vehicle shall tow more than one (1) other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. 
(Code 1967, § 15-63) 
Sec. 28-73. - Driving through processions. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession which they are in motion, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or a police officer. 
(Code 1967, § 15-61) 
Sec. 28-74. - U-turns. 
It shall be unlawful for any kind of vehicle to make a U-turn between the intersection of Marion and Davis Streets and the intersection of Davis and Washington Streets. 
(Code 1967, § 15-50) 
Sec. 28-75. - Slow-moving vehicles. 
Slow-moving vehicles shall at all times be operated as close to the right-hand side of the street as practicable. 
(Code 1967, § 15-49) 
Sec. 28-76. - Maximum speed limits. 
(a)  Enigma Road, from the northwest city limits boundary to a point one thousand (1,000) feet northwest of the intersection with SR 125, shall be zoned forty-five (45) miles per hour. From a point one thousand (1,000) feet northwest of the intersection of Enigma Road and SR 125 shall be zoned thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(b)  The maximum speed limit on all other local streets, lanes, alleys and roadways in the city, not before specifically set out, shall be thirty (30) miles per hour. Speed detection devices shall not be operated on these streets. 
(Res. No. 1-79, 2-1-79; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-9-81; Ord. of 10-26-81) 
Sec. 28-76.1. - Operation of motorized wheelchairs and other individual transportation devices by physically disabled persons on public roadways and park trails. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the administration and enforcement of this section. 
Motorized individual transportation devices shall mean those special vehicles limited to persons who require assistance because of physical infirmity in their personal transportation with such devices being limited to the capacity of carrying or transporting a single individual. 
Operate shall mean to ride in, or on, and control the operation of a motorized wheelchair or other motorized individual transportation device. 
Physically disabled shall mean any person who, because of physical disability: 
(1)  Cannot walk without substantial risk of falling; 
(2)  Cannot walk two hundred (200) feet without stopping to rest; 
(3)  Cannot walk without the aid of another person, walker, cane, crutches, braces, prosthetic devices, and/or wheelchair; 
(4)  Is restricted by respiratory disease to an extent that the person's forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one (1) second when measured by Spirometry is less than one (1) liter; 
(5)  Has an arterial oxygen tension (PAO2) of less than sixty (60) mm/hg; 
(6)  Uses portable oxygen; 
(7)  Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional limitations are verified by their personal physician as requiring assistance for transportation purposes; 
(8)  Has lost an arm or a leg and does not have or cannot use an artificial limb; 
(9)  Has a disability that would be aggravated by walking two hundred (200) feet or more under normal environmental conditions as verified by their personal physician. 
Right-of-way shall mean any street, avenue, place, drive or other public drive in the city. 
(b)  Operation on public property. 
(1)  No person shall operate a motorized wheelchair or motorized individual transportation device within the public right-of-way of any state or county highway, state aid or city street within the City of Nashville except as hereinafter provided under this section. On right-of-way designated for city streets, motorized wheelchairs or motorized individual transportation devices shall be permitted only on the shoulder of the roadway or, in the absence of an improved shoulder, on the right-most portion of the roadway and in the same direction as the street traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent thereto. No person shall operate a motorized wheelchair or motorized individual transportation device within the public right-of-way of any state of county highway, state aid or city street between the hours of one-half (½) hour after sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise. 
(2)  All such persons operating motorized wheelchairs or motorized individual transportation devices shall display the slow-moving vehicle emblem thereon as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. 
(3)  The operation of motorized wheelchairs or motorized individual transportation devices for all persons who are physically disabled shall be allowed on the park and public trails existing within the city. The operation of police, fire and emergency vehicles and public works vehicles shall be allowed in the park and public trail systems of the city. Except as otherwise provided herein no motorized vehicles shall be allowed on the public trail systems of the city. No motor vehicles except as provided herein shall be allowed in the city parks of the city except on established and paved parking surfaces posted for that purpose. 
(4)  No person shall operate a motorized wheelchair or an individual transportation device to push, pull, tow or attach anything, including, but not limited to, an additional individual transportation device, a vehicle, bicycle, cart, wagon or a person on a skateboard, roller skates, scooter, coaster, sled or any similar object. 
(5)  No person shall operate a motorized wheelchair or an individual transportation device in a manner contrary to or inconsistent with its design and intended purpose which is to carry or transport a single individual person. 
(Ord. of 5-11-09; Ord. No. O-06-18, 1-14-19) 
DIVISION 2. - MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 28-77. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motorized carts means electric-powered and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, commonly known as golf carts. These carts have not less than three (3) wheels and cannot be operated typically at more than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09; Ord. No. O-07-18, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 28-78. - Operations and limitations. 
Motorized carts may be operated within the corporate limits of the city by: 
(1)  Those persons who are sixteen (16) years of age and older and have a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(2)  Those persons who are fifteen (15) years of age, but not yet sixteen (16) years of age, if accompanied in the front seat by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(3)  No person under the age of fifteen (15) years of age shall be permitted to operate a motorized cart on any public street within the corporate limits of the city. 
(4)  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic. 
(5)  All child occupants of said motorized carts shall be appropriately restrained in accordance with all traffic regulations applicable to motor vehicles under state law. 
(6)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks or in city parks other than in parking areas. 
(7)  Motorized carts shall be operated during daylight hours only from thirty (30) minutes after sunrise until thirty (30) minutes before sunset. 
(8)  Motorized carts shall be equipped with an amber strobe light or LED visible for at least five hundred (500) feet as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-35. 
(9)  Motorized carts may not transverse streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation. Motorized carts may cross these streets to access other streets at designated street intersections as set forth in section 28-82. 
(10)  No person shall operate a motorized cart on any public street within the corporate limits of the city to push, pull, tow or attach anything, including, but not limited to, another motorized cart, individual transportation device, vehicle, bicycle, cart, wagon or a person on a skateboard, roller skates, scooter, coaster, sled or any similar object. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09; Ord. No. O-07-18, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 28-79. - Registration. 
(a)  Before any motorized cart may be operated within the corporate limits of the city, the cart must be registered and receive a decal from the city clerk signifying its registration. A person desiring to register a motorized cart shall bring documentation setting forth a description of said cart to the city clerk's office and complete an application for registration of said cart. Upon registration, the clerk shall issue a decal to be applied to the rear of such cart so as to be plainly visible. There shall be a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for such registration. The decal, issued, shall be nontransferable from the cart for which it is issued. The registration shall be effective until such time as the cart is sold. New owners must register a cart within ten (10) business days within change of ownership at a cost of ten dollars ($10.00). If the registration is not transferred within ten (10) business days, a twenty dollar ($20.00) penalty will be applied in addition to the ten dollar ($10.00) transfer charge. 
(b)  Before any motorized cart may be operated within the corporate limits of the city, the cart must have affixed thereto an emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall conform with those standards and specifications adopted for slow-moving vehicles by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers in December 1966, and contained within such society's standard ASAE S276.1, or shall be an emblem of the same shape and size painted on such vehicle in a bright and conspicuous retro-reflective red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at a height of three (3) to five (5) feet above the roadway, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09) 
Sec. 28-80. - Liability insurance coverage. 
Each person operating a motorized cart is liable for his own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies and each person operating a motorized cart shall provide proof of coverage upon request. Failure to maintain insurance in accordance with the minimum limits required under O.C.G.A. title 40 shall subject the owner/operator to a fine as set forth under section 28-83. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09) 
Sec. 28-81. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this division shall apply to any self-propelled, two-wheeled vehicle. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall apply to motorized carts operated by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09) 
Sec. 28-82. - Designated crossing. 
Motorized carts which are in compliance with section 29-79 may be operated on any city street within the city which are not within the jurisdiction of the Georgia Department of Transportation and may only cross streets or roads within the state highway system at intersections or crossings designated for that purpose by the department of transportation. The designated crossings will be at the following locations: 
(a)  US 76 at College St./Chism Ave.; 
(b)  US 76 at S. John St.; 
(c)  State Route 125 at Griner St.; 
(d)  State Route 129 at Hull Ave./Hall Dr.; 
(e)  State Route 129 at Avera Ave.; 
(f)  State Route 129 at Dennis Ave.; 
(g)  State Route 168 at S. Anne St./Anderson Rd. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09) 
Sec. 28-83. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The court in its discretion may allow community service in lieu of any fine imposed hereunder. 
(b)  A third violation within a calendar year shall result in a revocation of the license to operate said motorized cart within the corporate limits for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09) 
Chapter 29 - UTILITES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and council to operate public utilities, § 2-9(cc) 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5; gas, Ch. 11; plumbing, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 26; excavations, § 26-67 et seq. 
State Law reference— Eminent domain in re water and sewer systems, O.C.G.A., § 69-314; general owners, financing procedure, bonds, § 69-315; limitations on indebtedness, § 2-6401. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the work "utility" shall be construed to mean and include water, sewer, gas and/or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof. 
Sec. 29-2. - Scope of provisions. 
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are herein made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections, or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the council. 
Sec. 29-3. - Superintendent of utilities; office created; powers and duties. 
(a)  There is created an office of superintendent of utilities for the purpose of managing the affairs of the gas, water and sewerage utilities. 
(b)  The superintendent of utilities shall have the power to employ or discharge any employees who are unsatisfactory to operate and manage the utilities of the city to the city's best interest, and to take an active management of the utilities set out above. 
(Code 1967, § 22-1) 
Sec. 29-4. - Service to comply with technical provisions. 
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable technical provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
Sec. 29-5. - Rules, regulations. 
The council shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city within or without the city and under the management of the council. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 29-6. - Inspection outside city. 
In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any water or sewer taps outside the city limits until the premises involved has been inspected and approved by the building official. 
Sec. 29-7. - Right of entry. 
Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any time to all premises supplied with any utility service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility services from abusive use. 
Sec. 29-8. - Utility service—Application required. 
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for the same to the city. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such utility service is desired. 
Cross reference— Responsibility of city officials for unpaid bills, § 29-27. 
Sec. 29-9. - Same—Persons in debt to city. 
The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except current taxes and special assessments. 
Cross reference— Responsibility of city officials for unpaid bills, § 29-27. 
Sec. 29-10. - Same—Permit. 
Approval of the application for any utility service by the council shall be deemed permission for such service. 
Cross reference— Responsibility of city officials for unpaid bills, § 29-27. 
Sec. 29-11. - Same—Use assumed. 
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises shall remain connected with the utility service. 
Cross reference— Responsibility of city officials for unpaid bills, § 29-27. 
Sec. 29-12. - Not to use contrary to permit. 
No person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city shall use such utility service for any purpose other than mentioned in such permit or shall make any unauthorized changes in such service. 
Sec. 29-13. - Tampering with equipment or diverting of service prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity intentionally and without authority to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by the city or by any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television, or other public service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the city or of a company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, or intentionally to divert any of the services of the city or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the city or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the city or such company. 
(c)  No person or entity shall knowingly receive the benefit of acts of diversion of or tampering with electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service without the proper charge. 
(d)  Proof that any of the acts specified in this section were done on the premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission thereof. 
(Ord. No. 80-3, §§ 1—4, 10-27-80) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-3, §§ 1—4, enacted Oct. 27, 1980, has been codified herein as superseding the provisions of former §§ 29-13 and 29-19. Said former sections concerned tampering with the equipment of and unlawful connections to utility services. 
Sec. 29-14. - Bills; due date, penalty, reconnection. 
Utility bills are due by the tenth of each month. If they are not paid by the twentieth of each month, a ten (10) percent penalty or two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50), whichever is greater, will be charged and service discontinued without further notice. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee will be charged for any utility reconnection after cut off. 
(Mo. of 9-10-73; Mo. of 9-9-74; Mo. of 4-12-76; Ord. No. 4-76, 5-10-76; Ord. of 3-12-90) 
Cross reference— Responsibility of city officials for unpaid bills, § 29-27. 
Sec. 29-14.1. - Senior citizen discount. 
Effective September 1, 1990, a discount of ten (10) percent of the net amount of the monthly utility bill shall be afforded those citizens of Nashville that are sixty-five (65) years of age and retired upon applying at the city clerk's office and furnishing proof of age. Application must be made at City Hall in person and sufficient proof must be furnished. 
Editor's note— An ordinance enacted July 23, 1990, amended Ch. 29 by adding provisions designated as § 29-14a. In order to conform to established Code format, and to facilitate indexing, reference and use, the editor has redesignated these provisions as § 29-14.1. 
Sec. 29-15. - Repairs following installation of taps. 
(a)  Following all commercial taps made by the owner or contractor, he shall be responsible for replacing sidewalk, curb and gutter and paving as found as soon as the taps are completed. 
(b)  In all residential water and sewer facilities requiring an additional tap, the owner or contractor shall repair the sidewalk, curb and gutter and paving as found as soon as taps are completed. 
(Mo. of 3-6-74; Ord. of 4-22-74, § I) 
Sec. 29-16. - Deposit required to guarantee water bills, refund, contractors, deposit. 
(a)  There shall be a water deposit charge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) to guarantee the payment of monthly water bills. When service to applicant is discontinued permanently, this deposit, less any amounts still due the city for water service, shall be refunded without interest. 
(b)  During the construction of any building and before any water is installed as herein provided, the contractor so contracting such buildings at the time he secured his permit to construct the building within the city, shall make a water deposit charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to guarantee the payment of his water bill when water service to him is discontinued permanently. This deposit less any amounts still due the city for water services shall be refunded without interest. 
(Code 1967, § 22-19; Mo. of 1-14-74; Ord. of 6-23-94) 
Editor's note— The schedule of water rates and water tapping charges is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Responsibility of city officials for unpaid bills, § 29-27. 
Sec. 29-17. - Connections to service. 
Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made only under the supervision of the council. 
Sec. 29-18. - Separate connections. 
Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection. 
Sec. 29-19. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 29-13. 
Sec. 29-20. - Employees to turn on utility service; use without permission. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons to install water, gas or electric meters or to connect, turn on the water, gas or electricity within the city unless they are employees of the city or the electric company and it shall be unlawful to use, remove, replace or repair any utility equipment without the permission of the city or the electric company. 
(Code 1967, § 22-2) 
Sec. 29-21. - Maintenance of system by consumer. 
The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections, appliances and other apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service. 
Sec. 29-22. - Restricting use. 
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. 
Sec. 29-23. - Temporary interruption of service. 
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as circumstances permit. 
Sec. 29-24. - Sale of service by customer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell to others any utility service obtained from the city except with permission of the council. 
Sec. 29-25. - Termination of service. 
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law; 
(2)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service; 
(3)  Nonpayment of bills; 
(4)  Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise; 
(5)  Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service; 
(6)  Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor; 
(7)  Vacancy of premises. 
Sec. 29-26. - Liability of city for damage. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city. 
Sec. 29-27. - Responsibility of city officials for unpaid bills. 
Any city official who approves or endorses a city utility bill (including water and gas deposits) shall be held responsible for the payment of that bill if it is not paid by the customer. 
(Ord. of 12-12-88) 
Editor's note— Section 29-27 is derived from an ordinance enacted Dec. 12, 1988. This ordinance was not specifically amendatory of the Code and, therefore, has been codified herein at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Utility service, §§ 29-8—29-11; utility bills, due date, penalty, etc., § 29-14; deposit required, § 29-16. 
Sec. 29-28. - Water and sewer rates. 
(a)  Residential rates. The rates for residential water and sewer services are set out below: 
(1)  Water: 
First 1,000 gallons or less ..... $8.05 
First 5,000 gallons: $1.05 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
6,000 to 10,000 gallons: $1.10 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
11,000 to 15,000 gallons: $1.15 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
16,000 to 20,000 gallons: $1.20 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
Above 20,000 gallons: $1.25 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
(2)  Sewer: 
First 1,000 gallons or less ..... $8.55 
First 5,000 gallons: $1.55 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
6,000 to 10,000 gallons: $1.60 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
11,000 to 15,000 gallons: $1.65 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
16,000 to 20,000 gallons: $1.70 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
Above 20,000 gallons: $1.75 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate. 
(b)  Commercial rates. The rates for commercial water and sewer services are set out below: 
(1)  Water: 
First 1,000 gallons or less ..... $12.05 
First 5,000 gallons: $1.05 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
6,000 to 10,000 gallons: $1.10 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
11,000 to 15,000 gallons: $1.15 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
16,000 to 20,000 gallons: $1.20 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
Above 20,000 gallons: $1.25 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
(2)  Sewer: 
First 1,000 gallons or less ..... $12.55 
First 5,000 gallons: $1.05 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
6,000 to 10,000 gallons: $1.10 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
11,000 to 15,000 gallons: $1.15 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
16,000 to 20,000 gallons: $1.20 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
Above 20,000 gallons: $1.25 per 1,000 gallons plus base rate 
(Ord. of 2-26-90; Ord. of 4-8-91; Ord. of 8-22-94, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-22-05; Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 29-29. - Fees for water and sewer taps. 
The following fees are enacted for water and sewer taps and shall be used to cover the price of material along with the price of installing EPD-required backflow valves at the meter: 
Water Tap Fees 
¾-inch water tap ..... $500.00 
1-inch water tap ..... 700.00 
1½-inch water tap ..... 1,200.00 
2-inch water tap ..... 1,400.00 
Sewer Tap Fees 
4-inch sewer ..... $500.00 
6-inch sewer ..... 1,000.00 
8-inch sewer ..... 1,400.00 
Water Tap Fees for Irrigation Purposes 
¾-inch water ..... $600.00 
1-inch water ..... 900.00 
1½-inch water ..... 1,200.00 
2-inch water ..... 1,500.00 
(Ord. of 7-27-98; Ord. of 8-22-05) 
Secs. 29-30—29-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to provide sewers and sewage treatment facilities, § 2-9(cc). 
State Law reference— Water quality control act, Ga. Code Ann., § 17-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-43. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
Ammonia Nitrogen. That fraction of nitrogen in the ammonia form as analytically determined by standard methods. 
Approval authority. The director in a NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). Shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure (approved by EPA) five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in milligram per liter. 
Building drain. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Categorical standards. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standards. 
CCF. Hundred cubic feet. 
City. The City of Nashville or the City Council of Nashville. 
City engineer. City engineer of the City of Nashville or his authorized representative. 
COD (chemical oxygen demand). Shall mean the quantity of dissolved oxygen required for the chemical oxidation of decomposable matter under aerobic conditions. COD shall be determined by EPA approved methods. 
Collection sewer. A sewer line less than twelve (12) inches in diameter that receives wastewater from a small geographic area and discharges into an interceptor sewer serving more than one (1) collection sewer area. 
Combined sewer. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Composite. The make-up of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of wastewater or industrial wastes. 
Constituents. The combination of particles, chemical, or conditions which exist in the industrial wastes. 
Contractual FOG services. A contractual arrangement with an approved registered commercial waste transporter which provides a containment device for all FOG related material constituents generated by a food industry customer including scheduled removal of all FOG materials so as none of these FOG constituents enters the sanitary sewer system or publicly owned treatment works. 
Control authority. The term "control authority" shall refer to the "approval authority", defined hereinabove; or the superintendent of water/sewer department. 
Control manhole. An appropriately located manhole from which a given user's effluent can be effectively sampled by the city's standard methods. 
Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia. 
Effluent. The discharge of flow of a treatment facility. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator of other duly authorized officials of said agency. 
Flammable. Defined by existing fire regulations covering the city. 
FOG. Means fats, oils, and grease. 
Food industry customer. Any restaurant, bakery, deli, meat market, fish/seafood market, commercial kitchen, or institutional establishment that prepares or cooks food, either for takeout service or to be consumed on-site. 
Garbage. Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the building, storage and sale of produce. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Grease interceptor. A device designed and installed to separate and retain for removal food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. 
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402, of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Industrial wastes. The liquid waste from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distance from sanitary sewage. 
Influent. The wastewaters arriving at the wastewater treatment plant for treatment and those structures associated with its initial treatment. 
Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operation which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, The Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Interceptor sewer or trunk line. A sewer line twelve (12) inches or more in diameter into which one (1) or more collection sewers are tributary. 
Metered water. The amount of water consumed by the sewer customer, as measured by the city water meter. 
Mg/l. Milligrams per liter, or the ratio by weight, interchanged with ppm. 
National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulations containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial user. 
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
New source. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days of proposal in the federal register. Where the standard is promulgated later than one hundred twenty (120) days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
Normal. Those values as standards in the measurement of this division; these limits are defined in context. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollution. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Ppm. Parts per million, shall mean ratio by weight. 
Pretreatment device. Any device, equipment or system designed to accomplish pretreatment. 
Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Receiving waters. Those waters into which wastes are discharged. 
Recurrent maintenance. The removal of the entire contents of the grease interceptor system by pumping the contents of the grease interceptor system no less than once every month. The pumping of contents will be in accordance with State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control 3913-6-.24, Regulation of Commercial Waste Originators, Pumpers, Transporters, Processors, and Disposal Facilities. 
Registered commercial waste transporter. A business/owner registered by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) and whose tank trucks are permitted by a local governing authority. 
Sampling. The collection of a sample of two (2) effluent discharges by a given connection to the system. 
Sand trap. Means a structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit or sand. 
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank waste. That waste which results from the emptying of domestic septic tanks. 
Sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterwards acquired by the city. 
Sewage works. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewer connection charge. The charge assessed against the sewer customers within or without the city that are connected to, or have access to, the city sewage system. 
Shall is mandatory; May is permissive. 
Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of ten thousand (10,000) gallons or more per average work day; or 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five (5) percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system; or 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act of (state) statutes and rules; or 
(4)  Is found by the city, (state control agency) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
Slug. Shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quality of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
Standard methods. Shall mean those procedures or methods established by the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
State. State of Georgia. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Storm drain or storm sewer. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
Suspended solids or total suspended solids. Shall mean the solids that either float on the surface, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by EPA approved methods. 
Total solids. Total weight ppm of all solids; dissolved, undissolved, organic or inorganic. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into city's POTW. 
Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
Wastewater contribution permit. As set forth in section 29-51 of this chapter. 
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or order upon the State or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-44. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article, except subsection (d) of section 29-45, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  No person shall violate the provisions of subsection (d) of section 29-45 or shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) hereof, or shall continue any other violation of this article beyond the time limit provided. 
Sec. 29-45. - General regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. 
Sec. 29-46. - Connection to public sewers. 
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, and located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or after constructed to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within sixty (60) days after date of official notice so to do. 
(Code 1967, § 22-13) 
Sec. 29-47. - Sewer tax to be paid whether connected or not. 
All persons shall be liable for sewer tax whether their property has been connected to the sewer mains in the city or not, provided, if such person shall be more than two hundred fifty (250) feet from a sewer main, he shall not be charged with said tax. 
(Code 1967, § 22-15) 
Editor's note— The schedule of sewer rates and sewer tapping charges is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 29-48. - Penalty for failure to pay sewer tax. 
Any person failing and refusing to pay the sewer tax shall immediately have the water cut off and the meter removed from the property. Said meter shall not be replaced until all charges for water and sewer tax shall have been paid, together with any costs in connection with the removal and replacement of the said water meter. 
(Code 1967, § 22-16) 
Sec. 29-49. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 29-46, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and the inspection fee fixed by the mayor and council shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Natural Resources of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(e)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 29-46, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Sec. 29-50. - Building sewers and connections—Opening sewer, etc. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
Sec. 29-51. - Same—Permits; application; fee. 
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Residential; 
(2)  Commercial service and industrial service. 
All significant users proposing to connect to or contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before connection to or contributing to the POTW. In both instances, the owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. Permit and inspection fees fixed by the council for a residential, commercial or industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. All existing significant users or producers of commercial or industrial waste connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 30/60/90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. New commercial or industrial users shall apply for a permit at least 30/60/90 days prior to connection to or contributing to the POTW. 
(Ord. of 11-26-12) 
Sec. 29-52. - Same—Cost of connections. 
All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the municipal property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the municipality from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the municipal property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee fixed by the council for residential or commercial taps. 
Sec. 29-53. - Same—Separate sewer for each building. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. 
Sec. 29-54. - Same—Old sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
Sec. 29-55. - Same—Specifications. 
The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe, ASTM Specification A74; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C13; or concrete sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C14. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten (10) feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
Sec. 29-56. - Same—Size and slope. 
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch per foot. 
Sec. 29-57. - Same—Elevation. 
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
Sec. 29-58. - Same—Low building drains. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
Sec. 29-59. - Same—Excavations generally. 
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and back fill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12; except that no back fill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
Sec. 29-60. - Same—Excavations guarded, property restored. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the municipality. 
Sec. 29-61. - Same—Joints. 
(a)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(b)  Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly placed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, Federal Specification QQL-156, not less than one (1) inch deep. Lead shall be run in one (1) pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coating shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been tested and approved. Rubber joint cast iron pipe may be used as an alternate. 
(c)  All joints in vitrified clay or concrete pipe or between such pipe and metals shall be made with approved hot-pouring jointing material, as specified below, or by using rubber gaskets or preformed, factory-applied couplings having resilient properties in accordance with ASTM Specification C443-59T for concrete pipe, and ASTM Specification C425-64 for vitrified clay pipe, or the latest revisions thereof. 
(d)  Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a temperature of one hundred sixty (160) degrees Fahrenheit, nor be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp or similar approved material. 
(e)  Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the superintendent. 
Sec. 29-62. - Same—Place of connection. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve (12) inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five (45) degrees. A forty-five-degree all may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
Sec. 29-63. - Same—Inspection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
Sec. 29-64. - Discharges into public sewers—Waters prohibited in sanitary sewer. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
Sec. 29-65. - Same—Discharge of unpolluted waters. 
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
Sec. 29-66. - Same—Prohibited substances. 
Except as provided in this article, no person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(A)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(B)  Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease. 
(C)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(D)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(E)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(F)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(G)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. The fixed upper limits for the constituents listed below, in parts per million, shall be: 

 
(H)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(I)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
Sec. 29-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 27, 2012, repealed § 29-67, interceptors, in its entirety. 
Sec. 29-68. - Same—Duties of superintendent. 
The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having (1) a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter, or (2) containing more than three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter of suspended solids, or (3) containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in section 29-66 above, or (4) having an average daily flow greater than two (2) percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter, or (2) reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 29-66 above, or (3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. 
Sec. 29-69. - Same—Preliminary treatment facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
Sec. 29-70. - Same—Control manhole. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and the owner at his expense shall maintain the same so the manhole shall be safe and accessible at all times. 
Sec. 29-71. - Same—Measurements, tests and analyses. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 29-66 and 29-68 above shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," at the control manhole provided in section 29-70 above, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
Sec. 29-72. - Same—Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
Sec. 29-73. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL WASTE HANDLING (FATS, OILS AND GREASE) 

Sec. 29-74. - Purpose. 
(1)  Excessive amounts of fats, oils, grease, grit, sand and other solid or viscous materials can cause blockage and obstruction in the sanitary sewer system causing untreated wastewater to overflow into the environment. Much of the waste material that has the potential to cause blockage or obstruction originates from commercial facilities, such as food preparation and vehicle maintenance facilities. This division sets forth minimum and uniform requirements for the treatment and disposal of commercial waste into the sanitary sewer system, and the transportation and ultimate disposal of commercial waste sludge and byproducts. 
(2)  The objective of this division is: 
(a)  To minimize the discharge of pollutants associated with commercial waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system that may interfere with normal operation of the system; and 
(b)  To assure that the sludge and byproducts removed from commercial waste treatment systems are transported and disposed of in accordance with Chapter 391-3-6-.24 of the rules and regulations of the EPD. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-75. - Coverage and exclusions. 
(1)  This division applies to any facility that generates commercial wastes, to any person who removes commercial wastes, to any person who processes commercial wastes, and to any person who accepts commercial waste for final disposal. 
(2)  This division applies only within the geographical and political boundaries of the city. However, any transporter or disposal site operator within the city, who receives commercial wastes (whether such wastes originate within or outside the city or state), must still comply with the registration, permitting, and manifest requirements. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-76. - Requirements. 
(1)  General. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the originator to assure that the commercial waste removed from the originator's facility is properly treated and discharged to the sewer system, wastewater, sludge and byproducts are transported by a permitted transporter, and disposed of at an EPD approved commercial waste processing and disposal facility. 
(b)  The originator of commercial waste shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from their facility without a current commercial waste transporter issued by the utility. 
(2)  Permitting process. 
(a)  There is only one (1) type of permit required under this division, which is a commercial waste transporter permit. 
(b)  The permit for the transporter is issued by the utility under this division. However, prior to obtaining a commercial waste transporter permit, the transporter must first register as a transporter of commercial waste with the EPD and obtain a transporter registration number. This registration number must be included in the permit number issued by the utility. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-77. - Manifests. 
All originators, transporters, processing and disposal site operators, involved in the removal, transport, and disposal of commercial wastes and commercial waste sludge and byproducts, shall participate in proper maintenance of manifests. This manifest will require signatures from the originator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The approved manifest is a multi-copy form. A sample copy of an approved manifest is on file with the utility. 
(1)  The originator shall: 
(a)  Sign the received manifest form, maintain such record on site for a period of three (3) years, making it available for inspection by the utility. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the completed copy of the manifest from the transporter, the originator must provide a copy of the manifest within ten (10) working days to the utility. A manifest is considered complete after the commercial waste is delivered and disposed of at the commercial waste disposal or processing facility and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. 
(c)  Report any spills to the utility upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the utility of a spill will constitute a violation of this chapter and fines may be assessed to the commercial waste originator as well as the transporter. 
(2)  The transporter shall: 
(a)  Utilize a manifest for each location being serviced. 
(b)  Sign the transporter portion of the manifest and leave a copy of the manifest with the originator. 
(c)  Present the manifest to the disposal operator to complete and sign the disposal section, and shall leave one (1) copy of the manifest with the disposal site operator. 
(d)  Send a completed copy of the manifest to the originator with the signature of the disposal site operator within thirty (30) days. 
(e)  Keep one (1) copy of the completed manifest form demonstrating delivery to the disposal site operator for their records and shall maintain such records for a period of three (3) years; except that the transporter's manifest (or copy thereof) covering not less than the immediately preceding 30-day period for a particular tank truck shall be kept in the transporter's tank truck. All such records shall be available for inspection. 
(f)  Ensure that the manifest contains all the information required on the manifest form prescribed and furnished from time to time by the EPD. 
(g)  A transporter must remove the entire contents of any commercial tank that is serviced and dispose of such contents, unmingled with hazardous wastes or septic wastes, and only at a facility authorized to receive such waste. 
(h)  A transporter shall provide a copy of the commercial waste transporter permit for the tank truck to each disposal site where the transporter disposes of commercial wastes. 
(3)  Processing or disposal. A processing or disposal facility of commercial waste shall maintain copies of all manifests of tank pumping at their principal place of business for a period of three (3) years and make such records available for inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-78. - Food service establishments. 
(1)  New facilities. 
(a)  Facilities likely to discharge fats, oils and grease which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which shall be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility where such facilities did not previously exist, shall be required to install an approved, and properly operated and maintained pretreatment device/interceptor. Pretreatment devices/interceptors shall be installed prior to the opening or reopening of said facilities. 
(b)  New pretreatment devices/interceptors shall be inspected by the utility during installation and prior to use to ascertain compliance with this division. 
(2)  Existing facilities. Existing commercial facilities shall be required to install an approved, properly operated and maintained pretreatment device/ interceptor when any of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  Facilities that are found to be contributing fats, oils and grease in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the collection system. 
(b)  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing facility. 
(c)  Facility change of ownership or lease holder. 
(3)  [Exclusion.] The separator(s) shall exclude sanitary wastewater and is best located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. See subsection 22-27(c)(1) for alternative installations when special conditions exist. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator(s) shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. A manhole opening must be provided over the discharge pipe and the inlet and outlet pipe(s) for inspection and maintenance purposes. A separate sampling manhole may be required by the utility. 
(4)  [FOG separator.] The FOG separator equipment shall be pumped out as required herein and maintained by the originator. 
(5)  Alternative treatment methods. The use of any alternative method of treatment is prohibited without written approval of the utility. Alternative treatment systems, such as mechanical grease recovery devices, shall be used on a case-by-case evaluation and authorization of the utility. 
(6)  The use of chemical, enzymes and bacteria is prohibited. The use of any additives shall not be considered as an alternative to an adequate treatment system or in lieu of regular maintenance, as prescribed in this chapter. 
(7)  Maintenance required. All FOG separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. All FOG separators shall be pumped out at a frequency not to exceed ninety (90) days or as required by the utility pursuant to the schedule established by the superintendent or his designee. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-79. - Maintenance and service facilities. 
(1)  Sand/oil separator required. All maintenance or service facilities shall provide approved oil and solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this chapter, including remodeling of an automotive related enterprise, commercial laundry or other users that potentially may contribute wastes with petroleum-based oils, greases or lint. 
(2)  [Exclusion.] The separator(s) shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator(s) shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. A manhole opening must be provided over the discharge pipe and the inlet and outlet pipe(s) for inspection and maintenance purposes. A separate monitoring manhole may be required by the utility. 
(3)  [Originator's responsibilities.] The equipment or facilities shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
(4)  Maintenance required. All separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. All separators shall be pumped out at a frequency not to exceed ninety (90) days or as required by the utility pursuant to the schedule established by the superintendent or his designee. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-80. - Interceptor requirements. 
(1)  Design. Approved type of pretreatment device/ interceptors shall be either interior and exterior sealed concrete construction or fiberglass construction or equivalent provided that use of any equivalent type requites pre-approval by the utility. Any unit requiring the installation of an outlet filter shall have an approved sample port installed immediately outside the unit. 
(2)  Capacity. 
(a)  Capacity will be based on the following design criteria and will meet the required effluent quality parameters stated herein. Certain applications may require the installation of multiple units installed in series with outlet filters and approved sample port. 
(b)  Restaurants and food service establishments: 
(S) x (GS) x (HR/12) x (LF) = Interceptor capacity 
Where: 
(S) means number of seats in dining area 
(GS) means gallons of wastewater per seat (at twenty-five (25) gallons per seat) 
(HR) means number of hours open (divided by twelve (12)) 
(LF) means loading factor: 
1.25 Interstate highways 
1.00 4-lane highways 
0.8 Two-lane highways 
0.5 Other highways, locations 
(c)  Hospitals, nursing homes, other types of commercial kitchens with varied seating capacity. 
(M) x (GM) x (LF) = Interceptor capacity 
Where: 
(M) means meals per day 
(GM) means gallons of wastewater per meal (at five (5) gallons per meal) 
(LF) means loading factor: 
1.0 With dishwasher 
0.5 Without dishwasher 
(3)  Location. 
(a)  The best location for a grease pretreatment device/interceptor is in an area outside of an outside wall and installed in-ground. An alternative device and location will be evaluated on an individual basis for facilities when space limitations prohibit the installation of an in-ground unit, or when special conditions exist, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formulas. 
(b)  Each grease pretreatment device/ interceptor shall be installed and connected so that it is easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease at any time whether the unit is installed outside in-ground or inside the facility. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-81. - Transporter permits. 
(1)  Any transporter, owning or operating one (1) or more waste tank trucks that receive, transport or dispose of commercial waste in the city, must be registered with EPD. 
(2)  No transporter shall pump-out or vacuum FOG separators, grit traps, sand traps, or oil-water separators without a valid commercial waste transporter permit issued by the utility or other entity authorized by law to issue such permit. 
(3)  Application for the transporter permit must be made on a form prescribed by the EPD. A copy of the transporter permit application is on file with the utility. The utility will issue or deny a request for commercial waste transporter permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of the initial permit application. 
(4)  The transporter shall include the location of the disposal site(s) on the commercial waste transporter permit application. 
(5)  No commercial waste transporter permit shall be issued if the owner of the tank truck(s) is not registered with the EPD. 
(6)  A commercial waste transporter permit shall be required for each individual tank truck owned and operated by a transporter. A copy of a sample commercial waste transporter permit is on file with the utility. 
(7)  The commercial waste transporter permit issued by the utility for operation of a tank truck shall be valid throughout the state. 
(8)  A transporter, who has trucks permitted by the utility, and who decides to have additional trucks permitted by another city or county, or their designee, must provide copies of the current commercial waste transporter permits with the new commercial waste transporter permit application. 
(9)  A transporter cannot have two (2) tank trucks permitted with the same commercial waste transporter permit number. The registration number shall be part of the commercial waste transporter permit number issued by the utility. Every vehicle that transports commercial waste must display on the vehicle the FOG/permit number. 
(10)  Transporter permit fees. A transporter permitting fee will be assessed on an annual basis at a rate of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first truck and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional truck, payable to the utility, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-15-21(a)(3), or such fee as required by state law, as amended. 
(11)  Vehicle inspection. Annually the utility shall inspect each tank truck prior to the issuance of a commercial waste transporter permit. Such inspection shall verify that the tank truck is substantially leak proof, durable, of easily cleaned construction, and is maintained in good repair. The utility shall maintain records of each inspection. A copy of a sample vehicle inspection form is on file with the utility. 
(12)  Any commercial waste transporter permit issued shall have a fixed term not to exceed one (1) year, or as otherwise established by state law. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Sec. 29-82. - Enforcement. 
(1)  Inspection and entry. 
(a)  Representatives of the utility, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter the premises of any originator, transporter, processor, disposal site or food service establishment in the city at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this division or the commercial waste transporter permit. 
(b)  Representatives of the utility during inspections of the originator, transporter, processor, and the disposal site operator, may review records to determine compliance with provisions of this division. 
(c)  The right of inspection shall include the right to measure, observe, sample, test, record, review and make copies of all pertinent documents in accordance with this chapter. 
(2)  Monitoring. 
(a)  The utility may require the user to provide, operate and maintain, at the user's expense, appropriate monitoring facilities, such as a control manhole, that are safe and accessible at all times, for observation, inspection, sample collection and flow measurement of the user's discharge to the POTW. 
(b)  The utility may impose additional limitations and monitoring requirements for the discharge to the POTW in accordance with the provisions set forth in this division. 
(3)  Violations. 
(a)  Facility management practices. 
i.  Written warning. A written warning shall be issued to a user for any one (1) or more multiple violations as set forth below. The user shall have ten (10) working days to complete corrective action and submit evidence of compliance to the utility. A written warning will be issued for failure to: 
1.  Report pumping activities (manifest); 
2.  Maintain on site records at all times; 
3.  Maintain the pretreatment device/interceptor and associated components; or 
4.  Maintain inspection access. 
ii.  Notice of violation. Upon reinspection, a notice of violation shall be issued to a user for failure to comply with the corrective action specified in the written warning. The user shall have five (5) working days to complete the corrective action and submit evidence of compliance to the utility. 
iii.  Show cause hearing. 
1.  When a user fails to initiate and/or complete corrective action within the specified time period in response to a notice of violation, the user shall be notified by certified mail of the date, time and place of a hearing, the proposed enforcement action to suspend service, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why water and/or wastewater service should not be suspended immediately. The hearing date shall be within ten (10) working days of the date the notice is mailed. 
2.  The superintendent, or his designee, shall preside as the hearing officer. Upon hearing, the superintendent may suspend service immediately or he may extend an additional time up to fifteen (15) working days for the user to remedy the violation(s). The user shall have the right to appear at the hearing with or without an attorney, to introduce evidence, and to cross-examine the witnesses against them. If the user is not in compliance following the extension of time, then the superintendent will suspend water and/ or wastewater service immediately. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and it shall be submitted to the user in writing by certified mail. 
(b)  Interceptor noncompliance. 
i.  Notice to install. Upon inspection, if the utility inspector determines a new facility does not have a pretreatment device/interceptor, or that an existing facility has a pretreatment interceptor that is not functioning properly to meet the pretreatment standards of this chapter, then the inspector shall issue a notice to install an approved, properly functioning pretreatment device/interceptor. The user shall have ninety (90) working days to come into compliance by installing such a device/interceptor. 
ii.  Show cause hearing. 
1.  If the violation specified in the notice to install is not remedied at the end of the 90-day period, as shown by a second inspection, the inspector shall issue a second notice, by certified mail, stating the date, place and time of a hearing, and to show cause why the water and/or wastewater service to the user should not be suspended immediately. The hearing date shall be within ten (10) working days of the date the notice is mailed. 
2.  The superintendent, or his designee, shall preside as the hearing officer. Upon hearing, the superintendent may suspend service immediately or he may extend an additional time up to thirty (30) working days for the user to remedy the violation(s). The user shall have the right to appear at the hearing with or without an attorney, to introduce evidence, and to cross-examine the witnesses against them. If the user is not in compliance following the extension of time, then the superintendent will suspend the water and/or wastewater service immediately. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and it shall be submitted to the user in writing by certified mail. 
(c)  Emergency suspension of services. The utility may suspend water and/or wastewater services when, in the opinion of the utility, an actual or threatened discharge may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, may cause sanitary sewer stoppages or overflows, damage to the sanitary sewer collection system, interference to the POTW, or cause a violation of any condition of a NPDES and/or LAS permit. 
(d)  Reinstatement fees and charges. The user shall pay all outstanding utility fees and other charges prior to, and associated with, restoration of water and/or wastewater services. 
(e)  Transporter. 
i.  Any permit issued by the utility may be suspended, revoked or modified by the utility upon a finding that the holder is not in compliance with the terms of the permit or other conditions outlined in this chapter. 
ii.  The permit may be reissued by the utility upon remedy of the noncompliance that caused the suspension, revocation or modification of the permit. 
(f)  [Penalty.] Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the utility shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation of the commercial waste handling or pretreatment device/interceptor provisions of this chapter by any person, originator or transporter, pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-15-21(d), or such penalty amount as set forth in state law, as amended. For purposes of enforcing this civil penalty, municipal court shall have jurisdiction in cases of violations committed within the city to impose the civil penalty stated herein for each violation. 
(4)  [Severability.] Nothing in this section shall be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user in a court of law for violating this section. 
(Ord. of 8-27-12) 
Secs. 29-83—29-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to operate gas works, § 2-9(cc). 
Cross reference— Gas code and gas fitters, Ch. 11. 

Sec. 29-90. - Consulting engineers to be employed. 
The city shall employ consulting engineers whose duties shall be, among such other duties as may be imposed upon them by the city or the bond ordinance, to make an inspection of the system at least once a year after it has been completed and, at or before the date of completion and in each year thereafter, to submit to the city budgetary advice and recommendations as to extensions and improvements and as to the proper maintenance, repair and operation of the system during the ensuing fiscal year, and an estimate of the amount of money necessary for such purposes. An engineer or engineering firm agreeable to the city and the original purchasers of the bonds shall be employed during the first three (3) years of operation of the system as such consulting engineer, and at no time thereafter shall any other or different engineer or engineering firm be employed as consulting engineers unless the same be an independent engineer or engineering firm of national reputation for skill in the business of gas distribution. 
(Code 1967, § 22-31) 
Sec. 29-91. - City workers not to go past meter. 
Because the city's liabilities end beyond the gas meter, regarding gas connections or labor on gas appliances no city laborer should go past the meter to carry on work due to the liabilities involved. 
(Mo. of 2-10-75) 
Sec. 29-92. - Classification of rates and charges; enforcement of collection. 
(a)  The rates, fees and charges shall be classified in a reasonable manner to cover users of the services and facilities furnished by the system so that as near as practicable such rates, fees and charges shall be uniform in application to all users falling within any reasonable class. 
(b)  The city will diligently enforce and collect rates, fees and other charges for the services and facilities of the system, and the terms and provisions therefor, including the provision in this article with respect to discontinuance of service in the event any customer fails to pay his bill or any part thereof, and will take all steps, actions and proceedings for the enforcement and collection of such rates and charges as shall become delinquent to the full extent permitted or authorized by law and will maintain accurate records with respect thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 22-29) 
Sec. 29-93. - Deposits. 
All deposits must be made on or prior to the time gas is connected and turned on at the point of delivery. Such deposits shall be kept separate and distinct from other funds derived from the operation and maintenance of the said system and deposited in a special account to be known as the "gas system deposit account." No interest shall be allowed any customer on his deposit, but the amounts on deposit may be invested in securities which are direct and general obligations of the United States of America and any interest on such investments shall be deposited in the revenue fund. 
(Code 1967, § 22-34) 
Sec. 29-94. - Tapping fee; deposit to guarantee bills. 
There shall be a natural gas tapping fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for tapping the gas main and a gas deposit charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) to guarantee the payment of monthly gas bills. 
(Code 1967, § 22-32) 
Sec. 29-95. - Adjustment of rate schedule. 
(a)  The city will, from time to time hereafter, and as often as it shall appear necessary, revise and adjust the schedule of rates, fees and charges as may be necessary or proper so as to produce funds sufficient at all times to maintain and operate the gas system on a sound, businesslike basis, and to provide sufficient revenues for the creation and maintenance of the special funds hereinafter created, in order to discharge the purpose provided therein. 
(b)  The city will also maintain reasonable rates for services furnished by the system at such level as to produce net revenues (after the payment of the expenses of administration, operation and maintenance) during each thirty-six (36) consecutive months equal to at least one hundred fifty (150) percent of the amount required to pay principal and interest maturing and becoming due on the bonds during such thirty-six-month period. If at any time the cost of gas purchased by the city shall be increased, the city shall increase rates for services rendered to such an extent as may be necessary to produce additional revenues in the amount equal to the added cost of gas purchased. 
(c)  In the event the city shall fail to revise its schedule of rates, fees and charges in accordance with the provisions of this section, any bond holder, without regard to whether any default, as defined in Article VII of the bond ordinance, shall have occurred, may institute and prosecute in any court of competent jurisdiction an appropriate action to compel the city to adopt a schedule of rates, fees and charges in accordance with the requirements of this section, and the city covenants that it will adopt such schedule or schedules of rates, fees and charges in accordance with any decree entered in any such proceeding. 
(Code 1967, § 22-35) 
Editor's note— The schedule of gas rates is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 29-96. - Free service; meter. 
No free services shall at any time be furnished from the system. All services shall be furnished in accordance with rates now or hereafter established, including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation or other public body or board. Also, no customer shall be connected to the system or served by the city without a proper meter having been first installed. 
(Code 1967, § 22-30) 
Sec. 29-97. - Billing. 
Bills to customers for gas service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable and the amount due as shown by said bill shall be payable ten (10) days from date thereof, and if not paid within said ten-day period a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto and collected. 
(Code 1967, § 22-34) 
Sec. 29-98. - Cut-off for nonpayment. 
Any customer failing or refusing to pay his bill or any part thereof within thirty (30) days after the rendition thereof shall pay a cut-off charge as provided above, his deposit shall be applied in payment of said cut-off charge and also in payment of the unpaid balance of his bill, and his connection to the system shall be shut off until such time as all past due bills, together with a cut-on charge and a new deposit as above provided shall have been paid. 
(Code 1967, § 22-34) 
Sec. 29-99. - Cut-off and cut-on charges. 
There will be no connection charge for any customer connecting with the system and becoming a customer thereof at the time the system is being constructed. There will, however, be a cut-off charge and also a cut-on charge as provided above for previous customers whose connections have been shut off where service is subsequently resumed by such customer at the same premises. Any customer desiring to connect with the system after the construction of the system has been completed may be required to pay the cost of such connection, including service line, regulator and meter. 
(Code 1967, § 22-34) 
Sec. 29-100. - Reconnection. 
Customers who disconnect gas services in spring months shall pay a charge, as fixed by the council, for reconnection, to prevent last minute work orders in fall reconnection. 
(Mo. of 2-10-75) 
Sec. 29-101. - Refund of deposit. 
Upon the payment of all charges for services and facilities afforded any customer by the city and a cut-off charge as provided above and the discontinuance of such service, at his request, the deposit theretofore made by him shall be refunded, without interest. 
(Code 1967, § 22-34) 
Secs. 29-102—29-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 29-110. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-111. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-112. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
(a)  City means the City of Nashville. 
(b)  Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
(c)  Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
(d)  Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
(e)  Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
(f)  Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
(g)  Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
(h)  Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
(i)  Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
(j)  Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Note— Other than "city" and "personal identifying information", definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR § 681.2. 
Sec. 29-113. - Findings. 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include garage, water, sewer and natural gas. 
(3)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: minimal. 
(4)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(5)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(6)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
(a)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(b)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(c)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(d)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-114. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(1)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer as otherwise required by state or federal law. Such identifying information shall be provided by a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account with written authorization. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(2)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-115. - Access to covered account information. 
(1)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(2)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the city manager on a regular basis, shall be at least eight (8) characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(3)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(4)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-116. - Credit card payments. 
(1)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four (4) digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-117. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
(a)  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
(b)  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
(c)  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
(d)  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
(a)  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
(b)  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
(c)  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
(d)  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
(e)  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
(a)  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
(b)  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
(c)  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
(d)  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
(e)  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
(f)  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
(g)  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
(h)  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
(i)  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
(a)  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
(b)  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
(c)  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
(d)  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
(e)  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
(f)  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
(g)  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
(h)  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-118. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(1)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identify theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(a)  Contact the customer; 
(b)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
i.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
ii.  Close the account; 
(c)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(d)  Notify a debt collector within twenty-four (24) to forty-eight (48) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(e)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(f)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(2)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall nonetheless covey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one (1) or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(a)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(b)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(c)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(d)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-119. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-120. - Program administration. 
The city manager is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(a)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(b)  Service provider arrangements; 
(c)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
(d)  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city manager is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Sec. 29-121. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more covered accounts the city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
ARTICLE V. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 29-122. - Short title. 
[This article shall be known and sited as the] Treatment of Address Discrepancies. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 2) 
Sec. 29-123. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 2) 
Sec. 29-124. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(l), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(2)  City means City of Nashville. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 2) 
Note— See 16 CFR § 681.1(b). 
Sec. 29-125. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one (1) or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
(a)  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); 
(b)  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
(c)  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 2) 
Sec. 29-126. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(a)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(b)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(c)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 2) 
Sec. 29-127. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 2) 
Chapter 30 - WATER RESOURCE DISTRICTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 6-12-00, §§ 1-1—1-14 did not specifically amend the Code and were added as a new ch. 30, §§ 30-1—30-14, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this chapter is to establish minimum development standards and criteria which will afford reasonable protection of environmentally sensitive natural resources found throughout the city. Based on the findings of the 2015 Greater Berrien Comprehensive Plan, it has been determined that the wise management of these resources as defined in this chapter is essential to maintaining the health, safety, general welfare and economic well-being of the public. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Establishment of water resource districts. 
The city's water resource districts shall include the following: 
(1)  Groundwater recharge area districts. 
(2)  Wetlands districts. 
The boundaries of these water resource districts are shown on a set of maps designated as "Nashville Water Resource Districts Map" and are included as part of this chapter which is on file with the zoning administrator and/or his designee's office located in the Nashville City Hall. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
Hazardous waste. Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3. 
Utility. Public, private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water resource districts. A water resource district is a mapped area which imposes a set of requirements and/or specific development standards or use restrictions. 
Wetlands. Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation and hydrological conditions involving a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. For the purposes of this chapter, the 1987 National Wetlands Inventory shall serve to define these potential areas. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Groundwater recharge area district. 
(a)  Findings of fact. Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides, herbicides sprayed on crops, animal waste and septic tank effluents contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish criteria to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections and other development pressures. 
(c)  District delineation. The groundwater recharge area protection map is delineated according to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 Edition)" and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources "Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 Edition". Standards for this district shall comply with the DNR Rule 391-3-16-02, Criteria for the Protection of Groundwater Recharge Areas. 
(d)  Permitted uses. The following are requirements for specific uses in the groundwater recharge area protection district: 
(1)  All above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of six hundred and sixty (660) gallons, shall have secondary containment for one hundred and ten (110) percent of the volume of such tanks or one hundred and ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(2)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
a.  A high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifteen (15) acre-feet in size. 
c.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifty (50) acre-feet in size. 
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one (1) foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
(3)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
a.  One hundred and fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculation based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.  One hundred and twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculation based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
c.  One hundred and ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculation based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(4)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. 
a.  One hundred and fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculation based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
b.  One hundred and twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculation based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
c.  One hundred and ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculation based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(5)  Lots of record approved prior to the adoption of this chapter are hereby exempted from the requirements of (c) and (d) above. 
(6)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the standards of the DHR Manual for on-site sewage management systems and minimum lot size requirements. 
(7)  New facilities which handle hazardous materials, of the types (listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts (ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one (1) day) shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention code requirements. 
(8)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(9)  Any new wastewater treatment basin shall have an impermeable liner. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Wetlands district. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The wetlands within the city and county are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; natural resource education; scientific study; and recreational opportunities. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this wetlands district is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce the primary functions for water quality, flood plain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas. 
(c)  District delineation. The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the Generalized Wetlands Map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
The Generalized Wetlands Map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdiction wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this chapter does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(d)  Protection criteria: Requirement for local permit: No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within fifty (50) feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the zoning administrator/or his designee using the Generalized Wetlands Map, a U. S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit will not be granted until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued by the corps. 
(e)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right within the wetland district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging: 
(1)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practice approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, Section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption. 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided the conservation or preservation does not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(4)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(5)  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(f)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in a wetland district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary landfills. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Application for building permit. 
(a)  Any applications for building permits shall be accompanied by two (2) site plans drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the proposed buildings, and any proposed land-disturbing activities as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. The above referenced information is required on the site plan before the site plan is considered by the zoning administrator and/or his designee and any local permits are approved. 
(b)  Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the work of development is commended; provided that extensions of time and periods not exceeding six (6) months each may be allowed in writing by the zoning administrator and/or his designee. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-6) 
Sec. 30-7. - Activities to comply with site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the zoning administrator and/or his designee. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-7) 
Sec. 30-8. - Enforcement authority. 
The zoning administrator and/or his designee is hereby established as the administrator of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-8) 
Sec. 30-9. - Appeals. 
Appeals on decisions on permit applications made by the zoning administrator and/or his designee may be made to the city council, but only after review and recommendation of the Nashville Planning Commission. The appeal must be made within ten (10) days of the decision rendered by the zoning administrator and/or his designee. A public hearing shall be held for such administrative appeals. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in the city legal organ at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the city council may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided in Georgia Law. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-9) 
Sec. 30-10. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six (6) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six (6) months after the date that work ceased. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-10) 
Sec. 30-11. - Monitoring and enforcement. 
(a)  The zoning administrator and/or his designee shall have authority to enter upon privately-owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this chapter. 
(b)  The zoning administrator and/or his designee shall have authority to enforce this chapter; issue permits thereunder; and address violations or threatened violations thereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders, and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(c)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the zoning administrator and/or his designee in enforcement. 
(d)  The zoning administrator and/or his designee shall have authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this chapter. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided in Georgia Law. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-11) 
Sec. 30-12. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law. Each violation of this act shall be a separate offense, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this chapter, the violator may be required to remove the structure, at the discretion of the zoning administrator and/or his designee. 
(c)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this chapter, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the zoning administrator and/or his designee. Such actions shall be closely coordinated with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' supervision. 
(d)  If the zoning administrator and/or his designee discovers a violation of this chapter that also constitutes a violation of provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the zoning administrator and/or his designee may issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(e)  The zoning administrator and/or his designee may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-12) 
Sec. 30-13. - Judicial review. 
All decisions of the city council concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the proper courts as provided by Georgia Law. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-13) 
Sec. 30-14. - Amendments. 
This chapter and the water resources districts map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning the protected environmentally sensitive areas become available. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00, § 1-14) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 14-1 of the zoning ordinance adopted June 19, 1989, repealed the zoning ordinance enacted May 1, 1970, which was revised and amended by the following: Ord. No. 74-4, adopted June 24, 1974; Ord. No. 11-76, adopted Dec. 14, 1976; ordinances enacted March 14, 1977 and March 13, 1978; and by resolutions enacted Jan. 11, 1982 and March 8, 1982. Appendix A sets forth the provisions of the June 19, 1989, zoning ordinance as enacted. However, material in brackets has been added for purposes of clarification and in order to facilitate indexing, reference and use. The absence of a history note following a section or subsection in this appendix indicates that such section or subsection derives unchanged from the June 19, 1989, zoning ordinance; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section or subsection indicates amendment by the legislation cited therein. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to adopt plans for zoning, § 2-9(jj). 
Cross reference— Issuance of business license, § 15-14; planning, Ch. 21; subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference— Zoning generally, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 69-8; planning commissions and zoning, Ch. 69-12; grant of zoning power to municipalities, § 69-1207; plan and ordinance, § 69-1208; procedure for adoption, § 69-1209. 

SECTION 1. - ENACTMENT, SHORT TITLE, JURISDICTION, PURPOSE 

1-1 - Enactment clause. 
The city council of the City of Nashville, under the authority of Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs II and IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and the amendments thereto, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following sections. 
1-2 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance for the City of Nashville, Georgia." 
1-3 - Jurisdiction. 
This ordinance shall govern the use of all land and the development thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Nashville, Georgia. 
1-4 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance shall be to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of building, structures and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities and other purposes so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote the public health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to prevent urban sprawl; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and structures throughout the City of Nashville; and for other purposes. 
SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of interpreting this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein are defined. All other words in this ordinance shall carry their customary meaning. 

2-1 - Interpretation of certain terms and words. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, company, corporation, association or trust. 
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. The word "may" is always construed to be permissive. 
The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
2-2 - Accessory building. 
A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
2-3 - Accessory uses. 
A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of buildings and located on the same lot with such principal use of building. 
2-4 - Administrator, zoning. 
The person, officer or official, and his duly authorized representative(s), whom the city council has designated as its agent for the administration of this ordinance (see section 11-1). 
2-5 - Alteration of building. 
Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, beams, columns, girders) except such changes as may be required for its safety, an addition to a building, any change in use from that of one (1) district classification to another or of a building from one (1) location to another. 
2-6 - Agriculture. 
Agriculture shall be considered to mean the raising of soil crops and/or livestock in a customary manner on tracts of land more than five (5) acres in size and shall include all normal forestry and related activities. 
2-7 - Boarding or roominghouse. 
A building dedicated to the lodging or feeding or both of nontransient persons or separate families, as defined herein, for compensation. 
2-8 - Buffer area; buffer strip. 
A landscaped open area and/or screened area designed to separate incompatible uses. 
2-9 - Building. 
Any structure, including mobile homes, as defined herein, but not including accessory trailers, which has a roof and which is for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
2-10 - Building height. 
The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
2-11 - Club or lodge, private. 
An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational or like activities operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
2-12 - Care home. 
An orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, alcoholics, drug addicts and not including nursery schools. 
2-13 - Curb cut. 
The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
2-14 - Density. 
The overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referring to residential areas, density is defined as the number of housing units permitted per acre in the respective zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of this zoning ordinance or as authorized under the development standards of this ordinance. 
2-15 - Dwelling, single-family. 
A detached building used and either designed or constructed for one (1) dwelling unit. 
2-16 - Dwelling, mobile home. 
Mobile home (or manufactured home) is a detached structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. 
2-17 - Dwelling, two-family or duplex. 
A building either designed, constructed, altered or used for two (2) adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a fire-rated common wall and/or, if two (2) stories in height, by a fire rated common floor. 
2-18 - Dwelling, multi-family. 
A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than two (2) adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall or party floor connecting it to at least one (1) other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments, condominiums, or any other type of multi-family structure. 
2-19 - Dwelling unit. 
An enclosure of one (1) or more rooms, including kitchen and bathroom facilities, designed or constructed as a unit for residential occupancy by one (1) family. 
2-20 - Family. 
One (1) or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, hotel or fraternity or sorority house. 
2-21 - Farmer's market. 
A public marketplace, designed to serve area farmers, where provisions are sold at retail and wholesale. 
2-22 - Floor area, gross. 
The total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, excluding basement areas, attics, porches, carports and garages. 
2-23 - Health officer. 
The legally designated health authority or his authorized representative of the City of Nashville. 
2-24 - Home occupation. 
An occupation for gain or support customarily conducted on the premises by a person or family residing therein (see section 9-1). 
2-25 - Hospital. 
Any institution receiving in-patients, or a public institution receiving out-patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of senile psychotics or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
2-26 - Junk yard. 
Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk, including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
2-26.1  Storage area. Property and/or buildings used for the permanent or temporary storage of inoperative vehicles, machinery or other equipment or materials awaiting salvage, restoration or sale, but not including exterior displays or new or used merchandise in operative condition for retail or wholesale distribution. 
2-27 - Kennels. 
The housing of four (4) or more dogs. 
2-28 - Lot. 
A lot of record, held in a single ownership by one (1) person, or in common ownership by more than one (1), which has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by this ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the use proposed for the tract of land. 
2-29 - Lot, corner. 
A lot having frontage on two (2) or more public streets at their intersection. 
2-30 - Lot of record. 
A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Berrien County, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
2-31 - Lot, through. 
A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one (1) street, or a corner lot having frontage on three (3) or more streets. 
2-32 - Lot width. 
The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this ordinance, or if no setback line is established, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line. 
2-33 - Nonconforming use. 
A building, structure or use of land existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
2-34 - Nursery school. 
An agency, organization or individual providing daytime care of six (6) or more children not related by blood or marriage or not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult. 
2-35 - Open space. 
That required portion of a lot at ground level unoccupied by enclosed buildings and available to all occupants of the development. This space shall not be devoted to driveways or off-street parking but shall be usable for green space, recreational use and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. 
2-36 - Permit. 
Written authorization issued by the zoning administrator, with the approval of the health officer, permitting the construction or installation of any use allowed under this ordinance. 
2-37 - Personal care home. 
A building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two (2) or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care for nonfamily ambulatory adults for compensation. 
2-37.1  Family personal care home means a home for adults in a family-type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two (2) through six (6) persons. 
2-37.2  Group personal care home means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), noninstitutional in character, which offers care to seven (7) through fifteen (15) persons. 
2-37.3  Congregate personal care home means a home for adults which offers care to sixteen (16) or more persons. 
2-38 - Planning commission. 
As utilized in this ordinance, the planning commission shall mean the city of Nashville planning commission as duly appointed by the Nashville city council. 
2-39 - Principal building. 
The building containing or to contain the principal use of a lot. 
2-40 - Principal use. 
The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
2-41 - Public street. 
Right-of-way dedicated to the city, county, state or federal government or owned by the city, county, state or federal government for public street purposes. 
2-42 - Setback. 
The shortest distance between the centerline of a street and the principal building or structure on a lot. 
2-43 - Shopping center. 
Two (2) or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
2-44 - Sign. 
Any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to public view; or any structure (including billboard or poster panel) designed to carry the above visual information. 
2-44.1  Advertising separate use sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered only elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed. 
2-44.2  Advertising incidental use sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered as a minor and incidental activity upon the premises where the sign is displayed. 
2-44.3  Bulletin board. A sign used to announce meetings or programs to be held on the premises of a church, community recreation center, school, auditorium, library, museum or similar noncommercial places of public assembly. 
2-44.4  Identification sign. A sign used to identify only the name of the individual, family, organization or enterprise occupying the premises. 
2-44.5  Point of business sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, profession or industry located upon the premises where the sign is displayed; to a type of product sold, manufactured, or assembled; and/or to a service or entertainment offered on said premises, but not a sign pertaining to the preceding if such activity is only minor and incidental to the principal use of the premises. 
2-44.6  Temporary sign. Any sign, banner, pennant or advertising display constructed of cloth, cardboard, wall board or other light materials, with or without frames. This definition includes portable display signs (mobile trailer signs for use with or without changeable letters.) 
2-45 - Special exception. 
A special exception is a use which, within certain districts specified by this ordinance, is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the city council after the city council has: 
Reviewed the proposed site plans for the use, its location within the city, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; 
Has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance; and 
Has approved the use as specified (see sections 5 and 12). 
2-46 - Structure. 
Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, signs, swimming pools and fallout shelters but does not include walls or fences. 
2-47 - Tourist home. 
A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided for transient visitors for compensation. 
2-48 - Trailer, travel-type. 
A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a "camper" or "travel" trailer. 
2-49 - Variance. 
A variance is a relaxation of the dimensional and development standards of the zoning ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the intentional actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the dimensional and developmental standards of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
2-50 - Yard, front. 
That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line (see the illustration following these definitions). 
2-51 - Yard, rear. 
That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot (see the illustration following these definitions). 
2-52 - Yard, side. 
That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard (see the illustration following these definitions). 

SECTION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

3-1 - Interpretation and application. 
In interpreting and applying this ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance. Except as hereinafter provided, this ordinance shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
3-2 - Zoning affects all land and buildings. 
No buildings, structures or land shall be used or occupied, and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the requirements of this ordinance. 
3-3 - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this ordinance. 
3-4 - Only one principal building per lot. 
Except as herein provided (see section 9-2), there shall be no more than one (1) principal building or structure upon any lot in any residential district. 
3-5 - Open space not to be encroached upon. 
No open space shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking space requirements, and such other requirements dictated by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs and planted buffer strips shall be interpreted not to be encroachments of yards. 
3-6 - Required open space may not be used by another building. 
No part of any yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space for any other building, structure or use except as provided in section 7. 
3-7 - Reduction of yards or lot area. 
Except as provided in section 3-20, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
3-8 - Encroachment on public rights-of-way. 
No building, structure, service area or required off-street parking and loading facility, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
3-9 - Location of accessory buildings or uses. 
Accessory buildings on residential lots, when located within a front or side yard, shall be located no closer to property lines than would be allowed for a principal building. Within a rear yard, an accessory building on a residential lot shall be located at least five (5) feet from all property lines and, except that in the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall be set back from the centerline of an abutting street right-of-way a distance equal to three-fourths the front yard setback established for the zoning district in which the accessory buildings are located. In the case of a through lot, accessory buildings shall conform to front yard setbacks on both streets. Accessory buildings or uses on nonresidential lots shall comply with front, side and rear yard requirements established for the zoning district in which such buildings or uses are located. 
3-9.1  Accessory building on separate lot. An accessory building may be permitted, as a special exception by the city council, on a separate lot from the lot of the principal building; provided, that: 
(a)  The lot upon which the accessory building is to be located shall be within four hundred (400) feet of the principal use; 
(b)  All requirements, including use restrictions, established for the zoning district in which such accessory building is to be located shall be complied with; and 
(c)  Any structure or building erected shall meet the requirements of the Nashville Building Code and shall be approved by the building inspector. 
In addition to the above requirements, the city council may require design features such as buffer strips, screening, etc., as may be found necessary to protect the purposes of this ordinance. 
3-9.2  Swimming pools. Swimming pools accessory to residences or commercial uses shall be enclosed by a steel mesh security fence or other substantial building material affording equal or better access control. Said fence shall have a minimum height of four (4) feet. 
3-9.3  Separation from principal use. Any accessory building of more than eight (8) feet in height shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the principal building. 
3-9.4  Accessory building—Size limitations. Residential accessory buildings shall be limited to fifty (50) percent of the square footage of the principal building. 
3-10 - Every lot shall abut a street. 
No building shall hereafter be erected on a lot which does not have at least fifty (50) feet of frontage on a publicly dedicated, accepted and maintained street. 
3-11 - Uses prohibited. 
If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district, either as a matter of right or as a special exception, then such use, class of use or structures for such uses shall be prohibited in such district. 
3-12 - Zoning to apply when lot is divided by district boundary line. 
In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one (1) ownership on the date of passage of this ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the requirements established by this ordinance for the district in which such parcel is located; except, however, that if the property owner of such a lot so desires, he may extend a use allowed on either portion of said lot fifty (50) feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is encroaching. 
3-13 - Required buffers in N-S, C-B-D, G-B, WLI, and H-I districts. 
In a N-S, C-B-D, G-B, WLI and H-I zoning district, where a lot abuts any residential district, a six-foot-wide buffer the entire length of the lot abutting the residential property shall be provided with screening as specified in section 3-15. Off-street parking associated with such uses shall be governed by this same provision. 
3-14 - Screening of service areas within 150 feet of public street. 
Any service area, loading area, refuse or storage area associated with a principal building and being visible from a public street and lying within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said street shall be screened from view from the public street as specified in section 3-15. 
3-15 - Screening required. 
Wherever screening is required by this ordinance, a durable masonry wall or fence and hedge of sufficient opacity to provide a visual blind, designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties, shall be provided and maintained by the owner or his successors and assigns. Such fences and walls shall be at least six (6) feet in height, but no greater than eight (8) feet in height, measured from the ground along the common lot line of the adjoining properties. Hedges or comparable natural plantings shall be of such variety that an average height of at least six (6) feet could be expected by normal growth within no later than three (3) years from the time of planting. The owner/developer shall install the screening prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Occupancy will not be allowed until the screening is completed as a part of the normal development requirements. 
3-16 - Side and rear yards not required next to railroad. 
Within any nonresidential district, side yards and rear yards shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
3-17 - Permitted modification of front yard setback requirement. 
When a building is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way line there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of this ordinance, the required setback for such building shall be as follows: 
Where only one (1) said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a nonconforming setback, the setback shall be the computed average of (a) the normal setback requirement with (b) the nonconforming setback; or 
Where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a nonconforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two (2) nonconforming setbacks. 
3-18 - Structures permitted above the height limit. 
The height limits of this ordinance shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, dome or ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy, monument, water tower, observation tower, transmission tower, chimney, smoke stack, conveyor, flag pole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four (4) feet above the roof line of the building, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
3-19 - Permitted encroachments of yards and setbacks. 
Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters and fire escapes may project not more than three (3) feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways; provided, however, that in the case of automobile service stations, motels and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkways within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line. 
3-20 - Modification of sideyard requirements. 
When a lot of record has a width less than the frontage required in the district in which it is located, then the zoning administrator shall be authorized to reduce the side yard requirements for such lot; provided, however, that there shall not be less than a eight (8) foot side yard. 
3-21 - Zoning of annexed area. 
Areas annexed to the City of Nashville subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance shall be subject to this ordinance, as is all land area currently located in the corporate limits of the city. It is required that the annexation petition be accompanied by the petitioner's request for the city to assign a zoning designation to the property to be annexed and consideration of such property for initial City of Nashville zoning designation shall be subject to the normal amendatory requirements of this ordinance, including the normal public hearing requirements. 
SECTION 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS, OFFICIAL ZONING MAP AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN 

4-1 - Establishment of districts. 
In order that the purposes of this ordinance as defined in section 1 may be accomplished, there are hereby established within the City of Nashville zoning districts identified as follows: 
4-1.1  R-20 Single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of these uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
4-1.2  R-15 Single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
4-1.3  DR-10 One- and two-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide residential areas with minimum lot sizes of ten thousand (10,000) square feet for single-family dwellings and fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for two-family dwellings, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
4-1.4  R-6 Residential. The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of higher density residential areas for one-, two-, and multifamily dwellings with minimum lot sizes of six thousand (6,000) square feet, said areas being protected from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
4-1.5  R-6-M Residential. The purpose of this district is to create an area that, in addition to one-, two- and multifamily housing, allows mobile homes as a matter of right in a conventional subdivision. Lots in this district must have a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet. These districts shall be protected from the encroachment of incompatible uses which are detrimental to a sound residential environment. 
4-1.6  MHP Mobile home park. The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of property that is located and planned for mobile home use. Property developed in this district is to remain under single ownership for rental purposes only. Mobile home parks shall be developed only in strict accordance with the mobile home park provisions of this ordinance. 
4-1.7  RP Residential-professional. The purpose of this district shall be to create an area in which residential, professional, educational and institutional uses can be compatibly mixed while maintaining a healthful living environment for the residents of the district and at the same time preventing the development of blight and slum conditions. The minimum lot size in this district shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
4-1.8  N-S Neighborhood shopping. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect convenient areas for neighborhood shopping facilities consisting of neighborhood-oriented sales and services. 
4-1.9  G-B General business. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for and encourage the proper grouping and development of uses which include a wide variety of sales and services that will best accommodate the needs of the city and the traveling public in order to reduce highway traffic congestion, traffic hazards and blight along the public streets of the city. 
4-1.10  C-B-D Central business district. The purpose of this district shall be to accommodate development which will include a wide variety of sales which locate in the city's historical central business district. Due to the unique design of this district to serve the special needs of the city's historical central business district, applications for this zoning designation will not be accepted. 
4-1.11  WLI Wholesale-light industrial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those wholesale and light industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district. 
4-1.12  H-I Heavy industrial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which cannot comply with the requirements of the WLI district. 
4-2 - Official zoning map and major thoroughfare plan. 
The boundaries of each zoning district are shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Nashville, Georgia." The classification of streets (local and collector streets and principal and minor arterials) within Nashville, Georgia, are shown on a map entitled "Major Thoroughfare Plan, City of Nashville, Georgia." Both maps shall be dated and certified by the mayor and the city clerk, and said maps and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this ordinance. 
Accurate copies of the "Official Zoning Map, City of Nashville, Georgia," and the "Major Thoroughfare Plan, City of Nashville, Georgia," shall be on file in the office of the zoning administrator at all times. Said map shall accurately show all map amendments made in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to ensure that the "Official Zoning Map, City of Nashville, Georgia," and the "Major Thoroughfare Plan, City of Nashville, Georgia," displayed in his office are kept up-to-date and accurately show all amendments. 
4-3 - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Nashville, Georgia," the following rules shall apply: 
4-3.1  Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the centerline of a street right-of-way, highway, railroad right-of-way line, stream bed or river bed, such centerlines shall be interpreted to be such district boundaries. 
4-3.2  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be interpreted as following such lot lines. 
4-3.3  Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the corporate limit lines, such corporate limit lines shall be interpreted to be such district boundaries. 
4-3.4  Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as being set back from the centerline of a street right-of-way, road, highway, railroad, stream or river, and parallel thereto, such district boundaries, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be interpreted as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of such street, road, highway, railroad, stream or river as being parallel thereto. 
SECTION 5. - SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES 

5-1 - Table of permitted uses. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Nashville, Georgia," no building, structure or land shall be constructed, erected, altered or used except as indicated in the following schedules: 
5-1.1  Uses permitted by right. Uses permitted as a matter of right are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "X" in the appropriate column. 
5-1.2  Special exception. Uses permitted only after special review and approved by the city council are indicated on the following schedule by the letters "SE" in the appropriate column. 
5-1.3  Uses not allowed. Uses not specifically designated by an "X" or "SE" within the appropriate column are not allowed within the district. 
5-1.4  Conflict of use interpretation. In the event of a discrepancy between the various provisions of this ordinance as relates to a particular use of land being allowed in a particular zoning district, [this] section 5, [setting out the] schedule of permitted uses, shall govern. 

 
(Ord. of 11-10-97, § 1; Ord. of 7-27-98, § 1) 
SECTION 6. - SETBACK, FLOOR AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT 

6-1 - Development standards. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Nashville, Georgia," no building or structure, excluding all signs other than advertising separate use signs, shall be constructed or erected except as indicated in the following schedule: 

 

 

 
SECTION 7. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE AREA REQUIREMENTS 

7-1 - Off-street automobile parking and storage. 
At the time of the erection of any type of building or structure herein listed or at the time any such building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, there shall be provided for such new construction, enlargement or increased capacity only off-street automobile parking and storage in accordance with the following minimum requirements except in the C-B-D zoning district. Such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley. 
7-1.1  Dwellings —Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
7-1.2  Rooming and boardinghouses and hotels —One (1) space for each guest room. 
7-1.3  Places of public assembly, churches, fraternal organizations —One (1) space for each four (4) seats to be accommodated in the main assembly room. 
7-1.4  Tourist rooms, tourist courts or motels —One (1) space for each bedroom. 
7-1.5  Hospitals, convalescent homes or similar institutions —One (1) space for each two (2) beds intended for patients, excluding bassinets. 
7-1.6  Retail businesses —One (1) parking space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of retail floor area. 
7-1.7  Medical and dental offices and clinics —One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of office floor area. 
7-1.8  Offices including banks —One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of total floor area. 
7-1.9  Automobile service stations —Two (2) spaces for each gasoline pump plus three (3) spaces for each grease rack or similar facility. 
7-1.10  Wholesaling —One (1) space for each two (2) employees. 
7-1.11  Industrial —One (1) space for each two (2) employees at maximum employment on a single shift. 
7-1.12  Bus terminals —Three (3) spaces for each loading and unloading bay. 
7-1.13  Auto sales and repair —One (1) space for each two (2) employees at maximum employment on a single shift, plus two (2) spaces for each three hundred (300) square feet of auto repair or maintenance space. 
7-1.14  Shopping center —One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of total floor area. 
7-2 - Off-street parking within two hundred fifty feet of principal use. 
If vehicle parking or storage space required cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such space may be provided on other appropriately zoned off-street property, provided such space lies within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such vehicle parking space shall be clearly associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
7-3 - Combined parking spaces. 
The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one (1) lot but the required space assigned to one (1) use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half (½) of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. 
7-4 - Size of off-street parking spaces. 
The area of each parking space shall contain not less than two hundred (200) square feet with appropriate dimensions for the parking of an automobile, exclusive of the access drives or aisles thereto and adequate off-street maneuvering areas which generally will require an additional one hundred (100) square feet per vehicle. 
7-5 - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. 
7-5.1  Retail business: One (1) space, ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet (10' × 25'), for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
7-5.2  Wholesale and industry: One (1) space, ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet (10' × 50'), for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
7-5.3  Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
7-6 - Curb cut requirements. 
In all zoning districts, where the lowering or cutting away of curbs, or the placement of asphalt and/or driveway pipe on noncurbed sections is required for the purpose of access from public rights-of-way to private property, such curb cuts shall meet the following standards: 
7-6.1  Residential curb cuts. Residential curb cuts shall have a maximum width of twenty (20) feet at the street right-of-way line. Where at least two (2) streets intersect, all residential curb cuts shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from the intersection of the street rights-of-way lines or right-of-way lines extended, unless more restrictive standards are required by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
7-6.2  Commercial and industrial curb cuts. Commercial and industrial curb cuts shall have a maximum width of thirty-five (35) feet at the street right-of-way line. Where at least two (2) streets intersect, all commercial and industrial curb cuts shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the street rights-of-way lines or rights-of-way lines extended, unless more restrictive standards are required by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
SECTION 8. - NONCONFORMANCES 

8-1 - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lot for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the office of the clerk of Superior Court of Berrien County at the time of passage of this ordinance which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this ordinance, or if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged or extended; provided, that in either case: 
a.  Minimum requirements of the district for front, side and rear yard, height and floor area shall be complied with. 
b.  A lot to be used for duplexes, multifamily dwellings, mobile homes, or mobile [home] parks, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
8-2 - Nonconforming uses of land. 
Nonconforming uses of land consist of the open use of property (including such uses as, but not limited to, storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, mobile home parks and other similar open uses) where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the use of the lot, and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance: 
a.  When a nonconforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. 
b.  Nonconforming uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses. 
c.  A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
d.  When any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
8-3 - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
Nonconforming uses of structures consist of structures used, at the time of passage of this ordinance, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located. In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, nonconforming uses of structures shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
a.  An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use that generates more automobile or truck traffic; creates more noise, vibration, smoke, dust or fumes; is a more intensive use of structures than the existing nonconforming use; or is in any way a greater nuisance to the adjoining properties than the existing nonconforming use. 
b.  A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use which would in any way increase the floor space, area or volume of space occupied by the use. 
c.  When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one (1) year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. A passive use such as storage shall not be sufficient in and of itself to constitute a continuance of a nonconforming use. 
8-4 - Nonconforming signs. 
Nonconforming signs shall be allowed to continue except as provided in paragraphs [sections] 10-3 and 10-6 as follows: 
a.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
b.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as repainting, electrical repairs, and neon tubing repairs, shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
c.  New point of business signs related to legally established nonconforming uses may be erected, provided they comply with the sign regulations applicable to the use in the most restrictive district in which the use is permitted. 
8-5 - Reconstruction of nonconforming structures. 
When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use or nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than seventy-five (75) percent of the county-assessed tax value of the structure. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance shall also be governed by this provision. 
8-6 - Changes in zoning. 
Any nonconformances created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance requirements after the date of passage of this ordinance shall also be governed by the provisions of this section. 
SECTION 9. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN USES 

9-1 - Home occupations. 
A home occupation as defined by this ordinance shall be governed by the following requirements: 
9-1.1  At least one (1) resident and not more than one nonresident of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. The resident must be the owner of the home occupation. 
9-1.2  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building. 
9-1.3  No display of products shall be visible from the street and only products produced on the premises may be sold on the premises. 
9-1.4  Only one (1) point of business sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in size, motionless, nonlighted and attached to the principal building, shall be permitted and no advertising signs shall be permitted. 
9-1.5  Use of the building for this purpose shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of one (1) floor of the principal building. 
9-1.6  No internal or external alteration inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
9-1.7  The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
9-1.8  No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the occupation. 
9-1.9  Instruction in music and similar subjects shall be limited to two (2) students at a time. 
9-1.10  Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
9-1.11  The following and similar uses may be considered home occupations, provided that all additional requirements of this section are met: accounting, addressing service, answering service, architect, art instructor, barber or beauty shop (with no more than one (1) chair), drafting, dressmaking, insurance agent, manufacturing agent, music teacher, notary public, photography, real estate agent and tax consultant. 
9-1.12  Not more than five (5) children may be kept in the home as a nursery as a customary home occupation. 
9-2 - Multifamily development projects. 
Multifamily development projects must meet the following requirements: 
9-2.1  Multiple buildings are allowed on a single lot in these development types. 
9-2.2  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit proposed as part of any multifamily development project. 
9-2.3  Multifamily development projects shall conform to the building height restrictions and yard setback requirements listed in section 6 of this ordinance. 
9-2.4  Each dwelling unit proposed as part of a multifamily development project shall meet the minimum floor area requirements listed in section 6 of this ordinance, as well as limitations for efficiency and one (1) bedroom units as part of the total project development. 
9-2.5  All multifamily development projects shall leave five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit in a natural state as open space or be developed as park and/or open air recreation facilities. 
9-3 - Mobile home parks. 
Mobile home parks are allowed within the MHP district as a matter of right, provided the following requirements are met: 
9-3.1  The minimum size shall be two (2) acres. 
9-3.2  The park shall have minimum side yards of twenty (20) feet, minimum rear yard of twenty (20) feet, and a front yard of at least twenty (20) feet greater than that required for other uses permitted in the district. 
9-3.3  Each mobile home shall be connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
9-3.4  The minimum lot area per mobile home shall be not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet with a minimum stall width of forty (40) feet, where public sewer and water are available. 
9-3.5  The minimum distance between any two (2) mobile homes or between any mobile home and any other building in the park shall be twenty (20) feet. 
9-3.6  A twenty-foot private drive(s), paved and properly drained, shall serve all mobile home stalls and [shall] be drained so as to prevent damage to adjoining property, public or private. 
9-3.7  Each mobile home lot shall be clearly defined by means of concrete, steel or iron pipe markers placed at all corners. 
9-3.8  At least five hundred (500) square feet per mobile home lot, not to be a part of the required mobile home lot, shall be provided in one (1) or more locations for community playground and recreation purposes. 
9-3.9  All property lines of a mobile home park which abut any zoning district other than another MHP district shall be screened as described in section 3-15. 
9-3.10  No mobile home park shall be occupied by a greater number of mobile homes than that authorized in the approved building and inspection permits. No mobile home park shall be enlarged or extended unless a separate building permit and a separate certificate of occupancy have been issued. 
9-3.11  Any new mobile home park is subject to review and approval of the City of Nashville planning commission prior to approval of a building permit to insure compliance with the aforementioned requirements. 
SECTION 10. - SIGN REQUIREMENTS 

10-1 - Signs shall meet requirements of this section. 
All signs within the City of Nashville shall be erected, constructed or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section 10 and applicable sections of the Southern Standard Building Code for the City of Nashville, and only those signs that are permitted by these ordinances shall be erected in the City of Nashville. 
10-2 - No signs shall hamper traffic safety. 
No sign shall be erected or continued that: 
a.  Obstructs the sight distance along a public right-of-way. 
b.  Would tend, by its location, color or nature, to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, or to be confused with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle. 
c.  Would, by its nature or moving parts, tend to confuse traffic or create any potential hazard to traffic. 
d.  Uses of admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger" etc., which might be confused with traffic directional signals. 
10-3 - Locations prohibited. 
No sign shall be attached to or painted on any telephone pole, light pole, telegraph pole, or any tree, rock or other natural object. Except in the C-B-D districts, no signs, other than those signs erected by public governmental agencies or signs required by law, shall be placed so as to overhang any portion of public rights-of-way or other public properties. 
10-4 - Illumination not to be a nuisance. 
Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, flood or spot lights shall be so posted and so shielded as to prevent the rays or illumination therefrom being cast into neighboring dwellings and approaching vehicles. 
10-5 - Signs not requiring a permit. 
[The following signs do not require a permit:] 
a.  Signs to regulate traffic. 
b.  Signs required to be posted by law. 
c.  Warning signs and no trespassing signs. 
d.  Signs established by governmental agencies. 
e.  Signs indicating bus stops, taxi stands and similar transportation facilities. 
f.  Signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area advertising specific property for sale, lease, rent or development or private property. 
g.  Temporary real estate signs less than ten (10) square feet in area advertising specific property for sale, lease, rent or development on private property. 
h.  Any sign not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area other than advertising separate use signs or signs requiring electrical wiring. 
i.  Temporary signs on private land involved in campaigns of religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, political and similar organizations. 
10-6 - Limitations on advertising separate use signs. 
All advertising separate use signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the schedule of permitted uses, section 5, which stipulates the zoning required for such structures. 
10-6.1  Setback. Advertising separate use signs shall meet the building setback line required for principal buildings in each respective zoning district where permitted. This setback shall apply to both the sign face and the sign support structure. 
10-6.2  Height restrictions. No advertising separate use sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, measured from the roadway. Such signs shall have a minimum height of ten (10) feet as measured from the roadway before beginning of display or copy area of the sign. 
10-6.3  Copy area. Advertising separate use signs shall have a maximum copy area of three hundred (300) square feet per sign face, limit of two (2) sign faces per sign location. Only three hundred (300) square feet of copy area shall be visible from any one (1) direction. 
10-6.4  Spacing. No advertising separate use sign shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other advertising separate use sign, both sides of street inclusive. 
10-6.5  Prohibited locations. In addition to the zoning district limitations, no advertising separate use sign shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential district, any private residence, church, school, park, cemetery or premises used for local, state or federal governmental purposes, as measured along the same street to which the sign is proposed to be oriented. 
10-7 - Issuance of permits, administration and filing procedure. 
[The following provisions shall govern the issuance of permits, the administration, and filing procedures for signs under this section:] 
10-7.1  Issuance of permit. No sign, except those listed in section 10-5, shall be erected, hung or placed or structurally altered without a permit from the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall only issue a permit for the erection or construction of a sign which meets the requirements of this zoning ordinance and applicable sections of the Southern Standard Building Code for the City of Nashville. 
10-7.2  Filing procedure. Application for permits to erect, hang or place a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable from the zoning administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by plans showing the area of the sign; size and character and the method of illumination, if any; the exact location proposed for such sign and in the case of a projecting sign, the proposed method of fastening said sign to the building structure; the vertical distance between such sign and the finished grade; the horizontal distance between such sign and the street right-of-way line. In addition, the application must be accompanied by a permit fee, the cost of which shall be established by the city council. 
10-7.3  Additional information. Each application shall, upon the request of the zoning administrator, submit any additional information deemed necessary by said administrator. 
10-7.4  Temporary signs. If a temporary sign which requires a permit is not intended to be left in place for a period to exceed three (3) months, the owner may deposit a sum of ten dollars ($10.00) with the zoning administrator in lieu of the usual permit fee. If the sign is removed by the owner before the first day of the fourth month, the deposit shall be refunded in full; if not, the deposit shall be forfeited and the zoning administrator shall remove said sign. 
SECTION 11. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

11-1 - Zoning administrator. 
An administrative official designated as the zoning administrator by the City Council, Nashville, Georgia, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The zoning administrator is authorized to issue building permits, construction permits, certificates of occupancy, and any other duly authorized legal document or order that affects the use or development of property within the jurisdictional or administrative boundaries of the City of Nashville. He is also authorized to issue citations answerable to the municipal court of the City of Nashville, when he detects a violation of the herein ordinance. He is also hereby authorized to issue subpoenas and take out warrants answerable to the municipal court of the City of Nashville. 
11-2 - Building permit required. 
A building permit, or a sign permit in the case of a sign, issued by the zoning administrator is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, demolition or alteration of any building or structure or sign. No building or sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance; however, a building permit issued before the adoption of this ordinance shall remain valid with the same qualifications as issued under this ordinance. 
11-3 - Application for building permit. 
All applications for building permits, except single-family residential and duplexes, shall be accompanied by two (2) site plans, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate (if applicable), the setback lines of the building on the "permit lot", the various easements on the lot and such other site planning information (i.e., parking spaces, loading space requirements and ingress/egress information) as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. The above-referenced information is required on the site plan before the site plan is considered by the zoning administrator and any permits are approved. 
Single-family residential and duplex site plans need not be drawn to scale, but must be accurate as to dimensions of lot and proposed building. 
Any application for a building permit which proposes to develop properties which have been duly identified as having a flood hazard potential must provide adequate technical information based on the flood hazard management requirements of the City of Nashville (please see the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, Ordinance No. 2-86, adopted May 12, 1986, as amended) for technical standards and requirements. 
The applicant for a building permit shall submit a certificate with his application which certifies that the lot which he proposes to develop is a lot of record. When the lot in question does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements of this ordinance, then the applicant shall certify that such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance or is a lot which has been created through governmental taking of property. 
Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the work of development is commenced; provided, that extensions of time and periods not exceeding six (6) months each may be allowed in writing by the zoning administrator. Any unapproved deviation from the site plan shall cause the zoning administrator to not issue a certificate of occupancy. 
11-4 - Sign permits. 
The zoning administrator shall receive applications for the construction of signs, as required by this ordinance. Such applications shall follow the same forms as required for building permits, and shall contain information required by this ordinance in section 10. The zoning administrator shall process such sign applications and shall issue sign permits for proposed signs which comply with the requirements of this ordinance. The Nashville zoning administrator shall not issue a local sign permit for any signage subject to the review and approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation without documentary evidence of approval from the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
11-5 - Reason for denial of permit. 
When a permit is denied, the zoning administrator shall provide in writing, upon request of the applicant for a permit, his reasons for denying the permit within five (5) days after said request. 
11-6 - Cancellation of permits. 
A demolition, building or sign permit shall be cancelled by the zoning administrator when the method of demolition, construction or use violates any provision contained in this ordinance or any state or local ordinance or resolution. Upon such cancellation, any further work upon the demolition construction, alteration or repair on said building or structure or land shall be deemed a violation. Each and every day such unlawful demolition, construction, alteration or repair on said building or structure or further use of said building or structure or land continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
11-7 - Permits and licenses void when issued in conflict. 
Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance shall be null and void. 
11-8 - Certificate of occupancy. 
Certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with the following provisions: 
11-8.1  Certificate of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the zoning administrator is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
a.  A building hereafter erected. 
b.  A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, the side, front or rear yard. 
c.  Any building or premises where a change in the type of use will occur. 
11-8.2  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. The zoning administrator shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and if the building, as finally constructed, substantially complies with the sketch or plan submitted and approved for the building permit. One (1) copy of all certificates of occupancy issued, which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property or other pertinent information, signed by the owner or his agent, shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator. 
11-8.3  Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and substantially complies with the sketches or plans submitted for obtaining the building permit. 
11-9 - Penalties for violation. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, demolished, altered, repaired, moved, converted or maintained, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the offender shall be guilty and upon conviction thereof be fined no more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each offense. Each day of continued violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
11-10 - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator, city attorney or other appropriate city authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner or occupant who would be damaged by such violation, may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land. 
11-11 - Appeals. 
Appeals from the decisions of the zoning administrator with regard to interpretation, administration, and enforcement shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions of section 12. 
SECTION 12. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES 

12-1 - Administrative appeals. 
Appeals from the decisions of the zoning administrator with regard to interpretation, administration and enforcement shall be made to the Nashville City Council. The Nashville City Council shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator. 
12-1.1  Who may appeal. Appeals to the Nashville City Council may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeals shall be filed not later than thirty (30) days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the city council all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
12-1.2  Presentation of evidence. The appellant, and any public agency or private individual, shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the Nashville City Council. 
12-1.3  Administrative appeal decisions. The Nashville City Council may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator. 
12-2 - Special exception. 
The city council shall hear and decide upon special exceptions as authorized by section 5, "Schedule of Permitted Uses," of this ordinance. 
12-2.1  Special exception review criteria. The application to establish such special exception use shall be approved on a finding by the city council that: 
a.  The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose of this ordinance. 
b.  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood nor affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers. 
c.  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement, noise or fumes generation, or type of physical activity. 
d.  The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses of adjacent properties, and the proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use. 
e.  The parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted will be met. 
f.  Provided that the city council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards (i.e., increased setbacks, buffer strips, screening, etc.) as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of residents and workers in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided, that wherever the city council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, that any term, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, the city council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
g.  Special exceptions granted by the city council shall be exercised within twelve (12) months from date of approval, shall not be transferable except upon written approval of the city council, or shall become null and void and subject to procedures for resubmission as hereinabove established. 
12-3 - Request for a variance. 
The city council may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the dimensional standards and development requirements of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of provisions of this ordinance will, in any individual case, result in unnecessary hardship so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance in the district in question. 
12-3.1  Variance review criteria. A variance may be granted in an individual case upon finding by the city council that all of the following exists: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
b.  The application of all dimensional standards and development requirements to this particular piece of property would render the particular property unusable; and 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved, or in the alternative, that such conditions are due to the location of existing utilities, etc.; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this ordinance; provided, that no variance may be granted for a use of land, building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance. Applications for use variances shall not be accepted by the zoning administrator. Such requests shall be properly filed as requests for rezoning, the authority for such rezoning or ordinance amendments being solely reserved for the Nashville city council. 
e.  Provided that the city council may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards (i.e., increased setbacks, buffer strips, screening, etc.) as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of residents and workers in the community and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood. Provided that whenever the city council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, that any of the terms, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, the city council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity. 
12-4 - Public hearing required. 
Before making its decision on any administrative appeal, request for a special exception, or request for a variance, the Nashville city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. 
12-4.1  Notice of hearing shall be given. At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days' notice of such required public hearing shall be published in two (2) consecutive issues of the official legal organ of the City of Nashville. In addition, notice of such public hearings shall be sent to the owners of all properties either adjoining or directly across the public right-of-way to the property affected. Said list of property owners shall be supplied by the applicant and is a requested part of the application. Such required public hearing notice shall contain the name(s) of the appellant or petitioner, the date, time and place set for the public hearing, and shall contain a brief statement of the nature of the hearing. 
12-4.2  Who may appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
12-4.3  Time limit on board's decision. The city council shall reach a decision following a public hearing within thirty (30) days. 
12-5 - Forms. 
Administrative appeals, requests for permission to establish a use requiring special approval, and requests for variances shall be made on forms provided therefor, and all information required on said forms shall be provided by the appellant. Forms shall be filed with the zoning administrator. No form shall be accepted by the zoning administrator unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) to defray expenses. 
SECTION 13. - ZONING DECISIONS AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 

13-1 - General conditions. 
This ordinance, including the official zoning map or major thoroughfare plan, may be amended by the city council on their own motion, on recommendation of the planning commission, or on petition by the property owner or his duly authorized agent, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, the governing authority shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this section. 
13-2 - Application for amendment. 
[Application for amendment of this ordinance shall be made in conformance with the following:] 
13-2.1  General. Applications for amendment of this ordinance may be in the form of proposals for amendment of the text or proposals for amendment of the zoning map. Applications for amendment shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and shall include the required seventy-five dollars ($75.00) fee, payable to the city, to defray expenses. No application for a zoning change affecting the same parcel of property or part thereof shall be accepted by the zoning administrator until the expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following the defeat of a rezoning request by the city council. 
13-2.2  Signature of applicant required. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall state his name and address. 
13-2.3  Application for text amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
13-2.4  Application for map amendment. An application for a map amendment shall include the following information: 
a.  The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street number, if any; or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
b.  A legal survey of the land in question, and a description by metes and bounds, bearings and distances of the land; or the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of the county, then the lot, block and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; 
c.  The present zoning classification and the classification proposed for such land and a statement as to the proposed use of the property. 
d.  The name and address of the owners of the land; 
e.  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one (1) acre and in acres if one (1) or more. 
f.  If the applicant has made, within two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's application for a map amendment, campaign contributions aggregating two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more or made gifts having in the aggregate a value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more to the City of Nashville, any member of the city council of Nashville, Georgia, or a member of the City of Nashville planning commission, it shall be the duty of the applicant and the attorney representing the applicant to disclose the following in the application: 
1.  The name of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution or gift was made; 
2.  The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the map amendment and the date of each such contribution; and 
3.  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more made by the applicant to the local government official during the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the map amendment. 
4.  In the event that no such gifts or contributions were made, the application shall affirmatively so state. 
g.  The application number, date of application and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified. 
13-2.5  Exclusions. The provisions of subsections 13-2.1 through 13-2.4 shall not be applicable to amendments of this ordinance, including the zoning map, initiated by the planning commission or the city council. 
13-3 - Referral to planning commission. 
Within five (5) days after the routine monthly application acceptance deadline, the zoning administrator shall transmit two (2) copies of the rezoning application to the planning commission for its review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit its report to the city council. If the planning commission fails to take action within thirty (30) days, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the requested amendment. The passage of a motion to table or a postponement to a specific time shall constitute a decision for the purpose of this section. Upon receipt of the planning commission report or upon the expiration of said thirty-day period, whichever occurs first, a public hearing shall be scheduled regarding the application. 
13-4 - Posting of property. 
Not less than fifteen (15) nor more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date set for the public hearing on any application for a map amendment (other than a map amendment initiated by the planning commission or city council), the zoning administrator shall erect a sign on the land proposed to be reclassified. Such sign shall be erected by the zoning administrator within ten (10) feet of whatever boundary line of such land abuts the most traveled public road; and if no public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall be erected to face in such a manner as may be most readily seen by the public. The sign shall show the application number, if any, the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, and the scheduled date, time and place of public hearing. If the land sought to be reclassified lies within more than one (1) block as shown on a plat recorded in the land records of the county, then a sign shall be erected on the land in each such block. The zoning administrator shall verify the posting of a sign upon said property in accordance with these provisions. Any such sign shall be maintained on the property at all times by the zoning administrator until a decision on the application has been made by the city council. 
13-5 - Hearing procedures. 
[Procedures for hearings on proposed amendments are as follows:] 
13-5.1  Hearing called. Before taking action on a proposed amendment, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing. At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days' notice of the time, place and purpose of said hearing shall be published in two (2) consecutive issues of the official legal organ of the City of Nashville. Such notice with respect to text or map amendments not initiated by the planning commission or city council shall state the application number and shall contain a summary of the proposed amendment, if a text amendment; and in the case of a map amendment, the legal description (as furnished in compliance with subparagraph 13-2.4b. above) and location of the property, its area, the name of the owner or their authorized agent, and the present and proposed zoning classification for the property affected. Such notice, with respect to text or map amendments initiated by the planning commission or city council, shall state the time and place of the hearing, the purpose of the hearing, and that the proposed text or map amendment is described in documents available for public inspection during business hours in the office of the zoning administrator. 
13-5.2  Notice to interested parties. A notice shall be given to the applicant and the planning commission of the date, time and place of the public hearing. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the zoning administrator and be open to public inspection during regular office hours. 
13-5.3  Public hearing procedure. All public hearings on zoning matters shall be placed on the city council agenda under a section entitled "Public Hearings." After an initial presentation of a specific zoning and/or annexation/zoning request by the planning commission or their designated staff, citizen comments will be heard in an orderly fashion. The mayor or mayor pro tem will ask for those citizens speaking in favor of the request first, following by those opposed to the issue. All speakers will be asked to provide his or her name and address for the public record. Citizens are requested to keep their comments as brief as possible so that all who wish to be heard will have adequate time. When there are a large number of citizens wishing to testify at a given hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limitations on individual speakers. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to all speakers. Citizens may address their comments to the city council as a whole. Individual attacks or cross-examination of a council member, city employees or other citizens will be ruled out of order. After all citizens' comments have been received, all further discussion of the specific application is reserved for the city council. The city council retains the privilege to ask any questions of staff or any citizen present for clarification. The city council will then render a decision on the application. The passage of a motion to table or a postponement to a specific time shall constitute a decision for the purpose of this section. 
13-5.4  Standards for exercise of zoning powers. In order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the City of Nashville against the unrestricted use of property, the following standards, and any other factors relevant to balancing the above-stated public interest, will be considered, when deemed appropriate by the city council in making any zoning decision: 
a.  The existing land use pattern; 
b.  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
c.  The existing population density pattern and the possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities; 
d.  Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment reasonable; 
e.  Whether the proposed change will adversely influence existing conditions in the neighborhood of the community at large; 
f.  Potential impact on the environment, including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality and quantity; 
g.  The reasonableness of the costs required of the public in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety necessities when considering the proposed changes; 
h.  Whether the proposed change will be detrimental to the value or improvement of development of adjacent or nearby property in accordance with existing requirements; 
i.  Whether the proposed change is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the City of Nashville; 
j.  Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to the individual owner as contrasted with the adjacent or nearby neighborhood or with the general public; and 
k.  The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with local planning efforts, if any, or the City of Nashville. 
SECTION 14. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

14-1 - Conflict with other laws. 
All previous zoning ordinances of the City of Nashville, Georgia, are hereby repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect, but all such ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this ordinance, such more restrictive ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require lesser restrictions, the requirements herewithin shall govern. 
14-2 - Separability. 
If any section, clause, portion of provision of this ordinances is found invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any other portion of this ordinance. 
14-3 - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be enforced from and after its adoption and passage by the city council. 
      June 19, 1989        Date of Adoption 
;adv=1p> 

;adv=1p> 
;adv=1p> 

;adv=1p> 
;adv=1p> 

;adv=1p> 
;adv=1p> 

;adv=1p> 
;adv=1p> 

;adv=1p> 
;adv=1p> 

;adv=1p> 
;adv=1p> 

;adv=1p> 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix "B" sets forth the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Nashville as enacted March 22, 1971. The nature of a subdivisions ordinance, the requirements of state law as to the procedures for enactment, amendment, appeals and the like, preclude its physical incorporation as an integral part of the Code; therefore it has been included in the Appendix, as enacted for the information and convenience of the user. 
Unless otherwise indicated by a history note following a particular section, the ordinance is set out as enacted, the article headings and numbers, and section numbers and catchlines having been retained. 
Charter reference— Authority of mayor and city council to prescribe regulations for the subdividing or platting of property, § 2-9(jj). 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 5; mobile homes, Ch. 16; planning, Ch. 21; flood hazard areas, § 21-25; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 26; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference— Subdivision regulations generally, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1214 et seq.; injunction to prevent violation, § 69-1219. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION AND DEFINITIONS 

Section A. - Purpose. 
The public health, safety, and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of land within the City of Nashville. In furtherance of this objective, these subdivision regulations are adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
1.  To encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community; 
2.  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
3.  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
4.  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservations of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; and, 
5.  To assure, in general, the wise development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the community. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1214. 
Section B. - Authority. 
These subdivision regulations are adopted under the authority of the State of Georgia General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 as amended [Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1201 et seq.] 
Section C. - Jurisdiction. 
The subdivision regulations contained herein shall govern all subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Nashville as now or hereafter established. 
Section D. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words used herein are defined as follows: 
1.  Subdivision: The division, development, or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land, regardless of how it is to be used[,] into two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land, either by plat or by metes and bounds description, or the division or redivision of land involving the dedication of a new park, playground, street, or other public right-of-way or facility; or the vacating or closing, realignment, or any other change in existing streets, alleys, easements, recreational areas, water areas, or other public improvement of facilities, and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the act or process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
2.  Lot: A portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. 
3.  Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the building setback line parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
4.  Building setback line: The minimum horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line and the building or any projection thereof except: 
a.  Steps, terraces, and open fire escapes. 
b.  Architectural features such as eaves, cornices, gutters or canopies projecting not more than three (3) feet beyond the main wall of the building. 
5.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
6.  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular. 
7.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. 
8.  The word "may" shall be deemed as permissive. 
9.  Subdivider: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity, acting as a unit, subdivision, or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined. 
10.  Planning commission: The local planning commission officially designated by the city council for local planning purposes as specified in the General Planning Enabling Legislation of 1957, as amended [Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1201 et seq.]. 
11.  Plat, preliminary: A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability of the proposed subdivision of land. 
12.  Plat, final: A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets, public areas and other dimensions of land. 
State Law reference— Control of subdivision entrances to state highways, Ga. Code Ann., § 95A-948 et seq. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Section A. - Streets. 
1.  Right-of-way. The dedication of right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on the thoroughfare plan on page 5 [of the original ordinance], said thoroughfare plan is hereby made a part of these regulations and shall meet the following standards. (See cross sections, page 6 [of the original ordinance]) 

 
2.  Intersection. The centerline of no more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point. No street shall intersect another street at less than eighty (80) degrees and shall as nearly as possible intersect at ninety (90) degrees. A tangent no less than one hundred (100) feet shall be placed between a curved street and the nearest right-of-way line of the street which it intersects. 
3.  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be allowed. (See illustration 1, page 8 [of original ordinance]) 
4.  Additional right-of-way. If the subdivision boundary lies adjacent to the right-of-way line of an existing platted street of less than minimum right-of-way width, a minimum of one-half the required additional width shall be dedicated. 
5.  Dead-end streets. Permanent dead-end streets shall be prohibited. 



6.  Cul-de-sacs. Permanent cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than five hundred (500) feet measured from the nearest street right-of-way line with which the centerline of cul-de-sac intersects and shall terminate in a circular turnaround with a radius of no less than fifty (50) feet at the right-of-way line and forty (40) feet at the curb line. 
7.  Access. Every lot within a subdivision shall have adequate access to a public street. The planning commission may control the access from a subdivision to the major streets by requiring all lots to face and have access only to other streets. 
8.  Coordinated street system. Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication and improved to the boundary of such property. Where it is deemed necessary by the planning commission, such temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet. 
9.  Private streets and reserve strips. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every lot in a subdivision shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to a street, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the community under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
10.  Street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate or be sufficiently similar to existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place" or "court." 
11.  Curved streets. The intercurb radius shall not be less than three hundred fifty (350) feet for major arterial streets; two hundred fifty (250) feet for collector streets; and one hundred (100) feet for residential streets. Centerline tangents between reverse curves shall be no less than two hundred (200) feet for collector streets and one hundred (100) feet for residential streets. 
12.  Curb cuts. Curb cuts shall be prohibited within forty (40) feet of an intersection. 
13.  Curb radius. The curb radius at street intersections shall be no less than twenty (20) feet except that on major streets where the Georgia Highway Department Standards shall prevail. 
14.  Future development. Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and submitted by the developer. 
Section B. - Blocks. 
1.  Nonresidential. Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length in width as may be suitable for their perspective use including adequate provisions for off-street parking and maneuvering space. 
2.  Residential. The length of residential blocks shall not, unless natural or man-made barriers such as streams and railroads dictate, exceed one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet or a depth less than two (2) tiers of lots except where double frontage lots are permitted. 
Section C. - Lots and lot lines. 
All lots shall front upon a public street. Lot lines shall as nearly as possible be perpendicular to the street right-of-way lines or in the case of a curved street as nearly as possible perpendicular to the tangent of the street right-of-way lines. 
1.  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as prescribed in the zoning regulations for the City of Nashville provided that they are served by a public sewerage system. Lots not served by a public sewerage system shall meet the minimum size requirements of the public health department. 
2.  Minimum lot elevation. The lot area contained within and contiguous to the building walls and for a minimum distance of ten (10) feet measured from all sides of said building shall have a minimum elevation of two (2) feet above the maximum flood stage of streams or canals in the particular area being developed based upon acceptable engineering procedure and approved by the planning commission. The said minimum elevation shall be subject to approval by the County Board of Health. 
3.  Building setback line. All building setback lines shall be as specified in the zoning regulations for the City of Nashville. 
4.  City limits. Lots shall not be divided by corporate boundary lines. 
5.  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently wider and larger in area to permit the building setback line outlined above. 
6.  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall only be permitted where it shall be found necessary to separate a development from all roads, major and secondary thoroughfares, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography. Where a railroad or major or secondary thoroughfare abuts or runs through a portion of the subdivision, the lots abutting the railroad or major or secondary arterial shall have a minimum depth of one hundred seventy (170) feet to include a twenty (20) feet [foot] planted buffer strip separating the lots from the right-of-way. 
7.  Commercial use buffer strip. When a portion of the subdivision is to be devoted to commercial purposes or the subdivision abuts existing commercial development and when this commercial use abuts residential lots, a buffer strip shall be provided. Said buffer strip shall be twenty (20) feet in width and shall be planted with shrubs or trees at the same time the adjoining street is developed so as to provide visual screening. Said buffer strip shall be labeled as such on the subdivision plat. 
Section D. - Easements. 
Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided where necessary for utilities or drainage or for access to public facilities. All utility and drainage easements shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, and all other required easements shall be of sufficient width to accommodate the use for which it is intended. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAT 

Section A. - Preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall meet the standards of design as set forth in Article II and shall give the following information: 
1.  The title block shall show the name of the subdivision; name, address, and Georgia registration number of the engineer or surveyor; and scale; 
2.  Date, north point, and graphic scale; 
3.  Existing contour lines dashed and proposed contour lines solid, and both shall be shown at two (2) foot intervals of elevation, based upon mean sea level (M.S.L.) datus. Accuracy shall be within one-half foot intervals; 
4.  Acreage of land to be subdivided; 
5.  Boundary lines of the area to be subdivided and their bearings and distances; 
6.  Existing and proposed easements and their location, width, and distances; 
7.  Existing railroads, streets, and rights-of-way on and adjacent to the tract and their names and widths; 
8.  The location of any streams, natural drainageways, other waterways which exist on the property, and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions; 
9.  Proposed street system within the subdivision, with grades indicated if over 3%; 
10.  Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions; 
11.  Blocks designated by letter and lots by number; 
12.  Location of existing utilities on and adjacent to the tract, showing pipe sizes for water and sewer lines; 
13.  Location and sizes of proposed utilities; 
14.  Sites, and their acreages, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for public uses. Sites, if any, for semi-public, multi-family, or commercial uses; 
15.  Minimum building setback lines from the street; and, 
16.  Copies of proposed deed restrictions, if any, shall be attached to the preliminary plat. 
Section B. - Preliminary approval. 
The developer shall prepare a preliminary plat as specified in this ordinance and obtain approval of it prior to the making of any street improvements or installation of utilities. Three (3) copies of this plat shall be submitted to the building inspector at least fifteen (15) working days prior to the regular meeting date of the planning commission. The planning commission shall call a hearing on the preliminary plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary or chairman of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person or persons designated as requesting preliminary plat review and approval, no less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. Within thirty (30) days after submission, the planning commission shall review the plat and indicate its approval, disapproval (listing reasons), or approval subject to listed modifications as a basis for the preparation of the final plat. Failure to act within thirty (30) days shall be deemed approval of the preliminary plat unless the developer agrees to an extension of time. Approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless the final plat is submitted within one (1) year from the date of preliminary approval. After action by the planning commission, copies of the preliminary plat shall be distributed as follows: Developer—One copy; building inspector—One copy; planning commission—One copy. 
Section C. - Physical improvements of subdivision. 
After preliminary approval of the plat has been given by the planning commission, the developer may then proceed to grade the streets and install all improvements required by this ordinance and any other applicable city ordinance. If the subdivider wishes to record the final plat prior to completion of the improvements herein required, the city commission may require, in lieu of such completion, the subdivider to file a surety bond or certified check with the city clerk to insure the actual construction of such improvements according to the plans and specifications approved by the planning commission within a period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date of approval of the final plat. Such bond shall be in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of the improvement as determined by the planning commission and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the city commission. No building construction shall be permitted on any lot that does not comply with the provisions of these regulations, and no municipal utility service will be furnished to such lot. In any case where the commission does not require a bond for the improvements required herein, no building shall be permitted on any lot or in any area in a subdivision where the proposed construction will produce runoff or require utility services that affect other areas or lots located within or outside the subdivision unless a bond, in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost is posted for the portion of the drainage or utility improvements that will protect the affected area. 
Section D. - Development required for approval. 
1.  Streets. 
a.  Grading and paving. The subdivider shall grade and pave all streets to their full pavement width as set forth on page 6 [of the original ordinance (Recommended Standards for Street Cross Sections)]. 
b.  Curb and gutter. The subdivider shall install curb and gutter and proper drainage as required by city specifications. 
2.  Monuments. Concrete monuments, four (4) inches in diameter or square, three (3) feet along, with a suitable center point shall be set at each street intersection on the street right-of-way line and at all points on boundary lines of the subdivision where there is a change of direction. Iron pins at least one-half inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long shall be placed at all lot corners. 
3.  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadway and the necessary slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by the acceptable engineering procedure but in no case shall the pipe be less than twelve (12) inches. 
4.  Water supply system. Water mains properly connected with the city water supply system shall be constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat for both domestic use and fire protection. The sites of water mains, the locations and types of valves and hydrants, the amount of soil cover over the pipes, and other features of the installation shall conform to specifications and standards established by the city. 
5.  Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewer lines properly connected with the city sewerage system shall be installed in such a manner as to serve all lots within the subdivision in accordance with specifications and standards established by the city; provided, however, that sanitary sewers shall not be required to be installed unless a public sewerage system is now or will soon be accessible to the subdivision in the opinion of the planning commission. 
6.  Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way which shall conform substantially with the lines of such watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream and shall be of such additional width or construction, or both as will be adequate for the purpose. 
Section E. - Final plat. 
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and shall give the following information: 
1.  Date, title, name and location of the subdivision, graphic scale, and true north point; 
2.  Street boundary line, right-of-way lines of streets, easements, and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites with accurate dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, bearings and deflection angles on all lines, radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves with readings to the nearest minute; 
3.  Name and right-of-way width of each street, width of each easement or other right-of-way; 
4.  Blocks designated by letter and lots by number; 
5.  Purpose for which parcels of land, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved; 
6.  Minimum building setback lines from the street; and 
7.  Location and description of monuments; 
8.  Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets, and the location and names of owners of adjoining unplatted property; 
9.  Certification on plat of title showing that applicant is the owner and a statement by such owner dedicating street rights-of-way and any other sites for public use; 
10.  Certification on plat by surveyor or engineer as to the accuracy of the survey and plat; 
11.  Certification by the County Board of Health that water supply and sewage disposal are in accord with approved standards; 
12.  Certification by the City Clerk of the City of Nashville that the subdivider has complied with one (1) of the following alternatives: 
a.  All the improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable city ordinances; or, 
b.  A surety bond or certified check has been accepted by the city in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all required improvements. 
13.  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording; 
14.  Certificate on the plat to be signed by the secretary of the planning commission when the plat has been given final approval by the planning commission. 
Section F. - Final plat requirements. 
The developer shall submit an original tracing drawn in black indelible drawing ink and four (4) copies or the final plat of the subdivision, or that portion thereof to be recorded and developed, to the building inspector, who will check and certify that monuments and completion of (or payment for) improvements are satisfactory. Such plat shall be submitted no less than two (2) weeks prior to the regular meeting date of the planning commission. The planning commission shall afford a hearing on the final plat. Notice of the time and place of such shall be sent by the secretary or chairman of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person or persons designated as requesting final plat review and approval, not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. Within thirty (30) days after submission, the planning commission shall review the final plat and approve or disapprove it (listing reasons for disapproval). Failure to act within thirty (30) days will deem approval of the final plat unless the developer agrees to an extension of this time. The tracing with certification shall be returned to the developer, plus one copy for filing with the Clerk of the Superior Court, and one copy for filing with the Clerk of the City of Nashville. The remaining two (2) copies shall be retained, one by the building inspector and one by the planning commission. 
Editor's note— A footnote in the original ordinance reads: "The illustration on page 23 presents the format which shall be followed for final plats." The note refers to the sample plat shown at the end of this article. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section A. - Enforcing officer. 
The provision of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the city building inspector. His duties shall include: 
1.  Receiving subdivision plats; 
2.  Obtaining the approval of the planning commission of all subdivision plats and having the chairman of the planning commission sign said plat before being signed as approved by the zoning administrator; and, 
3.  Inspecting subdivisions for compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable city ordinances. 
The city building inspector shall utilize the services of the nonresident city engineer when necessary. 
Section B. - Enforcement provisions. 
1.  Penalties for transferring lots in unapproved subdivision. The owner, or agent of the owner, of any land to be subdivided within the municipality of Nashville who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Berrien County shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instruments of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city, through its attorney or other designated official, may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
2.  Erection of building. From and after the time when the platting jurisdiction of the planning commission shall have been established by virtue of adoption by the city of these regulations, no building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the city unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and line with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by said planning commission or with a street located and accepted by the city. Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building inspector or city attorney or other designated official of the City of Nashville may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
Section C. - Amendments. 
1.  Planning commission responsibility. This ordinance may be amended from time to time, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendations. The planning commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit its report to the city council. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the thirty (30) day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
2.  City council responsibility. Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, the city council of Nashville shall hold a public hearing thereon; at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
State Law reference— Amendments to subdivision regulations, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1216. 
Section D. - Violation and penalty. 
It shall be unlawful to convey title of lots of a platted subdivision or improve property by the construction of buildings on such lots, which has not been approved and recorded as provided in these regulations, except those parcels recorded prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to record a subdivision plat, or once recorded, to make any changes thereon whatsoever which have not been reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the county commission in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
Each and every day's violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
A violation of these regulations shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Any person or persons, firm, or corporation or association of persons who shall divide and offer for sale any real estate in violation of the terms or provisions of these regulations or who records a subdivision in violation of these regulations, shall be punished as provided by law. 
Charter reference— Penalty for violation of ordinances, § 2-9(ww). 
ARTICLE V. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section A. - Conflict with other laws. 
When the provisions of this ordinance specify more restrictive standards than required by any other ordinance, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance require more restrictive standards, the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-1213. 

Section B. - Validity. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section C. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption. 
Editor's note— The subdivision ordinance was adopted on March 22, 1971. 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE - 1933 Georgia Code 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the 1933 Georgia Code or related matters. 

 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE - (O.C.G.A.) 
The ordinances of the City of Nashville were codified and published in 1980. At that time statutory references in this volume were cited to the 1933 Georgia Code. As pages are necessarily pulled for updating in the Supplement Service, state law references will be updated to reflect the 1981 Georgia Code (O.C.G.A.). 

 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1967 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1967 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1967 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1980 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1967 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1967 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
 O—Indicates Ordinance   R—Indicates Resolution  Mo—Indicates Motion 

 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1980 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 