CODE OF DOUGHERTY COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
STATE LAWS OF LOCAL APPLICATION GENERAL RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY 
____________ 
Published in 1987 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF DOUGHERTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Gil M. Barrett Chairman 
____________ 
John L. Brunson Vice Chairman 
____________ 
George Brown Victor T. Edwards Connie Meier Jeff Sinyard Jack Stone Commissioners 
____________ 
W. Alan Reddish County Administrator 
____________ 
W. Spencer Lee County Attorney 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
COUNTY OF DOUGHERTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Jeff Sinyard Chairman 
____________ 
Ewell Lyle Vice Chair 
____________ 
Lamar Hudgins John Hayes Muarlean Edwards Ewell Lyle Gloria Gaines Jack Stone Commissioners 
____________ 
Richard Crowdis County Administrator 
____________ 
W. Spencer Lee IV County Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a compilation of certain state laws of local application and a complete recodification of the resolutions and ordinances of Dougherty County of a general and permanent nature. 
The Code of Ordinances is a codification of the resolutions and ordinances of the County of a general and permanent nature. Such Code supersedes all such resolutions and ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1979 Code, and Acts of the General Assembly and resolutions and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Commissioners. It should be noted that the 1979 Code was never officially adopted by the board; it was used, in the preparation of this Code, as a "starting point" for source material. The source of each section is in this Code is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent act or resolution or ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of Part II of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state codes. Each section number consists of three component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the first dash referring to the part number, the figure before the second dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the second dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1-6 is numbered 1-6-1 and the fourth section of Chapter 2-3 is 2-3-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its part and chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 8-3-1 and 8-3-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 8-3-1.1, 8-3-1.2 and 8-3-1.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 1-3 and 1-4, it will be designated as Chapter 1-3.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The general index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by county officers and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of B. Meade White, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida, Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. W. Alan Reddish, County Administrator, and Mr. W. Spencer Lee, County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code which will make the active law of the County readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the County's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION Tallahassee, Florida 
93-024 
A RESOLUTION ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR DOUGHERTY COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN RESOLUTIONS NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; AND PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR A PENALTY; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS RESOLUTION SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT RESOLVED, by the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, and IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED by the authority of same: 
SECTION I: The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Dougherty County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of eighteen chapters, is adopted. 
SECTION II: All resolutions and ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 10, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
SECTION III: The repeal provided for in Section II hereof shall not be construed to revive any resolution or ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent resolution or ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
SECTION IV: Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, or as otherwise provided by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the County may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
SECTION V: Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments. 
SECTION VI: Resolutions and ordinances adopted after March 10, 1992 that amend or refer to resolutions and ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
SECTION VII: This resolution shall become effective September 8, 1993. 
_____ Gil Barrett CHAIRMAN 
ATTEST: 
_____ W. Alan Reddish COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR 
ADOPTED: September 8, 1993 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Resolutions that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Resolutions that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - STATE LAWS OF LOCAL APPLICATION 
Chapter 1-1 - GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1-1. - Reserved. 
Chapter 1-2 - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-2-1. - Composition; election. 
The board of commissioners of Dougherty County shall be composed of a chairman and six (6) other members. The chairman shall be elected from the county at large. The remaining six (6) members shall be elected from commission districts composed of portions of Dougherty County as hereinafter provided. All of such members shall be elected at the times and in the manner provided for hereinafter. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3058, § 1(a); Code 1979, § 1-101)
Sec. 1-2-2. - Qualifications; residence. 
All members of the board of commissioners shall be qualified electors of Dougherty County. The chairman of the board shall have been a resident of Dougherty County for at least one (1) year prior to the date he takes office, and each of the other commissioners shall have been a resident of his respective commission district for at least six (6) months prior to the date of taking office. In the event the chairman ceases to be a resident of Dougherty County during his term of office or in the event any member ceases to be a resident of his respective commission district during his term of office, a vacancy shall thereby be created and shall be filled in the manner hereinafter provided. The chairman of the board shall be elected by the qualified electors of the entire county. Each of the other members shall be elected by the qualified electors of Dougherty County residing within his respective commission district. Any person wishing to offer as a candidate for chairman shall offer as a candidate for that office. Any person offering as a candidate for commissioner other than chairman shall designate the commission district for which he is offering. The chairman and all other members of the board shall be nominated and elected in accordance with the provisions of Code Title 34 [O.C.G.A. Title 21], known as the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3058, § 1(b); Code 1979, § 1-102)
Sec. 1-2-3. - Commission districts. 
For the purpose of electing the members of the board of commissioners, other than the chairman, Dougherty County shall be divided into six (6) commission districts. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3058, § 1(c); Code 1979, § 1-103)
Sec. 1-2-4. - Initial elections. 
(a)	The first members of the board of commissioners provided for herein shall be elected as follows: 
(1)	The chairman shall be elected at the general election of 1978 and shall take office on the first day of January, 1979, for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(2)	The member from Commission District 3 shall be elected at the general election of 1978 and shall take office on the first day of January, 1979, for an initial term of two (2) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(3)	The members from Commission Districts 2, 4 and 6 shall be elected at the general election of 1978 and shall take office on the first day of January, 1979, for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(4)	The members from Commission Districts 1 and 5 shall be elected at the general election of 1980 and shall take office on the first day of January, 1981, for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)	Successors to the chairman and other members elected pursuant to subsection (a) hereof shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of their respective terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)	For the period beginning January 1, 1979, and ending December 31, 1980, the board of commissioners of Dougherty County shall consist of the chairman and four (4) members elected pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (3) of subsection (a) of this section and the two (2) incumbent members of the present board of commissioners of Dougherty County whose regular terms of office expire on December 31, 1980. During such period of time said two (2) incumbent members shall be deemed to be the commissioners from Commission Districts 1 and 5, and at the first regular meeting of the board held in January, 1979, the board, by resolution, shall designate the incumbent commissioner who shall represent Commission District 1 and the incumbent commissioner who shall represent Commission District 5. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3058, § 2; Code 1979, § 1-104)
Sec. 1-2-5. - Oath. 
The members of said board before entering upon their duties shall take an oath before the judge of probate or some officer authorized to administer oaths, or before one (1) of their number, to discharge honestly and faithfully all the duties of said office according to the laws and the constitution of the State of Georgia, which oath shall be subscribed upon the minutes of the board by them. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834, § 3; Code 1979, § 1-105)
Sec. 1-2-6. - Chairman; duties and authority. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners shall preside at all meetings of the board and shall be a full voting member of the board for all purposes, but the chairman shall not have any veto power. The chairman shall call meetings of the board as hereinafter provided and as requested by a majority of the members of the board. The chairman shall also appoint members and chairman of all committees of the board. The chairman shall be recognized as the official head of Dougherty County by state, federal and other authorities for military and ceremonial functions. In time of danger or emergency the chairman may, with consent of two (2) commissioners, take command of the police and govern the county by proclamation and maintain order and enforce laws. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3058, § 2; Code 1979, § 1-106)
Sec. 1-2-7. - Vice-chairman; selection and duties. 
The board of commissioners may elect from its membership a vice-chairman to serve at the pleasure of the board. The vice-chairman shall preside at meetings of the board in the absence, disability or disqualification of the chairman and during a vacancy in the office of chairman until such vacancy is filled as hereinafter provided. The vice-chairman shall receive no additional salary for service as vice-chairman, and his rights and duties as a member of the board shall not be impaired by reason of such service as vice-chairman. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3058, § 2; Code 1979, § 1-107)
Sec. 1-2-8. - Meetings; quorum; voting. 
The board of commissioners shall hold a regular meeting at 10:00 a.m. on the first and third Mondays of every month at the Dougherty County Courthouse, and they may hold special meetings at any time and at any place within the county that their duties may require. Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but the concurrence of at least four (4) commissioners shall be necessary to take official action. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3058, § 2; Code 1979, § 1-108)
Editor's note— For current law, see 1986 amendatory Act of the General Assembly. 
Sec. 1-2-9. - Compensation. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the salary of the chairman of the board shall be three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) per annum and the salaries of the remaining members of the board shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per annum. Said salary shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the treasury of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834; Ga. Laws 1969, p. 2797; Code 1979, § 1-110)
Sec. 1-2-10. - Vacancies. 
(a)	In the event of a vacancy in the membership of the board of commissioners of Dougherty County because of death, resignation, removal of residency from the county or commission district, or for any other reason, said vacancy shall be filled as hereinafter provided. 
(1)	If the unexpired term is six (6) months or less, the remaining members of said board of commissioners, within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of the vacancy, shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(2)	If the unexpired term is more than six (6) months [and] a November election, as defined by subsection (m) of Code section 34-103 of the Georgia Election Code, as amended, [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-2(12)] will be held within one hundred eighty (180) days, but not less than thirty (30) days, after the occurrence of the vacancy, then the remaining members of said board of commissioners, within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of said vacancy, shall appoint a qualified person to serve until the vacancy is filled for the remaining unexpired term by a person elected at a special election called for the same date as the November election as hereinafter provided. The board of elections of Dougherty County shall issue the call for a special election for the purpose of electing a qualified person to fill the vacancy for the remaining unexpired term, and said board shall set the date of said special election for the same date as the November election. The call for said special election shall be issued not more than forty-five (45) days, nor less than thirty (30) days, prior to the date of said special election. In the event the remaining term is more than six (6) months but the vacancy occurs within less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the next November election, as herein defined, then such vacancy shall be filled in the manner prescribed by paragraph (3) hereof. 
(3)	If the unexpired term is more than six (6) months and a November election, as hereinabove defined, will not be held within one hundred eighty (180) days and at least thirty (30) days after the occurrence of the vacancy, then within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of said vacancy, the board of elections of Dougherty County shall issue the call for a special election for the purpose of electing a qualified person to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. Said board shall set the date of said special election for a day not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty-five (45) days after the date of the issuance of the call. 
(b)	When a vacancy occurs in the office of chairman of the board of commissioners, the person elected or appointed to fill said vacancy, as the case may be, may reside anywhere within the territorial limits of Dougherty County, and when filled by a special election, the qualified electors of the entire county shall be eligible to vote at said special election. When the vacancy occurs in the office of a district commissioner, the person elected or appointed to fill said vacancy, as the case may be, shall be a resident of the commission district wherein the vacancy exists, and when filled by a special election, only the qualified electors of Dougherty County who reside within the commission district wherein the vacancy exists shall be eligible to vote at said special election. Persons elected or appointed to fill vacancies as provided by this section shall be subject to the same qualifications as required of other persons elected to the office of chairman or commissioner of Dougherty County. 
(c)	The provisions of Code Title 34 [O.C.G.A. Title 21], known as the Georgia Election Code, as amended, shall apply to special elections to fill vacancies provided for in this section. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834, § 5; Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2656; Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3058, § 2; Code 1979, § 1-109) 
Secs. 1-2-11—1-2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 1-2-20. - Enumeration of general powers. 
Said board of commissioners shall have, and they are hereby vested with exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters: 
(1)	In directing and controlling and caring for all property of the county according to law; 
(2)	In levying taxes according to law; in establishing, altering or abolishing roads, private ways, bridges [and] ferries according to law; 
(3)	In establishing, abolishing and changing election precincts and militia districts;
(4)	In supervising the tax collector's and tax receiver's books and allowing the insolvent list for said county, according to law; 
(5)	In settling all claims or accounts of officers having the care, management, keeping, collecting or disbursement of money belonging to the county, or appropriated for its use and benefit and bringing them to settlement, and especially are they charged with the duty to examine and audit frequently the books of the county depository, the tax collector, the tax receiver, the sheriff, the superintendent of public schools or other officers of said county through whose hands funds may pass, and this may be done by said commissioners themselves or by their clerk or auditor, and they may require from all such officers and depository such reports as may be necessary to keep such board fully informed at all times of the financial condition of the county according to law; 
(6)	In making such rules, regulations and provisions for the support of the poor of the county, and for the preserving and promoting of public health of the county, with authority to quarantine against contagious diseases and epidemics according to law; 
(7)	In regulating peddling and fixing license fees, according to law;
(8)	And generally to have and exercise all the powers which are by the constitution and laws of Georgia vested in probate judges when sitting for county purposes, and to exercise such other powers as are granted by law or as may be indispensable to their jurisdiction over matters of county finances, including all powers not inconsistent with this Act, which have heretofore been exercised by the board of commissioners of Dougherty County under the Act approved August 6, 1904 (Ga. Laws 1904, p. 262) and under all Acts amendatory thereof; 
(9)	In selecting and appointing all minor officials of the county whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for by law, such as superintendent and guards of convicts and chaingang, janitor of court house, superintendent of the pauper farms, county physician, health officer, tax assessors, county policemen and other officers and guards as may be needed and authorized by law; [and] 
(10)	Said board of commissioners is authorized to enter into an agreement with the City of Albany to jointly collect, and by the terms of said agreement, appropriate the proceeds from the excise tax collected on alcoholic beverages, wine and beer. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834; Ga. Laws 1967, p. 2856; Code 1979, § 1-201)
Cross reference— Election by clerk of board, assistant clerk, attorney, § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2-21. - Garbage disposal and sanitary districts; sanitary and garbage collection systems; tax levy therefor. 
(a)	The board of commissioners of Dougherty County is hereby authorized and empowered to provide systems of garbage disposal in said county in all areas in Dougherty County outside the limits of any incorporated municipality. The commissioners are further authorized to create sanitary districts in Dougherty County outside the limits of the incorporated municipalities thereof. 
(b)	The board of commissioners of Dougherty County shall have the right to provide a county sanitary system to be operated by the county, making such expenditures in connection with the establishment and operation thereof as the commissioners deem necessary. The commissioners shall have the further right to contract with an independent contractor to collect and dispose of garbage and shall have further right to authorize the collection and disposal of garbage by individuals or others. 
(c)	The governing authority is hereby authorized to levy a tax upon the taxable property in said county or in any district created hereunder for the purpose of establishing, maintaining and operating any system provided for hereunder, or by assessments on the property owners utilizing such system within the county or any district created hereunder. 
(d)	The board of commissioners of Dougherty County are hereby authorized and directed to regulate the collection and disposition of garbage, trash and refuse throughout the county. The commissioners shall make all rules and regulations necessary for the collection and disposal of such garbage and shall regulate the fees or charges for the services rendered. Such regulations shall not conflict with any general laws of force in this state. The commissioners may prescribe different charges for different classes of customers such as commercial or residential, but such charges or fees shall be uniform per pickup or per service rendered within each class. 
(e)	In order to protect the public health and welfare, said commissioners shall prescribe rules and regulations for the disposal and removal of garbage from all businesses, residences and occupied dwellings, providing when it shall be removed, and to where it shall be removed. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834, § 9; Ga. Laws 1969, p. 2980, §§ 9B, 9C, 9D, 9E and 9F; Code 1979, § 1-202) 
Cross reference— See also § 1-2-30 as to garbage, and § 1-2-32 as to sewer. 
Sec. 1-2-22. - Contributions for road improvements. 
Said board of commissioners may receive contributions for the improvement of the public roads of the county from persons who own property along the same or from any other persons or from the state government or the United States government, and such contributions, when received, shall be used for the improvement of the roads designated by the contributor. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834, § 10; Code 1979, § 1-203)
Sec. 1-2-23. - Improvement and subdivision of land. 
(a)	The board of commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, are hereby authorized and empowered to make rules and regulations providing for the development and improvement of real estate in said county lying outside the corporate limits of all municipalities in said county, and/or regulating the subdividing of said property by owners or other persons for residential purposes. 
(b)	The commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, shall have the power to enforce all said rules and regulations by injunction and other appropriate equitable relief. 
(c)	The violation of any rule or regulation adopted by the commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, pursuant to this Act shall be [a] misdemeanor, and shall be punished in the manner provided by Code section 27-2506 [O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3]. 
(Ga. Laws 1960, p. 2837, §§ 1—3; Code 1979, § 1-208)
State Law reference— Punishment for violation of county ordinance, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60, 36-1-20. 
Sec. 1-2-24. - Authority to appropriate general funds to school system. 
Pursuant to the provisions of an amendment to Article VIII, section 5, paragraph 1 of the Constitution [Const. 1983, Art. VIII, § 5, ¶¶ 1, 2], … providing for the establishment of a countywide board of education for Dougherty County … the City of Albany and the County of Dougherty are hereby authorized to appropriate money from their general funds to said Dougherty County school system and the board of education thereof to be used for any and all educational purposes for which said board may be now or hereafter authorized to expend funds. 
(Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2976, § 1; Code 1979, § 1-209)
Cross reference— Dougherty County School System, § 1-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2-25. - Business or occupational taxes authorized. 
Said county board of commissioners for the County of Dougherty is authorized and empowered to levy such licenses and specific or occupation taxes on all those who transact or offer to transact business within said county, other than within the incorporated limits of an incorporated town or city, as said county board of commissioners may deem expedient or necessary for the safety, benefit, convenience or advantage of said county, and the citizens thereof; to classify businesses or occupations for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful; to require such person to procure licenses before engaging in business or offering to transact business in such area; to compel the payment of such licenses and taxes by execution or in any other lawful manner, and to make all suitable laws and regulations necessary and proper to the carrying out of the powers herein conferred, and to prescribe suitable penalties for violation thereof. Without in any way limiting other methods by which the payment of such licenses may be enforced, it is enacted that the same may be enforced as provided in section 92-3907; section 92-3908; section 92-3910, of the Code of 1933 [1], relating to collection of licenses for the exhibition of shows, etc. 
(Ga. Laws 1943, p. 952, § 1; Code 1979, § 1-210)
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—These sections of the 1933 Code were repealed.
Cross reference— See also 2-10-1 et seq.

Sec. 1-2-26. - Buildings, fences and similar structures may be regulated. 
(a)	Said board is further authorized and empowered to pass necessary rules and ordinances regulating buildings, fences and similar structures within the limits of said county and other than within the incorporated limits of an incorporated town or city, and to require a permit from said county board of commissioners for the erection of any building, fence or similar structure where in the opinion of said county board of commissioners the erection of any such building, fence or structure is so located with reference to other buildings, fences, or structures, or with reference to properties belonging to other parties as to make it to the public interest to have such building, fence or structure conform to regulations and standards adopted by said board of county commissioners. 
(b)	Anyone erecting any building, fence or other similar structure within the area aforesaid without first obtaining a permit therefor, where such permit is required, or failing or refusing to comply with any of the rules, regulations and standards adopted by said board of county commissioners, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction shall be punished as provided by section 27-2506, of the Code of 1933 [O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3]. 
(Ga. Laws 1943, p. 952, § 2; Code 1979, § 1-211)
Cross reference— See also § 2-4-1. 
Secs. 1-2-27—1-2-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTITUTIONAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— See also §§ 1-2-24, 1-4-31, 1-4-33, 1-5-21, 1-8-1 and 1-8-31 as to constitutional amendments.

Sec. 1-2-30. - Authority to regulate and police collection of garbage. 
Article VII, section 4, paragraph 1 of the Constitution [Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 4, ¶¶ 1—3] is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof, the following: "The governing authority of Dougherty County, in order to provide for the public welfare, health and security of the people of Dougherty County, shall have the right to regulate and exercise police powers over the collection of garbage in all areas of Dougherty County outside the incorporated limits of municipalities and shall have the right to issue exclusive franchises for the collection of garbage in any areas of Dougherty County outside the incorporated limits of municipalities; and in assessing the fees or charges for such franchises; to prescribe the fees to be charged by any and all parties franchised by the governing authority and to provide for the payment of such fees, including the right of the governing authority to make collections for the holders of such franchises; and to make such necessary rules and regulations pertaining to the collection of garbage as may be necessary to effectuate the powers herein granted. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 1770; Code 1979, § 1-301)
Editor's note— This Amendment No. 12 has been continued in existence. 
Cross reference— See also, § 1-2-21. 
Sec. 1-2-31. - Authority to abolish office of tax commissioner and merge board of tax assessors and offices of county relating to return, assessment, collection of taxes. 
Article XI, section 1, paragraph 6 of the Constitution of Georgia [3] is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof, the following: "Notwithstanding any provision of law or of this constitution to the contrary, the office of tax commissioner of Dougherty County is hereby abolished upon the expiration of the term of the present tax commissioner of Dougherty County, December 31, 1976, or upon a vacancy occurring in the office of tax commissioner of Dougherty County, whichever shall occur first, and the governing authority of the County of Dougherty may, by resolution and without any enabling act of the General Assembly of Georgia, merge, consolidate and combine the board of tax assessors, departments, offices, officers and functions of the County of Dougherty relating to the return and assessment of property for taxation, notice of property assessment, hearings, appeals, arbitration, reviews of property assessment, and the enforcement and collection of taxes; may provide in said resolution for liens, priority of liens, and for the enforcement and collection of ad valorem taxes levied by the County of Dougherty and State of Georgia, and any and all other matters relating to or incident to the same; may specify and provide for the time, method and manner of performing any and all such matters and functions, including, without limitation of the foregoing generally, the retention, release or combination of the present offices and officers, positions and employees, the election or selection of officers and employees to perform such consolidated and combined tax functions, the compensation and tenure of office and employment of such officers and employees, and may provide for all other related or incidental matters. Provided, that there shall be vested in and conferred upon such combined board of tax assessors, departments, offices and officers, such authority as may be conferred upon board of tax assessors under existing laws or those hereinafter enacted. Provided, further, that, except as provided hereafter, upon resolution of the governing authority of the County of Dougherty, combining the tax functions of offices, boards and officers now existing under any and all acts relating to the County of Dougherty or to board of tax assessors of counties generally, such board of tax assessors and tax departments, offices and officers shall be abolished and of no force and effect within the County of Dougherty, and all functions heretofore performed by the board of tax assessors and tax departments, offices, officers and employees of the County of Dougherty, shall be performed by said tax boards, departments and officers, all as provided in said resolution. Provided, further, that upon the effective date of the abolishment of the office of tax commissioner of the County of Dougherty, the duties, responsibilities and authority of the tax commissioner shall be vested in such official or officials or board as shall be designated in the resolution of the governing authority of the County of Dougherty. Provided, further, that in the performance of any and all of the matters herein authorized, due process of law shall be afforded, and the rights of persons to homestead exemptions as now or hereafter provided by law, as related to ad valorem taxation due to the State of Georgia and the County of Dougherty shall not be affected hereby. 
"Provided further, that the powers herein delegated may be exercised from time to time. Provided, further, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize any change in the ad valorem millage limitation provided by the Constitution of the State of Georgia or by any legislative act." 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 1654, § 1; Code 1979, § 1-304)
Editor's note— This Amendment No. 11 has been continued in existence. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—There is no counterpart in the 1983 constitution.
Cross reference— See also § 2-16-1 et seq.

Sec. 1-2-32. - Authority to establish sewer system; assess property owners; issue revenue certificates; contract. 
Article VII, section 7, paragraph 1 of the Constitution [Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 5, ¶¶ 1, 4, 5] is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: "The governing body of Dougherty County is hereby authorized to establish, construct, maintain, operate and administer a system of sewerage, including sanitary and storm sewers and a sewage disposal plant, in said county. In order to accomplish the foregoing, the governing authority is hereby authorized to assess the cost of sanitary sewers against the property owners served thereby, to acquire rights-of-way for such sewers by contract of purchase or by the power of eminent domain, and to create indebtedness, and to issue revenue anticipation certificates and/or general obligation bonds but the amount of such bonds outstanding at any one (1) time shall not exceed two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00) in addition to the seven (7) percent limitation now imposed by the constitution. The governing body of said county is hereby given full authority to determine the aggregate amount of bonds to be issued from time to time, the maturity dates not to exceed thirty (30) years from date of issue, the date of issuance and other details incident to the issuance and sale of said bonds. Such bonds may be issued after submitting the question of such issuance to the voters of the county and the approval of such issuance by a majority of the qualified voters of said county voting on such question. In the event such bonds are issued, the governing body shall provide for the assessment and collection of an annual tax on all the property in said county subject to taxation for bond purposes sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on said bonds as the same mature. The aforesaid governing body is further authorized to levy a tax, fee or charge as necessary, to assure the acquisition, construction, equipping and, thereafter, operating, maintaining and extending such system, and, in their discretion, to levy a sewer charge for the use of sewers constructed hereunder for such purposes, and to contract with the governing authority of the City of Albany relative to the establishment, construction, maintenance, financing, administration, operation and use of such sewerage system and sewage disposal, including the aforesaid sewage disposal plant, and such contract may include provisions relative to the joining of the aforesaid system to any system now or hereafter created in or by the City of Albany." 
(Ga. Laws 1956, p. 467, § 1; Code 1979, § 1-305)
Editor's note— This Amendment No. 5 has been continued in existence. 
Cross reference— See also, § 1-2-21. 
Chapter 1-3 - COUNTY OFFICERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-3-1. - Clerk of board of county commissioners. 
The board of commissioners shall elect a clerk of the board of commissioners, and he shall attend all sessions of the board and shall keep a record of the actings and doings of said board in a well-bound book to be provided at the expense of the county, and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by said board, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the commissioners electing him. Said clerk shall keep a book of inventory of all property, including road machinery, livestock, chaingang outfits, roadwork tools and every other kind and class of property belonging to said county, together with a fair valuation of the same, where located, in whose custody and in what condition, which inventory shall be carefully revised each year, and said clerk shall keep such other books and records as may be necessary or as the board may direct, and shall perform generally all and singular the acts and duties necessary to be performed as said board of commissioners may require. Said board may discharge said clerk at any time, with or without cause, and elect a successor. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834, § 6; Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2319, § 1; Code 1979, § 1-205)
Cross reference— Combining with office of attorney authorized, § 1-3-4; county administrator designated clerk, § 1-3-27; salary, § 1-3-24. 
Sec. 1-3-2. - Assistant clerk. 
Said board in its discretion may elect an assistant clerk, who shall perform such duties as required of the clerk as might be directed by said board. Said assistant clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by said board. Said board may discharge said assistant clerk at any time, with or without cause, and elect a successor. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834, § 6; Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2319, § 1; Code 1979, § 1-207)
Cross reference— Selection, compensation and dismissal of assistant clerk now within authority of county administrator, § 1-3-25. 
Sec. 1-3-3. - Purchasing agent; bids, reports. 
(a)	No contract for public work, amounting to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, shall be let except to the lowest and best bidder. If the contract for public works amounts to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, opportunity for competitive bidding shall be given after reasonable advertisement for at least five (5) days prior to the date set for receiving such bids. The clerk of the board shall be purchasing agent for the board; provided, that all purchases made by him requiring the expenditure of money in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more shall be approved by the board of commissioners. In the capacity of purchasing agent the clerk shall cancel all sales of personal property which the board may authorize to be sold, and which may have become unnecessary or unfit for the county's use; provided, that if sales or purchases in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) be involved, opportunity for competitive bids shall be given after reasonable advertisement thereof. 
(b)	The assistant clerk may act in place of the clerk as purchasing agent at such times as directed by said board. 
(c)	The clerk of said board is required to prepare and file annually in the office of the clerk of the superior court of said county and in the Carnegie Library, two (2) itemized statements of expenditures of said county, approved by said board during the preceding year, showing the amount paid out, to whom paid, and for what purpose; also the income for said period, so that the general public may be fully informed, at all times, as to the income and expenditures of the county. Said statements shall remain on file in said clerk's office and in the Carnegie Library and shall be subject to public inspection as are other public records of said county. Said statements shall be filed in the clerk's office and in the Carnegie Library each year within a period of ninety (90) days after the end of each fiscal year, and the board shall cause a condensed copy of the statement to be published in the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements are published in said county within a period of fifteen (15) days from the date the statement is filed in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Dougherty County and in the Carnegie Library. 
(d)	Any willful violation of this section by the clerk or assistant clerk, or by any of the commissioners shall constitute a misdemeanor under the penal laws of this state. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834, § 12; Ga. Laws 1972, p. 3863; Code 1979, § 1-206)
Editor's note— Amount of purchases requiring approval of board of commissioners was increased to $2,500.00, see § 1-3-26; requirement for annual report probably superseded by Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, set out in § 1-3-20 et seq. 
Cross reference— County administrator designated chief purchasing agent, § 1-3-27; joint city-county purchasing department established, App. A. 
Sec. 1-3-4. - County attorney. 
It shall be lawful for said board to employ a competent attorney to act as attorney for said board and for said county, and to pay for such legal services, such compensation as the board, in its discretion, may deem proper. The office of clerk and attorney may be combined in the discretion of the board. 
(Ga. Laws 1941, p. 834, § 11; Code 1979, § 1-204)
Secs. 1-3-5—1-3-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 1-3-20. - Office created. 
There is hereby created the office of county administrator of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 1; Code 1979, § 2-201)
Sec. 1-3-21. - Appointment; restrictions. 
The county administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the board of commissioners of Dougherty County. No member of the board of commissioners of Dougherty County shall be appointed county administrator or acting county administrator during the term of office for which he was elected or for a period of one (1) year thereafter. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 2; Code 1979, § 2-202)
Sec. 1-3-22. - Qualifications. 
The county administrator shall be chosen by the board of commissioners of Dougherty County solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 3; Code 1979, § 2-203)
Sec. 1-3-23. - Term; removal; suspension and removal; public hearing. 
The county administrator shall be appointed in January of each year for a term of one (1) year. The county administrator shall be subject to suspension or removal from office at any time for just cause. In case of suspension or removal the county administrator shall be given a written statement of the reasons for such action. He may within five (5) days from receipt thereof request a public hearing thereon before the board of commissioners of Dougherty County, which request shall be filed with the board. Upon receipt of such request, a hearing shall be set not earlier than ten (10) days, nor later than fifteen (15) days, from the date of such request. Pending such hearing, and until final action has been taken thereon, the county administrator may be suspended from office and all of the duties hereof performed by some other person designated by the board of commissioners to perform such duties. The action of the board of commissioners in suspending or removing the county administrator shall be by majority vote and shall be final. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 4; Code 1979, § 2-204)
Editor's note— A reference to the term of initial appointee in the above section was a transitional provision and has been deleted. 
Sec. 1-3-24. - Compensation as fixed. 
The county administrator shall be paid an annual salary to be fixed by the board of commissioners of Dougherty County, and there shall be no reduction thereof during his term of office. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 5; Code 1979, § 2-205)
Sec. 1-3-25. - Duties. 
The county administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the County of Dougherty and head of the administrative branch of the county government. He shall be responsible to the board of commissioners of Dougherty County, for the proper administration of all affairs of Dougherty County, except as otherwise provided by law, and it shall be his duty: 
(1)	To appoint, and when in his discretion the welfare of the county requires it, suspend, discharge, transfer or remove all employees for whom the said board is responsible, except the county attorney and the chief of the county police who shall be appointed directly by the said board, but he may delegate to any department head such powers with respect to subordinates within that department; 
(2)	To see that all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of said board and all laws of the state subject to enforcement by him or by officers or department heads subject to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
(3)	To exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county which the board has heretofore exercised, or that may hereafter be created, and to direct and supervise the administration of all county offices and specifically the construction, maintenance and operation of all county roads, bridges, drains, buildings and other public works, and the care and maintenance of all real and personal property owned by Dougherty County; 
(4)	To attend all meetings of the board, with the right to take part in the discussions, but having no vote. The county administrator shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings; 
(5)	To prepare and submit to the board the annual budget and capital program and to execute the budget and capital program adopted by the board, approving all disbursements and expenditures as budgeted and/or authorized by the board; 
(6)	To examine regularly at periods fixed by the said board the accounts, records and operations of every county board, commission, department, office and agency which received appropriations from the said board; to make regularly monthly reports to the said board on county fiscal and other affairs; to keep the said board fully advised on the financial conditions and future needs of the county; and to make such recommendations on county affairs as he deems necessary for the efficient operation of the county; 
(7)	To submit to the said board at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the county for the preceding year; 
(8)	To confer and advise with all other elected or appointed officials of Dougherty County who are not under the immediate control of the said board, but who receive financial support from said board; 
(9)	To fix the salaries of all officers and employees of the county, whom he has the right to appoint, subject, however, to supervision, control or disapproval by the board; 
(10)	To devote his entire time to the affairs of his office; and
(11)	To perform such other duties as may be required of him by the said board.
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 6; Code 1979, § 2-206)
Sec. 1-3-26. - Designation as purchasing agent; limitations. 
The county administrator shall be the chief purchasing agent for the county, by whom all purchases and supplies and all contracts therefor shall be made, and he shall sign all vouchers for the payment of the same under such rules and regulations as the board of commissioners may adopt; provided, that no contract, purchase or obligation involving over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be valid and binding until after approval of the board of commissioners of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 7; Code 1979, § 2-207; Ga. Laws 1988, H.B. No. 1853, § 1) 
Cross reference— Duties of purchasing agent, § 1-3-3; joint city-county purchasing department, App. A. 
Sec. 1-3-27. - Designation as clerk of board. 
The county administrator shall be clerk of the board of commissioners of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 8; Code 1979, § 2-208)
Sec. 1-3-28. - Acting administrator; appointment, authority. 
The board of commissioners may designate some qualified person to act as acting county administrator in the absence of the county administrator. While so engaged, the acting county administrator shall have all of the rights, duties and authority of the county administrator. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 9; Code 1979, § 2-209)
Sec. 1-3-29. - Official bonds. 
The county administrator and any acting county administrator shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to the board of commissioners of Dougherty County and the premium therefor to be paid by Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1975, p. 2651, § 10; Code 1979, § 2-210)
Chapter 1-4 - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
ARTICLE I. - JOINT BOARD OF REGISTRATION AND ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Eligibility to membership, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-75.

Secs. 1-4-1—1-4-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— For current law, see Acts 1986, p. 3831. 
ARTICLE II. - ALBANY-DOUGHERTY PAYROLL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 1-4-30. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the "Albany-Dougherty Payroll Development Authority." 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 1; Code 1979, § 3-302)
Sec. 1-4-31. - Membership; purpose; powers; restrictions. 
Article V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia is hereby amended by adding to the end thereof a new section and paragraph to be known as section 9*, paragraph 1, which shall read as follows, to-wit: 
"Article V, section 9, paragraph 1. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the 'Albany-Dougherty Payroll Development Authority' which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced by Dougherty County. The County of Dougherty and the City of Albany may contract with the authority as a public corporation as provided by the Constitution of Georgia. 
Editor's note— This Amendment has been continued in existence. 
"The authority shall consist of five (5) members who shall have such control, duties, powers and authority as are hereby conferred and as may be prescribed or provided for by the General Assembly of Georgia, and such additional powers as may be delegated to the authority by the County of Dougherty and the City of Albany. Members of the authority shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of Dougherty County, the mayor of the City of Albany, the president of the Albany Chamber of Commerce and two (2) other members who shall be residents of Dougherty County within or without the corporate limits of the City of Albany. The General Assembly shall provide for appointment and terms of office of the members of the authority who are not members thereof by virtue of their office. The authority shall elect a chairman and a treasurer. The executive vice-president of the Albany Chamber of Commerce shall serve as secretary of the authority. 
"All lands and improvements thereon, the title to which is vested in the authority, and all debentures and revenue anticipation certificates issued by the authority, and all income earned therefrom by the holders of said evidences of indebtedness shall be exempt from state and local taxation. 
"Said authority is created for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare jobs and payrolls in industry, agriculture, commerce and natural resources and the making of long-range plans for the coordination of such development, promotion and expansion, within its territorial limits, and shall specifically be authorized to enter into contracts and agreements for periods of time extending beyond the terms of the members of the authority in office at the time of such contracts and agreements. The authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia, the County of Dougherty or the City of Albany. The authority is created for nonprofit purposes and all property acquired by the authority shall be used continually and exclusively for the purposes for which the authority is created. 
"The specifications of certain powers herein is not intended to be exclusive, it being the intention of this amendment that all powers hereby granted, and to be granted by the General Assembly pursuant hereto, are to be liberally construed to effectuate the general purposes of said authority as hereinabove set out. 
"The powers hereby granted to the General Assembly, to the fiscal authorities of Dougherty County and to be granted by the General Assembly to effectuate the purposes herein set forth shall exist notwithstanding other provisions of this constitution or any general or special laws of the state." 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 444, § 1; Code 1979, § 3-301)
Sec. 1-4-32. - Creation; authority; members; qualifications; appointments; terms; vacancies; officers. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Albany-Dougherty Payroll Development Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall consist of five (5) members who shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of Dougherty County, the mayor of the City of Albany, the president of the Albany Chamber of Commerce and two (2) appointed members who shall be residents of Dougherty County within or without the corporate limits of the City of Albany, and not less than thirty (30) years of age at the time of appointment. In making the nominations of members of the authority not more than one (1) member shall be nominated from any one (1) family, partnership or other business organization. The members shall be selected in the following manner: Immediately after the effective date of this Act the directors of the Albany Chamber of Commerce shall select and nominate persons for appointment and submit four (4) or more names to the city and county. From such lists of nominees the commission of the City of Albany and the commissioners of Dougherty County each shall appoint one (1) member of the authority. For the first appointments, the county shall appoint one (1) person for three (3) years, and the city shall appoint one (1) person for two (2) years. Thereafter all terms and appointments, except in case of a vacancy, shall be for three (3) years. In the event a vacancy occurs in the city appointment, the city shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. In the event a vacancy occurs in the county appointment, the county shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. In making any appointment for a vacancy or after the expiration of a term, the city and the county shall make such appointments from four (4) nominations for each member to be appointed, which nominations are to be made by the directors of said Chamber of Commerce. The authority shall elect a chairman and a treasurer. The executive vice-president of the Albany Chamber of Commerce shall serve as secretary of the authority without compensation. The members of this authority shall be entitled to no compensation. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 2; Code 1979, § 3-303)
Sec. 1-4-33. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)	The word "authority" shall mean the "Albany-Dougherty Payroll Development Authority" created by this Act and by and under Article V, section 9, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(2)	The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of jobs and payrolls in industry, commerce, agriculture and natural resources; the construction of buildings and plants or the acquisition of equipment for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures or equipment to private persons, firms or corporations. The word "project" shall also include the acquisition, construction, improvement or modification of any property, real or personal used as air or water pollution control facilities which any federal, state or local agency having jurisdiction in the premises shall have certified as necessary for the continued operation of the industry or industries which the same is to serve and is necessary for the public welfare. For purposes hereof, the term "air pollution control facility" means any property used primarily to abate or control atmospheric pollution or contamination by removing, containing, altering, disposing or storing of atmospheric pollutants or contaminants if such facility is in furtherance of federal, state or local standards for control of atmospheric pollution or contaminants. For the purpose hereof, the term "water pollution control facility" means any property used primarily to control water pollution by removing, storing, altering or disposing of pollutants, contaminants, wastes or heat, including the necessary intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, pumping, power and other equipment, holding ponds, lagoons and their appurtenances, if such facility is in the furtherance of federal, state or local standards for the control of water pollution. 
(3)	The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one (1) year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation; provided, however, that in no event shall entertainment or promotional expense be considered a part of the cost of any project. It is the intention here that funds the authority may borrow and the interest paid thereon, for interim or temporary financing for any of the above-named items properly included in "cost of project" for the use of a designated project, pending the issue and validation of revenue anticipation bonds for such project, shall be considered a "cost of project" which may be paid or repaid from the proceeds of the revenue anticipation bonds authorized herein in section 1-4-36(12). 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 3; Ga. Laws 1962, p. 2778, § 1; Ga. Laws 1975, p. 3172, § 1; Code 1979, § 3-304) 
Sec. 1-4-34. - Authority to contract with city and county. 
The County of Dougherty and the City of Albany are expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the authority as a public corporation. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 4; Code 1979, § 3-305)
Sec. 1-4-35. - Quorum; minimum votes for approval. 
Any three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by not less than three (3) affirmative votes. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 5; Code 1979, § 3-306)
Sec. 1-4-36. - Powers. 
The authority shall have powers: 
(1)	To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure.
(2)	To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property, including the stock of other corporations, for its corporate purposes. 
(3)	To enter into contracts for periods of time not in excess of fifty (50) years.
(4)	To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of same or to dispose of same in any manner the authority deems to its best advantage. If the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in the County of Dougherty or the City of Albany; the governing authorities of Dougherty County and the City of Albany are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the authority. 
(5)	To appoint and select officers, agents and employees, including engineers, architects, builders and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(6)	To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases and rental and sale of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. 
(7)	To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate and manage projects and to pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue anticipation certificates or bonds or any other income of the authority, or from any contributions or loans by persons, firms or corporations, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(8)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debts, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing; it being the intention here that in addition to the pledge of revenue from any project for the payment of revenue anticipation bonds and for the benefit of the bond-holders, the authority is authorized to execute mortgages, deeds to secure debts, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient covering the property of any particular project as additional security for the bondholders of such project. 
(9)	To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(10)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act. 
(11)	To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(12)	To issue revenue anticipation certificates for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the authority. Such revenue anticipation certificates shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of 1937, (Ga. Laws 1937, pp. 761—774), and as subsequently amended, providing for the issuance of revenue anticipation certificates. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 6; Ga. Laws 1962, p. 2778, § 2; Code 1979, § 3-307)
Sec. 1-4-37. - Authority to acquire and develop land; bonds. 
(a)	The authority is hereby specifically authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire land and to improve and develop same so as to make said land more desirable for industrial purposes. Such land acquisition and development may be undertaken by the authority at any time whether or not there is at such time a prospective industry considering the purchase or lease of an industrial site in Dougherty County. Such land and improvements may be held by the authority for any length of time it deems desirable, but any sale, lease or other disposition of same when made, shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-4-39 hereof. 
(b)	The purposes of this Act are to develop and promote for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities and to promote the general welfare of the state. No bonds except refunding bonds shall be issued by an authority hereunder unless its board of directors shall adopt a resolution finding that the project for which the bonds are to be issued will promote the foregoing objectives and will increase employment in such area, or will prevent a decrease in employment in such area. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirement, bonds may be issued to finance projects for air and water pollution control facilities by industry as hereinabove provided without a finding that the project will increase employment or prevent a decrease in employment so long as any federal, state or local agency having jurisdiction in the premises shall have certified that the project is necessary for the continued operation of the industry or industries which the same is to serve and is necessary for the public welfare. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 7; Ga. Laws 1975, p. 3172, § 2; Code 1979, § 3-308)
Sec. 1-4-38. - No public funds for entertainment or promotion. 
No moneys derived by the authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment or other promotional expenses. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 8; Code 1979, § 3-309)
Sec. 1-4-39. - Gifts prohibited. 
All projects of the authority shall be on a self-liquidating basis, and the authority shall not make gifts, directly or indirectly, to any person, firm or corporation. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 9; Code 1979, § 3-310)
Sec. 1-4-40. - Disposition of property. 
Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Dougherty County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 10; Code 1979, § 3-311)
Sec. 1-4-41. - Tax exemption. 
All lands and improvements and personal property the title to which is vested in the authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds and revenue anticipation certificates issued by the authority shall be exempt from state and local taxation. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 11; Code 1979, § 3-312)
Sec. 1-4-42. - No debt against city or county. 
The authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia, the County of Dougherty or the City of Albany. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 12; Code 1979, § 3-313)
Sec. 1-4-43. - Annual audit; copies. 
The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a competent auditor. The authority shall furnish the copies of said audit to the County of Dougherty and the City of Albany, and shall publish same one (1) time in all newspapers printed in Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 13; Code 1979, § 3-314)
Sec. 1-4-44. - Liberal construction. 
This Act being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Dougherty and the City of Albany and their inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Ga. Laws 1958, p. 2870, § 14; Code 1979, § 3-315)
Sec. 1-4-45. - Severability. 
The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(Ga. Laws 1979, p. 2870, § 15; Code 1979, § 3-316)
Secs. 1-4-46—1-4-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALBANY-DOUGHERTY HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 1-4-50. - Establishing authorized. 
The board of commissioners of Dougherty County may, by resolution, establish and change from time to time the number of members of the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority, their terms of office, the manner of appointment, the method of filling vacancies, and all other matters relative to the membership of the authority. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 4136, § 1; Code 1979, § 3-401)
Cross reference— Additional member, § 2-2-3. 
State Law reference— Creation of authority, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72; audit required, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-91. 
Chapter 1-5 - COURTS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 1-5-1—1-5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUPERIOR COURT 

Sec. 1-5-20. - Circuit created; composition. 
Effective January 1, 1965, there is hereby created a new judicial circuit of the superior courts of this state, to be known as the Dougherty Judicial Circuit, which circuit shall be composed of the County of Dougherty. The offices of judge and solicitor-general [district attorney] of the superior court of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit are hereby created. Although such circuit shall not come into existence until January 1, 1965, a judge and a solicitor-general [district attorney] for said circuit shall be elected at the general election in 1964, to take office for a term beginning January 1, 1965. 
(Ga. Laws 1964 Extra Sess., p. 7, § 1; Code 1979, § 5-101)
Cross reference— Performing duties in state court, § 1-5-54. 
State Law reference— Solicitor-general now district attorney, O.C.G.A. § 15-18-1. 
Sec. 1-5-21. - Additional judge for the circuit—Position created; term; election. 
(a)	Pursuant to the provisions of Article VI, section 3, paragraph 1 of the constitution [Const. 1983, Art. VI, § 1, ¶ 7], there is hereby added one (1) superior court judge to the Dougherty Judicial Circuit. 
(b)	Within thirty (30) days after the approval of this Act, the governor shall appoint the initial additional judge to serve until December 31, 1974. Said judge shall take office immediately upon taking the required oath. His successor shall be elected in a manner provided by law for the election of judges of the superior courts of this state at the general election in November, 1974, for a term of four (4) years beginning on the first day of January, 1975, and until his successor shall be duly elected and qualified. Future successors shall be elected at the general election conducted each four (4) years thereafter for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. They shall take office on the first day of January following the date of their election. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, §§ 1, 2; Code 1979, § 5-110)
State Law reference— Election, Const. 1983, Art. VI, § 7, ¶ 1; number of judges, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-2. 
Sec. 1-5-22. - Same—Powers. 
The additional judge of the superior court of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit shall have and may exercise all powers, duties, dignity, jurisdiction, privileges and immunities of the present judges of the superior courts of this state. Either of the two (2) judges of said circuit may preside over any cause, whether in their own or in other circuits, and perform any official act as judge thereof, including sitting on appellate courts as provided by law. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 3; Code 1979, § 5-111)
Sec. 1-5-23. - Same—Qualifications; salary; allowances. 
The qualifications of such additional judge and his successors shall be the same as are provided by law for all other superior court judges, and his compensation, salary and allowances shall be the same as that of the other judge of the superior courts of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 4; Code 1979, § 5-112)
Sec. 1-5-24. - Same—Writs, processes and terms of court unchanged. 
All writs and processes in the superior court of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit shall be returnable to the terms of said superior court as they are now fixed and provided by law, or as they may hereafter be fixed or determined by law, and all terms of said court shall be held in the same manner as though there were but one (1) judge, it being the intent and purpose of this Act to provide two (2) judges coequal in jurisdiction and authority to attend to perform the functions, powers and duties of the judges of said superior court and to direct and conduct all hearings and trials in said courts. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 5; Code 1979, § 5-113)
Sec. 1-5-25. - Salaries of judge and district attorney—Generally. 
The compensation and allowances of the judge of said circuit shall be as now or hereafter provided by law. The solicitor-general [district attorney] or said circuit shall be compensated on a salary basis, rather than a fee basis, and in addition to the compensation and allowances paid the solicitor-general [district attorney] of the superior courts by the state, the solicitor-general [district attorney] of said circuit shall be compensated in the amount of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per annum, which shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Dougherty County. All fees of whatever kind or nature which are now or may be hereafter allowed solicitors-general [district attorneys] under the fee basis system to be received or collected as compensation for services by solicitors-general [district attorneys] shall be paid into the general funds of the county treasury of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1964 Extra Sess., p. 7, § 2; Code 1979, § 5-102)
State Law reference— Supplementation of salary of district attorney, O.C.G.A. § 15-18-10; judges' salaries, O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4. 
Sec. 1-5-26. - Same—Maximum supplemental compensation for judge. 
The governing authority of Dougherty County is authorized to provide from county funds a supplement to the compensation of the judge of the superior court of Dougherty County. The amount of such supplement shall be fixed by the governing authority of Dougherty County but shall not exceed nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00) per annum. Within the limitations provided in this section, it shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of Dougherty County to establish the amount of such supplement and, from time to time, to increase or decrease said supplement in such manner as the governing authority of Dougherty County shall provide. 
(Ga. Laws 1964 Extra Sess., p. 7, § 2(a); Ga. Laws 1969, p. 36; Ga. Laws 1973, p. 15, § 1; Code 1979, § 5-103) 
Sec. 1-5-27. - Same—Maximum supplemental compensation for district attorney and assistants. 
The governing authority of Dougherty County is authorized to provide from county funds a supplement to the compensation of the district attorney and each assistant district attorney of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit. The amount of such supplement shall be fixed by the governing authority of Dougherty County but shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per annum for the district attorney or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per annum for each assistant district attorney. Within the limitations provided in the section, it shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of Dougherty County to establish the amount of such supplements and, from time to time, to increase of decrease said supplements in such manner as the governing authority of Dougherty County shall provide. 
(Ga. Laws 1977, p. 2777, § 1; Code 1979, § 5-104)
Sec. 1-5-28. - Private law practice of district attorney prohibited. 
The solicitor general [district attorney] of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit is hereby prohibited from engaging in the private practice of law. 
(Ga. Laws 1964 Extra Sess., p. 7, § 3; Code 1979, § 5-105)
State Law reference— District attorneys, Const. 1983, Art. VI, § 8, O.C.G.A. § 15-18-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-5-29. - Empaneling jurors. 
The drawing and empaneling of all jurors, whether grand, petit or special, may be by either of the judges of the superior court of said circuit, and they, or either of them, shall have full power and authority to draw and empanel jurors for service in said courts so as to have jurors for the trial of cases before either of said judges separately, or before each of them at the same time. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 7; Code 1979, § 5-115)
Sec. 1-5-30. - Grand juries. 
The grand jury of said county shall convene as provided by law, and whenever in the opinion of the judge of said circuit it is expedient or necessary to have a grand jury, he may in his discretion draw, call and empanel a grand jury for services at any term of court. 
(Ga. Laws 1964 Extra Sess., p. 7, § 5; Code 1979, § 5-108)
Sec. 1-5-31. - Additional court reporter for circuit. 
The judges of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit shall be authorized and empowered to appoint an additional court reporter for each circuit, whose compensation shall be as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 8; Code 1979, § 5-116)
State Law reference— Additional court reporters in large circuits, O.C.G.A. § 15-14-4. 
Sec. 1-5-32. - Official papers. 
All writs, processes, orders, subpoenas and any other official paper issuing out of the superior court of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit may bear teste in the name of any judge of said Dougherty Judicial Circuit, and when issued by and in the name of any judge of said circuit, shall be fully valid and may be heard and determined before the same or any other judge of said circuit. Any judge of said court may preside over any cause therein and perform any official act of judge thereof. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 9; Code 1979, § 5-117)
Sec. 1-5-33. - Courtrooms, etc., for circuit. 
Upon request of either judge, the governing authorities of the counties comprising the Dougherty Judicial Circuit are hereby authorized to furnish the judges of said court with suitable courtrooms and facilities, office space, telephone, furniture, office equipment, supplies and such personnel as may be considered necessary by the court to the proper function of the court. All of the expenditures authorized herein are hereby declared to be an expense of court and payable out of the county treasury as such. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 10; Code 1979, § 5-118)
Sec. 1-5-34. - Construction of article. 
Nothing herein enumerated shall be deemed to limit or restrict the inherent powers, duties and responsibilities of superior court judges provided by the constitution and statutes of the State of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 11; Code 1979, § 5-119)
Sec. 1-5-35. - Senior judge; conduct of court business. 
The two (2) judges of the superior court of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit of Georgia, in transacting the business of said court and in performing their duties and responsibilities, shall share, divide and allocate the work and duties to be performed by each. In the event of any disagreement between said judges in any respect, the decision of the senior judge in point of service, who shall be known as the chief judge, shall be controlling. The judge of the superior court serving at the time this Act becomes effective shall be the first chief judge. Thereafter, the judge with the longest service as a judge of the superior courts shall be the chief judge. The judges of the superior court of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit shall have, and they are hereby clothed with full power, authority and discretion to determine from time to time, and term to term, the manner of calling the dockets and/or fixing the calendars and order of business in said court. They may assign the hearing of trails by jury for a term to one (1) of said judges, and the hearing of all other matters not requiring a trial by a jury to the other judge, and they may alternate such order of business at the next term. They may either of them conduct trials by jury at the same time in the same county or otherwise within said circuit, or they may both or any one (1) of them hear chambers business and motion business at the same time, at any place within said circuit. They may provide in all respects for holding the superior courts of said circuit so as to facilitate the hearing and determination of all the business of said courts at any time pending and ready for trial or hearing. In all such matters relating to the manner of fixing, arranging for and disposing of the business of said court, and making appointments as authorized by law where the judges thereof cannot agree or shall differ, the opinion or order of the chief judge, as hereinbefore defined, shall control. 
(Ga. Laws 1974, p. 367, § 6; Code 1979, § 5-114)
Sec. 1-5-36. - Office space, equipment, and clerical help for judge and district attorney for the circuit. 
The board of commissioners for the County of Dougherty shall provide and equip adequate and suitable office space for the judge and solicitor-general [district attorney] of said circuit, and shall pay for all office supplies necessary for the operation and maintenance of said offices; said commissioners shall further provide and pay for adequate clerical help, who shall serve both offices of judge and solicitor-general [district attorney], the compensation of said clerical help to be fixed by said commissioners upon the recommendation of the judge of said circuit; said compensation shall be paid directly to said clerical help out of the general funds of said county. 
(Ga. Laws 1964 Extra Sess., p. 7, § 8; Code 1979, § 5-109)
Sec. 1-5-37. - Investigators; powers. 
Investigators duly appointed by, and serving at the direction of, the district attorney of the circuit shall have the same power to make arrests, to execute and return all criminal warrants and processes and serve as a peace officer as may be performed by a sheriff and may serve as subpoena clerk in the superior court for the purpose of summoning witnesses before the grand jury. 
(Ga. Laws 1977, p. 342, § 1; Code 1979, § 5-106)
Sec. 1-5-38. - Terms of court. 
The terms of court of said circuit shall be as follows: The second Mondays in January, March, May, July, September and November. 
(Ga. Laws 1964 Extra Sess., p. 7, § 4; Code 1979, § 5-107)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-3. 
Secs. 1-5-39—1-5-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local law extended, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-60; general law prevails over local law, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-3.

Sec. 1-5-50. - Powers; civil jurisdiction; jurors. 
The state court of Dougherty County and the judge and associate judges thereof shall have all powers to do all acts which justices of the peace [3] are now or may hereafter be authorized to do under the laws of Georgia, shall have jurisdiction as to subject matter to try and dispose of all cases wherein by law jurisdiction is conferred upon justices of the peace and justice courts, and said jurisdiction therein and thereover as to the amount shall extend to all cases wherein the principal amount shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less. The court shall be a court of record and all proceedings and procedures not limited to but including those relative to pleadings, issuance of summons and warrants, committal hearings, trial by the court, trial by jury and appeal and certiorari shall be the same as is now or may hereafter be provided for superior courts under the laws of this state, except as otherwise provided by law. Juries for the trial of civil and criminal cases by the court shall be composed of six (6) jurors. Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedures for the summoning, drawing, empaneling and selection of jurors for the trial of cases shall be the same as is provided for the superior courts. The judge of the state court at each term shall have made up from the petit jurors two (2) panels of six (6) jurors each which shall be known and distinguished as panels "number 1" and "number 2." The prosecuting attorney and the accused or the plaintiff and defendant may select either panel of the petit jury. If they shall not agree upon a panel, the clerk shall furnish the parties or their attorneys a list of both panels from which the parties or their attorneys may strike alternately until there shall be but six (6) left which shall constitute the jury to try the case. In all civil cases the plaintiff shall have the first strike and in all criminal cases the state shall have the first strike. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 2; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 1; Code 1979, § 5-201)
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Now magistrate court.
State Law reference— State court jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-4.

Sec. 1-5-51. - Jurisdiction of misdemeanors. 
The state court of Dougherty County shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the superior court of Dougherty County of all misdemeanor criminal offenses committed within Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 3; Ga. Laws 1974, p. 3777, § 3; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 3; Code 1979, § 5-202) 
Sec. 1-5-52. - Jurisdiction regarding ordinances, etc. 
Said court shall have like powers and jurisdiction in regard to any ordinance, law or regulation adopted by the board of commissioners of Dougherty County, if and when said board may be empowered to adopt such ordinances, laws or regulations. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 4; Code 1979, § 5-203)
Sec. 1-5-53. - Election of judge; term, vacancies. 
The judge of the court in office on the effective date of this section shall serve out his term expiring in 1977. His successor shall be elected to a term expiring on January 1, 1981. Beginning with the general election in 1980 the judge shall be elected at the same time and in the same manner as county officers of Dougherty County and shall serve a four-year term beginning on January 1 of the year following his election. Should any vacancy occur in the office of the judge, the governor shall, by appointment, fill such vacancy until the first day of January after the general election held next after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the time such vacancy occurs, at which election a successor for the unexpired term shall be elected. All judges elected hereunder shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified to serve. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 5; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 5; Code 1979, § 5-204)
State Law reference— Establishment of number and work status of judges, election, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-20. 
Sec. 1-5-54. - Qualifications, oath, powers, and duties of judge; performance of duties by judge and solicitor of superior court. 
(a)	To qualify for the office of judge hereunder, the candidate must at all times be a licensed attorney at law not less than twenty-five (25) years of age and he must be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. Said attorney shall also have been in the active practice of law at least two (2) years prior to his election to the office of judge. Before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, the judge shall take and subscribe before the ordinary [judge of probate court] of Dougherty County, the following oath: "I solemnly swear that I will administer justice as announced by the law and not of my person [sic] determination, without respect to persons, and do equal right to the poor and the rich, and that I will faithfully and impartially discharge and perform all the duties which may be required of me as judge of the state court of Dougherty County, according to the best of my ability and understanding, agreeably to the laws and constitution of this state and the Constitution of the United States, so help me, God," and said oath shall be immediately forwarded to the governor and filed in the executive department. Said judge shall have the authority and duty to issue criminal warrants, to hold commitment hearings, to bind persons charge with violations of the criminal laws of Georgia over to the superior court of Dougherty County, and generally to do and perform all acts and things which justices of the peace [magistrate courts] of this state are authorized to do, or may hereafter be authorized to do, and as to matters pertaining to misdemeanor cases, generally to do and perform all acts and things which judges of the superior, county, city and judges of probate courts of this state are authorized to do, unless otherwise provided in this Act. 
(b)	In the absence of the judge of the state court of Dougherty County or during his temporary inability to act, and during the absence of all associate judges qualified to act, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the judges of the superior court to issue such criminal warrants as may be required; and, under these circumstances, it shall be the further duty and responsibility of the superior court judges to hold such commitment trials as may be required. 
(c)	These duties and responsibilities of the solicitor [district attorney] and judge of the superior court shall also apply when the volume of warrants to be written or commitment trials to be held indicates a need for assistance. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 6; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 4; Code 1979, § 5-205)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-21; however, said section requires of judge five years' membership in Bar. 
Sec. 1-5-55. - Judge prohibited to practice law; grounds for impeachment. 
While holding office as judge under this Act, the judge may not practice law; he may not maintain a law office; and his name shall not be used as a part of a firm or partnership name of any law firm; he shall be subject to and governed by the canons of judicial ethics as they are now and may hereafter be set forth in the rules and regulations of the State Bar of Georgia. Any judge holding office hereunder shall be subject to impeachment under the same terms and provisions, and for the same causes, as they are now or may hereafter be enumerated in the constitution and laws and statutes of this state with regard to superior court judges. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 7; Code 1979, § 5-206)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-21. 
Sec. 1-5-56. - Compensation of judge. 
The judge of the court shall receive an annual salary in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Such salary shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Dougherty County. The governing authority of Dougherty County may supplement the salary provided in this section. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 10; Ga. Laws 1974, p. 3777, § 10; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 3; Code 1979, § 5-209) 
State Law reference— Compensation as fixed, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-22. 
Sec. 1-5-57. - Local supplement. 
The governing authority of Dougherty County is authorized to provide from county funds a supplement to the compensation of the judge of the state court of Dougherty County. The amount of such supplement shall be fixed by the governing authority of Dougherty County but shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per annum. Within the limitations provided in this section, it shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of Dougherty County to establish the amount of such supplement and, from time to time, to increase or decrease said supplement in such manner as the governing authority of Dougherty County shall provide. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053; Ga. Laws 1974, p. 3158; Code 1979, § 5-210)
State Law reference— Supplement authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-22. 
Sec. 1-5-58. - Associate judges; oath, compensation as fixed. 
The judge of the court shall have the power, at his discretion, to appoint practicing attorneys, who shall be residents of Dougherty County, to serve as associate judges of the state court of Dougherty County, to discharge such duties of his office as he shall delegate. When the appointments of such attorneys as associate judges, together with their oaths, which shall be the same as is required of the judge of said court, have been recorded in the office of the judge of the probate court of said county, such associate judges may exercise all the powers of the judge of the state court of Dougherty County. Such appointments may be vacated at any time by order of the judge of said court, to be likewise recorded. The governing authority of Dougherty County shall determine the number and compensation of such associate judges. Said compensation shall be an expense of the county and shall be paid from the funds of Dougherty County available for such purposes. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 11; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 7; Code 1979, § 5-211)
State Law reference— Part-time judges may not practice in state court, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-21(b). 
Sec. 1-5-59. - Selection of judge pro hac vice by parties. 
In the event the judge of said court and the associate judges of said court are all unable or disqualified to preside in said court, then a judge pro hac vice may be selected by the parties to any cause pending in said court in the same manner as the parties might select a judge pro hac vice in the superior court. In the event the parties fail to select by agreement a judge pro hac vice, then the clerk of the state court of Dougherty County, or in his absence the deputy clerk, shall select a judge pro hac vice in the same manner as now or hereafter provided by law for such cases in the superior courts. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 12, as amended by Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 8; Code 1979, § 5-212) 
Sec. 1-5-60. - Judge's power; contempt. 
The judge of said court shall have the same power to enforce his orders, to preserve order, punish for contempt and to enforce all his judgments as is vested by law in the judges of the superior courts of this state, or as may hereafter be vested by law in said superior court judges, except that the power and authority of the judge of said court to punish as for contempt of said court shall not exceed a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for ten (10) days in jail, either or both in the discretion of the court, and the matters, acts and things which may be held by said court to be contempt of court shall be the same as are now or may hereafter be prescribed within the jurisdiction of the superior courts of the state. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 13; Code 1979, § 5-213)
Sec. 1-5-61. - Removal of judge from office. 
In addition to being subject to impeachment as hereinbefore provided, the judge of said court shall be subject to removal from office for the same causes and under the same rules as provided by law for the removal of justices of the peace [magistrates], except that the indictment of the judge shall operate to suspend him from office. If he shall be convicted, he shall be removed from office by the superior court and shall not receive any salary from the time of his indictment. If he shall be acquitted, he shall be restored to his office as though no indictment had been returned against him, with full salary from the time of his indictment. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 14; Code 1979, § 5-214)
State Law reference— Discipline, removal, involuntary retirement, Const. 1983, Art VI, § 7, ¶ 6 et seq. 
Sec. 1-5-62. - Court clerk—Designation; deputy clerks; bond; oath; judge's secretary. 
The clerk of the superior court of Dougherty County shall ex-officio be clerk of the state court of Dougherty County. In addition to his authority to appoint deputy clerks of the superior court of Dougherty County who would also be ex-officio deputy clerks of the state court of Dougherty County, he may appoint special deputy clerks whose authority as such shall be limited to performing the duties and exercising the powers of deputy clerks of the [state] court of Dougherty County. The clerk of the state court of Dougherty County and each of his deputy clerks shall make a bond with good security in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the faithful discharge of their duties, which bonds shall be approved and recorded in the same manner as bonds of clerks of the superior courts are approved and recorded, or in such manner as such bonds may by law hereafter be approved and recorded. Such deputy clerks shall hold office at the will of the clerk of the superior court of Dougherty County. The clerk and his deputies shall be subject to rule by said state court of Dougherty County in the same manner as clerks are or may hereafter be subject to rule in the superior court. The appointment of such deputy clerk or clerks shall be recorded in the probate judge's office of Dougherty County and such deputy clerk or clerks, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, shall take before the judge of probate the same oath as is required of clerks of the superior courts and such oath shall likewise be recorded. The judge of the state court of Dougherty County shall be ex-officio clerk of said court and may perform all of the duties of clerk of said court. Whenever in this Act the clerk of the state court of Dougherty County is authorized or required to perform any act or to do anything, the clerk of the state court of Dougherty County or his deputy or the judge of said court acting as ex-officio clerk of said court shall be authorized to perform the functions of clerk. One (1) deputy clerk, to be designated by the clerk, and approved by the judge, shall perform all such secretarial duties as may be required by the judge. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 15; Code 1979, § 5-215)
Sec. 1-5-63. - Same—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of said court to keep all dockets, books and records required of said court specifically by this Act and generally by the laws of this state; to make all reports and account for all costs, fines and forfeitures and required specifically by this Act and by the laws of this state; to have a seal for said court; to issue, sign and attach seals thereto when necessary, every order, rule, summons, subpoena, writ, execution, process or court paper under the authority of the court except criminal warrants; to attend all sessions of the court as required by the judge thereof, and generally to do and perform all duties as clerk of said court which clerks of superior courts may now or hereafter do, insofar as applicable to the state court of Dougherty County, or as required in this Act. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 16; Code 1979, § 5-216)
Sec. 1-5-64. - Same—Compensation. 
The clerk of the state court of Dougherty County shall receive such salary as may be determined by the commissioners of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 17; Code 1979, § 5-217)
Sec. 1-5-65. - Duties and liabilities of sheriff and deputies; oath; bond. 
The sheriff of Dougherty County, or his lawful deputies, shall act as bailiff and constable in and for the subject court; and they shall do and perform all duties incident to the offices of bailiff and constable. Before entering upon the duties of their office, each shall take and subscribe an oath to faithfully and diligently perform the duties thereof, and each shall have executed a bond in a sum not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the faithful discharge of the duties of office as required under section 23-1406 of the Code of Georgia [O.C.G.A. § 36-8-3] and upon which they shall be liable for the discharge of their duties as bailiffs and constables of the state court of Dougherty County. Such offices shall be subject to rule in said court as sheriffs are now or may hereafter be subject to rule in the superior courts. Such officers shall, in addition to the powers conferred on them as sheriffs, have any and all powers and duties now or hereafter provided by law for constables in justice [magistrate] courts in this state. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 18; Code 1979, § 5-218)
Sec. 1-5-66. - Ex-officio solicitor. 
The solicitor of the state court of Dougherty County shall continue to serve as such until the expiration of his term of office, at which time the office of the solicitor of the state court of Dougherty County, as such, shall be abolished and all duties of the solicitor of the state court of Dougherty County shall be discharged by the solicitor-general [district attorney] of the Dougherty Judicial Circuit as ex-officio solicitor of the state court of Dougherty. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 19; Code 1979, § 5-219)
State Law reference— Solicitor, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-24. 
Sec. 1-5-67. - Location of court; dockets and records. 
Said court shall be held at the courthouse of Dougherty County, or at such other adequate and convenient place as the commissioners of said county may provide; and said commissioners shall provide the necessary office, furniture, supplies, forms and books for keeping the dockets and records of said court. Both the judge and the clerk of the subject court are charged with the duty and responsibility of keeping adequate and complete dockets and records, which shall at all times be kept current. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 8; Code 1979, § 5-207)
Sec. 1-5-68. - Office hours of judge. 
It shall be the duty of the judge of the state court of Dougherty County to have his office open during the usual business hours during five (5) days of each week. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 9; Code 1979, § 5-208)
Sec. 1-5-69. - Terms of court. 
The terms of said court shall commence on the first Monday of each month. The judge of said court shall have power to hold court in session from day to day, and to recess the same from time to time; provided, that each term of said court shall be finally adjourned simultaneously with the commencement of the succeeding term. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 20; Code 1979, § 5-220)
State Law reference— Trial terms as prescribed, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-40. 
Sec. 1-5-70. - Procedure, pleadings, practice and service. 
In all civil cases filed or brought in said court, the procedure, pleading and practice in said court shall be the same as that now or hereafter prescribed by the laws of this state for superior courts, except as otherwise provided in this Act. In all matters pertaining to service, pleading, and practice, the laws now or hereafter governing the superior courts of this state, where not inconsistent with this Act, and unless otherwise specially provided by this Act, shall be applicable to the state court of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, §§ 21, 22; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, §§ 9, 10; Code 1979, § 5-221) 
State Law reference— Practice and procedure, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-43. 
Sec. 1-5-71. - Executions. 
All executions issuing from said court shall bear teste in the name of the judge or associate judge and be signed by the clerk or by the judge or associate judge as ex-officio clerk and be directed to the constable of said court and to all and singular the sheriffs or their deputies of the various counties of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 23; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 11; Code 1979, § 5-222)
Sec. 1-5-72. - Costs and fees—Prescribed. 
The cost and fees charged in the state court of Dougherty County shall be a flat amount of twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) which shall be the total cost of the case and which shall not be refunded. Such fee shall be charged in garnishment proceedings also. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 24; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 12; Code 1979, § 5-223)
Sec. 1-5-73. - Same—Collection. 
It shall be the duty of the judge of the court to see that the officers of the court are diligent in the collection of costs, and to this end he shall call the issue docket of the court on some fixed day in each month and shall adopt such measures and rules as will ensure the payment of costs by the party or parties liable for the same. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 27; Code 1979, § 5-226)
Sec. 1-5-74. - Same—Deposit in civil cases; pauper's oath. 
Each party filing a civil suit or proceeding in said court shall deposit with the clerk of said court at the time of the filing or commencement of said proceeding the sum of twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) as provided in section 1-5-72; provided, however, such deposit shall not be required of any person who shall subscribe an affidavit to the effect that from poverty he is unable to pay the same; and provided, further, if the party making such deposit shall finally prevail in said suit or proceedings, the amount of said deposit shall be taxed as part of the costs against the losing party defendant, and shall be refunded to the party depositing the same after all costs have been paid. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 25; Ga. Laws 1974, p. 3777, § 25; Ga. Laws 1976, p. 3176, § 13; Code 1979, § 5-224) 
Sec. 1-5-75. - Records of costs, fees, forfeitures and charges. 
An accurate record of all costs, fees, forfeitures and charges in said court shall be kept by the clerk of the court, and all costs, fees and charges of every kind collected by any of the officers of the court shall be immediately turned over to the clerk of the court and entered at once by the clerk on his records, and on or before the fifth day of each month it shall be duty of the clerk to furnish the commissioners of Dougherty County a complete, accurate and sworn statement of all such costs, charges, fees, fines, forfeitures and collections and to pay over all of the monies collected to the treasurer [depositories] [4] of Dougherty County; and such monies so received by said treasurer from the clerk of court shall be held to the credit of the county and paid out on warrant of the said commissioners of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 26; Code 1979, § 5-225)
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—The office of treasurer was abolished.

Sec. 1-5-76. - Filing of suits. 
The only individuals and legal entities who may file suits in this court shall be individuals and legal entities, or their licensed attorneys at law, who shall have a direct interest or claim in the matter brought before the court. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 28; Code 1979, § 5-227)
Sec. 1-5-77. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, word, phrase, sentence, provision or part of this Act shall be declared unconstitutional, the remainder shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 3053, § 29; Code 1979, § 5-228)
Secs. 1-5-78—1-5-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES OF CERTAIN COURT OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AND SHERIFF'S OFFICE 

Sec. 1-5-90. - Basis for sheriff, clerk of superior court, judge of probate court. 
The sheriff, the clerk of the superior court, and the judge of the probate court of Dougherty County shall hereafter be paid salaries in lieu of all fees, as herein provided. 
(Ga. Laws 1955, p. 2874, § 1; Code 1979, § 2-101)
Cross reference— Compensation of clerk as clerk of state court, § 1-5-64. 
State Law reference— Minimum salary of clerk, O.C.G.A. § 15-16-20; minimum salary of judge of probate, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-63; minimum salary of clerk, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-88. 
Sec. 1-5-91. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1-5-92. - Local supplemental compensation for sheriff, judge of probate court and clerk of superior court. 
The governing authority of Dougherty County is authorized to provide from county funds a supplement to the compensation of the sheriff, judge of the probate court and clerk of the superior court of Dougherty County, or any one (1) or more of such officers. The amount of such supplement shall be fixed by the governing authority of Dougherty County but shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per annum. Within the limitations provided in this section, it shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of Dougherty County to establish the amount of such supplement and, from time to time, to increase or decrease said supplement in such manner as the governing authority of Dougherty County shall provide. 
(Ga. Laws 1955, p. 2874; Ga. Laws 1977, p. 3158, § 1; Code 1979, § 2-103)
State Law reference— Additional remuneration, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-6-89, 15-9-64, 15-16-20.1. 
Sec. 1-5-93. - Expenses of probate judge, sheriff and clerk of superior court. 
All office expenses incurred in carrying out the duties of the probate judge, sheriff, clerk of the superior court of Dougherty County and the clerk of the state court of Dougherty County shall be paid directly to the supplier, or other person to whom payment for such expenses is due, from the general funds of said county. 
(Ga. Laws 1955, p. 2874, § 4; Code 1979, § 2-104)
Sec. 1-5-94. - Fees, forfeitures, penalties. 
All fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances and all other perquisites of whatever kind which are now or may hereafter be allowed by law to be received or collected as compensation for service by any of said officials or their deputies, including compensation received or collected by such officials or their deputies for serving as bailiffs, shall be received and diligently collected by all of said officials and each of them, for the sole use of Dougherty County, and shall be paid as public moneys belonging to Dougherty County and accounted for and paid over to the county treasurer on the tenth day of each month. Each officer collecting such fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances and other perquisites shall at all times keep complete and accurate books of account showing all sums of every sort and nature due to his office, collected by his office or in any manner distributed by his office, and shall present to the county treasury with each payment a detailed itemized statement, under oath, showing all such collections and the sources from which collected. The county treasurer of Dougherty County shall keep a separate account showing the sources from which said funds were paid, and the board of commissioners of Dougherty County and the grand jury of the superior court of said county shall have the right, at any time, to inspect the records of each, or any, such office or officer. 
(Ga. Laws 1955, p. 2874, § 5; Code 1979, § 2-105)
Cross reference— Office of treasurer abolished, § 1-6-20. 
Sec. 1-5-95. - Appointment and compensation of sheriff's deputies and clerks of superior court. 
The sheriff of Dougherty County shall have a chief deputy who shall receive a salary of not more than four hundred seventy-five dollars ($475.00) per month, a deputy who shall receive a salary of not more than four hundred twenty-five dollars ($425.00) per month, a deputy who shall receive a salary of not more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month, and a deputy who shall receive a salary of not more than three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) per month. All other deputies of the sheriff of Dougherty County shall receive a monthly salary of not more than the base pay of the Dougherty County Police. On or before the effective date of this Act the sheriff shall fix said salaries within said limits by giving notice thereof to the clerk of the commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, and may change the same from time to time within said limits by giving a new notice thereof to the clerk of the county commissioners. The clerk of the superior court of Dougherty County, who is also serving as the clerk of the state court of Dougherty County, shall have a chief deputy who shall receive a salary of not more than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per month, two (2) assistant clerks who shall receive a salary of not more than two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00) per month, and an assistant clerk who shall receive a salary of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month. All other assistants of the clerk of the superior court shall receive a salary not in excess of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) per month. On or before the effective date of this Act the clerk of the superior court shall fix said salaries for his assistants within said limits by giving notice thereof to the clerk of the commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, and may change the same from time to time within said limits by giving a new notice thereof to the clerk of the county commissioners. The probate judge of Dougherty County shall have one (1) clerk who shall receive a salary of not more than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per month. All other assistants to the probate judge shall receive a salary of not more than two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) per month. On or before the effective date of this Act the probate judge shall fix said salaries within said limits by giving notice thereof to the clerk of the commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, and may change the same from time to time within said limits by giving a new notice thereof to the clerk of the county commissioners. All the salaries provided by this section shall be paid directly to the deputies, assistants and employees out of the general funds of said county. 
(Ga. Laws 1960, p. 2224, § 6; Code 1979, § 2-106)
Sec. 1-5-96. - Additional assistants of sheriff, clerk of superior court and judge of probate court; additional automobiles. 
(a)	Said sheriff, clerk of superior court and the judge of probate shall, with the consent of the judge of the superior court of Dougherty County, have the power to employ such other assistants as they may deem necessary, but the compensation of such other employees shall not exceed the maximum amount of the salaries hereinbefore provided. Said sheriff, clerk of superior court and the judge of probate shall give at least ten (10) days' written notice to the clerk of the commissioners of his intention to apply for any additional assistants before the judge of the superior court of Dougherty County shall have authority to consent for the employment of such additional assistants. It shall not be necessary for said sheriff, clerk of superior court or judge of probate to obtain the consent of the judge of the superior court of Dougherty County for the continued employment of those assistants of theirs who have already been employed on the effective date of this Act by previous consent of said judge. The sheriff, with consent of the judge of the superior court of Dougherty County, may purchase such additional automobiles of the type described in section 1-5-97 and on the terms and conditions set out in said section 1-5-97, as may be required for the discharge of the duties of his office. 
(b)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, said sheriff, clerk of superior court and judge of probate shall, with the consent of the commissioners of Dougherty County, have the power to employ such other assistants as they may deem necessary for their respective offices, and without the consent of the judge of the superior court of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1955, p. 2874, § 7; Ga. Laws 1960, p. 2224, § 3; Ga. Laws 1962, p. 2371, § 2; Code 1979, § 2-107) 
Sec. 1-5-97. - Sheriff's automobiles; purchase; expenses. 
(a)	The sheriff shall be authorized to purchase four (4) automobiles or motor vehicles, and the purchase price of such vehicles shall not exceed that paid by the board of commissioners of Dougherty County for those automobiles used by the county police department. The sheriff shall be authorized to trade any vehicle at any time after it has been driven a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) miles. Said vehicles are to be used exclusively by the sheriff and his deputies in the performance of their official duties. The purchase price, fuel, maintenance and upkeep of said vehicles shall be paid by the authorities having charge of the fiscal affairs of said county out of the general funds of the county. 
(b)	The commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia are authorized to enter into agreements with the sheriff of Dougherty County, Georgia from time to time providing for the payment by Dougherty County to the sheriff of a fixed sum in lieu of the payment by the county of the actual cost of the purchase price, fuel, maintenance and upkeep of said vehicles, which agreements shall provide the period during which said agreements shall remain in effect and the compensation to be paid to the sheriff in lieu of the foregoing expenses during said period. When any such agreement has been made between the commissioners and the sheriff, the county shall be discharged from all obligation to pay for the purchase price, fuel, maintenance, or upkeep of said vehicles during the period of said agreement, and said expenses shall be the responsibility of the sheriff. 
(Ga. Laws 1955, p. 2874, § 3; Ga. Laws 1960, p. 2224, § 2; Code 1979, § 2-121)
Sec. 1-5-98. - Rewards not prohibited. 
No part of this Act shall be interpreted so as to prevent the benefits given to officers under the Georgia Code [1933], Title 58, section 207 from being received by the officers who might otherwise be entitled thereto, nor shall this Act deprive any of the officers from receiving rewards for the apprehension of criminals. 
(Ga. Laws 1955, p. 2874, § 8; Code 1979, § 2-122)
Chapter 1-6 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Bids of street paving contracts, § 1-7-30; investment by tax director, § 2-6-6; reimbursable expenses of commissioners, §§ 2-2-22, 2-2-23, and generally, § 2-6-3.
State Law reference— Power of taxation, Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 4, ¶1; power of expenditure, Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 4, ¶2.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 1-6-1—1-6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY DEPOSITORIES AND DISBURSING AGENTS 

Sec. 1-6-20. - Office of county treasurer abolished. 
The office of county treasurer of Dougherty County, Georgia, shall be abolished, and said office shall cease to exist. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456; Code 1979, § 4-101)
Sec. 1-6-21. - Selection of depositories and disbursing agents. 
The commissioners of Dougherty County, shall, by a majority vote taken among themselves, select some duly incorporated bank or banks in said county to act as depository or depositories and disbursing agent or agents of and for the public funds of said county. Any bank or banks now or hereafter in business in Albany, Georgia, when and while so selected and appointed by said commissioners are hereby designated as depositories and disbursing agents for county funds. Said commissioners shall select the bank as such depository and disbursing agent which makes the highest bid for the county funds in the form of an offer to pay interest on the daily balance of the funds of the county. If no bank offers to pay interest, then said county commissioners shall, in their discretion, select one (1) of said banks to act under the terms of this Act. If all the banks in said county refuse to serve under this Act, then and in that event only shall said commissioners appoint a person to act as hereinafter provided. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456, § 2; Code 1979, § 4-102)
Sec. 1-6-22. - No compensation. 
No bank or banks which may be designated as such depository or depositories and disbursing agent or agents shall receive any compensation for acting as such. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456, § 3; Code 1979, § 4-103)
Sec. 1-6-23. - Bond. 
No such bank shall be allowed to act as such depository and disbursing agent until it shall have given a bond signed by at least two (2) amply solvent persons or by some good surety company, or both, in the sum of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), payable to said commissioners and their successors in office, conditioned for the safekeeping and accounting for all funds that may come into its custody by reason of its acting as such depository and for the faithful performance of all the duties pertaining to said depository; said bond to be approved by said county commissioners. It shall be within the power of said commissioners to call upon said bank to increase the amount of or to strengthen said bond at any time they may deem necessary, and in default of the same being done, to revoke the appointment of such bank as depository and disbursing agent. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456, § 4; Code 1979, § 4-104)
Sec. 1-6-24. - Duties. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of any bank acting as such depository and disbursing agent:
(1)	To pay without delay, when in funds of the county, all orders or warrants issued by said commissioners or by their authority when presented for payment. The responsibility for the legality of such orders or warrants is placed on said commissioners; 
(2)	To take a receipt on each order when paid and carefully file it away;
(3)	To keep a well-bound book in which shall be entered all receipts, stating when received, from whom, and on what account, and all amounts paid out, stating when paid, to whom and on what account; 
(4)	To keep a well-bound book in which shall be entered a full description of all county orders or warrants or other forms of indebtedness, as they are presented; and to record a copy of the order of the county authorities levying county taxes; 
(5)	To collect and receive from all officers and others all county funds and to receive, hold and disburse according to law all funds which a county treasurer might have heretofore received, held or disbursed; 
(6)	To render reports to and to appear before said commissioners whenever notified, and to appear before any grand jury, on request, to render an account of its actings and doings as such depository and disbursing agent, and to exhibit its books and vouchers as such depository and disbursing agent whenever notified; 
(7)	To perform all other duties essential to the proper conduct of the county's affairs which it has been necessary heretofore for the county treasurer to perform. 
(b)	Said commissioners shall have the power and authority to prescribe from time to time other reasonable duties and regulations for the government of said depositories and disbursing agents, and said depositories and disbursing agents shall be just as much bound to observe the same as they are bound to observe those prescribed in this Act. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456, §§ 5, 6; Code 1979, § 4-105)
State Law reference— Duties of treasurer, O.C.G.A. § 36-6-14. 
Sec. 1-6-25. - Payment to depositories; legal payment. 
After January 1, 1922, all parties heretofore required by law to pay over to the county treasurer funds of said county, including the tax collector of said county, shall pay over such funds to the depository so selected by said board of commissioners, and payment to said depository shall be as legal payment as when heretofore made to county treasurer. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456, § 7; Code 1979, § 4-106)
Editor's note— Portion of above section of transitional nature has been omitted. 
Sec. 1-6-26. - Appointment of individual to act. 
In case said commissioners shall be unable to get a bank in said county to become such depository and disbursing agent, or in case it should come to pass that there should be no chartered bank in said county, then said commissioners shall have the authority to appoint some person as receiving and disbursing agent who is a resident of said county, whose duties and liabilities shall be the same as now required of county treasurers in Georgia, and said person so appointed shall give bond to the judge of probate of said county for the faithful performance of his duties, with security or securities to be approved by said judge of probate in a sum named by said commissioners, but not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The compensation of said person shall be fixed by the said board of commissioners, but in no event shall it exceed the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per annum, and said salary or compensation shall be paid out of the funds of said county. All records necessary for him in the performance of his duties shall be provided by said commissioners out of the county funds. In the event a surety company bond is required of him, the premium on the same shall also be paid out of the county's funds by order of said commissioners. The paying of the bond premium and the furnishing of records as set out above applies only in the event it is necessary to select some person to act as said depository and disbursing agent. If a bank is found to act as such, it shall not charge to the county its bond premium, nor its expense in procuring the necessary records and the keeping of the same. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456, § 8; Code 1979, § 4-107)
Sec. 1-6-27. - Term; removal for malfeasance. 
The term of such depository and disbursing agent shall be for a period of four (4) years from January 1, 1922, and thereafterwards shall expire at the end of each four-year period, but shall extend by operation of law until a successor is appointed and qualified. For nonfeasance or malfeasance in office any bank or person performing the duties under this Act may be removed by said commissioners at any time and a successor appointed. Any person desiring to call the attention of said commissioners to any nonfeasance or malfeasance in office of said depository and disbursing agent, shall do so in writing and shall serve a copy on said depository and disbursing agent five (5) days before the hearing set by said commissioners. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456, § 9; Code 1979, § 4-108)
Sec. 1-6-28. - Liability. 
Said depository and disbursing agent, or depositories and disbursing agents, shall be liable both civilly and criminally just as county treasurers are now liable civilly and criminally for any nonfeasance, misfeasance or malfeasance of duty, and said commissioners shall have the right to proceed against such depository and disbursing agent, or depositories and disbursing agents, and the security or securities on their bonds in the same manner as the judge of probate may now proceed against a county treasurer and his securities in case of nonfeasance, misfeasance or malfeasance in the conduct of his offices. 
(Ga. Laws 1921, p. 456, § 10; Code 1979, § 4-109)
Chapter 1-7 - COUNTY SERVICES AND IMPROVEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-7-1. - Joint authority of city and county—Authority to acquire property jointly. 
The City of Albany and County of Dougherty shall have the right to jointly acquire such lands and buildings in the County of Dougherty as the governing authorities of the City of Albany and County of Dougherty may, from time to time, determine is necessary for the joint use of the City of Albany and County of Dougherty in providing for public buildings, facilities and parking areas as may be necessary and needful in the conduct of the governmental and proprietary functions of the City of Albany and County of Dougherty. 
(Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2972, § 1; Code 1979, § 8-101)
Sec. 1-7-2. - Same—Method of acquisition. 
The City of Albany and County of Dougherty shall have the right to acquire such lands and buildings either by donation, purchase or eminent domain and the title to such lands and buildings acquired hereunder shall be held jointly by the City of Albany and County of Dougherty in such proportion as may be determined by the governing authorities of the respective bodies. 
(Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2972, § 2; Code 1979, § 8-102)
Sec. 1-7-3. - Same—Procedure for eminent domain. 
In the event such lands and buildings are acquired by eminent domain such action may be instituted jointly by the City of Albany and County of Dougherty or such action may be instituted by either the City of Albany and County of Dougherty. Any eminent domain action brought hereunder shall be in accordance with procedures, or any of them, as may now or hereinafter exist in the pertinent eminent domain statutes of this state and in accordance with all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of private property for public use. 
(Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2972, § 3; Code 1979, § 8-103)
Sec. 1-7-4. - Same—Joint contracts authorized. 
The City of Albany and County of Dougherty shall have the right to jointly enter into contracts for the planning and construction of buildings and other improvements to be used jointly by the City of Albany and County of Dougherty in furtherance of their governmental obligations and to pay the cost thereof in such proportion as may be determined by the governing authorities of the separate bodies. Cost shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights and easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expense and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of the property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project. 
(Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2972, § 4; Code 1979, § 8-105)
Sec. 1-7-5. - Same—May incur indebtedness for joint purchases. 
The City of Albany and County of Dougherty shall have the right to create indebtedness for the purposes herein described by the issuance of contracts, general obligation bonds, revenue certificates and other indebtedness. Any such indebtedness created shall be in accordance with existing laws applicable to the creation of indebtedness by the City of Albany and County of Dougherty. 
(Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2972, § 5; Code 1979, § 8-105)
Sec. 1-7-6. - Same—Procedure for disposal. 
If at any time either the City of Albany or County of Dougherty desire to dispose of its interest in any jointly owned property such body may convey its interest to the other on such terms and conditions as the respective governing authorities agree upon. 
(Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2972, § 6; Code 1979, § 8-106)
Sec. 1-7-7. - Same—Joint rights. 
The City of Albany and County of Dougherty shall have the right to do and perform jointly an act in connection with lands and buildings used for governmental purposes which either might do individually. 
(Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2972, § 7; Code 1979, § 8-107)
Sec. 1-7-8. - Water and sanitary sewer districts—Creation. 
The governing authority of Dougherty County is hereby authorized to district all areas outside the incorporated municipalities in Dougherty County so as to provide water and sanitary sewerage services in such districts. 
(Ga. Laws 1971, p. 3541, § 1; Code 1979, § 7-101)
Sec. 1-7-9. - Same—Elections. 
Upon the establishment of districts in areas outside the incorporated areas of municipalities in Dougherty County, the governing authority shall submit the question as to whether or not water and sanitary sewerage services shall be provided in such districts to the qualified voters of such district in an election for that purpose, which election shall be held as now or hereafter provided by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1971, p. 3541, § 2; Code 1979, § 7-102)
Sec. 1-7-10. - Same—Tax levy. 
Upon a majority of the qualified voters of any district voting in an election as provided above, voting in favor of providing water and sanitary sewerage services in such district, the governing authority shall have the authority to levy a tax upon the taxable property in such district for the purpose of constructing and maintaining water and sewerage facilities therein. 
(Ga. Laws 1971, p. 3541, § 3; Code 1979, § 7-103)
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater and sewage collection and disposal systems, Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 2, ¶ 3(a)(6); authority as to furnishing water, Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 2, ¶ 3(a)(7); special districts, Art. IX, § 2, ¶6. 
Sec. 1-7-11. - Building code—Failure to comply with permit requirement. 
Any owner, contractor, builder, repairer or other person, firm or corporation engaging in the construction, reconstruction, remodeling or repair of any building within Dougherty County without first obtaining a building permit where lawfully required by any building code or amendment thereto which has been or may hereafter be adopted by Dougherty County pursuant to the constitutional amendment of 1956, (Ga. Laws 1956, p. 119, 121), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the manner provided by law for misdemeanors. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2082, § 1; Code 1979, § 7-201)
Cross reference— Building code adopted, § 2-4-1. 
Sec. 1-7-12. - Same—Violation a misdemeanor. 
Any owner, contractor, builder, repairer or other person, firm or corporation engaging in the construction, reconstruction, remodeling or repair of any building within Dougherty County in violation of the building standards lawfully fixed by any building code or amendment thereto which has been or may hereafter be adopted by Dougherty County pursuant to said constitutional amendment [of 1956] shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the manner provided by law for misdemeanors. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2082, § 2; Code 1979, § 7-202)
Sec. 1-7-13. - Same—Injunction. 
Any construction, reconstruction, remodeling, repairs or other work being done in Dougherty County in violation of any lawful provision of said building code may be enjoined upon the application of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2082, § 3; Code 1979, § 7-203)
Sec. 1-7-14. - Fire protection districts—Described. 
(a)	For the purpose of providing fire protection there is hereby established two (2) fire protection districts in Dougherty County. The West District shall begin at a point on the Lee County line, in the northeast corner of Land Lot No. 328, 1st Land District, and go west 3.6 miles along county line to northwest corner of Land Lot No. 409 to north point of district line between 1st and 2nd Land Districts (See Dougherty County Land Lot Map, dated March 1948, revised September 1951); from here go south along district line 7.5 miles to Lily Pond road; then go east along south side of Lily Pond road 3.2 miles to west bank of Flint River; then go north along west bank of Flint River 7 miles to northeast corner of Land Lot No. 326 at Georgia Power Company bridge; from here go north along land lot line 6,000 feet (1.1 miles approximately) to starting point in northeast corner of Land Lot No. 328 on county line, and shall contain all or part of Land Lots Nos. 300, 304, 305, 306, 307, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 327, 328, 329, 330, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 367, 368, 369, 370, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 419 and 420. 
(b)	The East District shall start from the east bank of Flint River at point in southwest corner of Land Lot No. 273; go east 1.9 miles to east side of Blue Springs Road at southeast corner of Land Lot No. 223; now go north 1.5 miles to south side of State Route 257 (Holley Highway); continue along south side of State Route 257 about 2.8 miles to northwest corner of U.S. Marine Corps Supply Depot property; from here go east along north side of Atlantic Coast Line R.R. right-of-way 1.2 miles to southwest corner of Land Lot No. 153, 1st Land District; then go north along land lot line 3.4 miles to east bank of Flint River, and shall be composed of all or part of Land Lots Nos. 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238 and 239. 
(Ga. Laws 1956, p. 2598, § 1; Code 1979, § 7-401)
Sec. 1-7-15. - Same—Contract with City of Albany. 
The governing authority of Dougherty County is hereby authorized to furnish fire protection to the fire protection districts by contract with the City of Albany. 
(Ga. Laws 1956, p. 2598, § 2; Code 1979, § 7-402)
Sec. 1-7-16. - Same—Tax levy. 
The governing authority of Dougherty County is hereby authorized to levy a tax of not to exceed five (5) mills upon the taxable property of such districts to defray the costs of providing fire protection service within such district. 
(Ga. Laws 1956, p. 2598, § 4; Code 1979, § 7-404)
Sec. 1-7-17. - Same—Fire regulations. 
The governing authority of Dougherty County is hereby authorized to adopt and enforce fire safety regulations for Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1956, p. 2598, § 3; Code 1979, § 7-403)
Cross reference— Fire protection and prevention, § 2-7-1 et seq. 
Secs. 1-7-18—1-7-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET AND SIDEWALK PAVING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Roads and streets, Ch. 2-13.

Sec. 1-7-30. - Definition; petition. 
The paving of, and/or the construction of sidewalks and/or curbing for, any road or street in any urban area (urban area shall be defined as any area that has been subdivided into lots for residential or commercial purpose, either or both, of Dougherty County, Georgia, outside the corporate limits of any municipality), may be initiated either by majority of the county commissioners, or by a petition in writing signed by the persons owning fifty-one (51) percent of the total lineal footage of the property abutting said road or street. When a petition is presented to the commissioners by the property owners as above provided, it may be rejected or approved by a majority of the county commissioners. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 1; Code 1979, § 7-301)
Sec. 1-7-31. - Specifications. 
If the petition is approved by a majority of the commissioners, or if a majority of the commissioners initiate the improvement on their own motion, the majority shall provide, when said work shall be commenced, the type of paving to be laid, the materials to be used therein, the extent of the lineal length of the road or street to be paved, and the width of the paving. They may also provide for such curbing and gutter, storm sewers, drainage works, grading or other work as they may deem is necessarily incident to the proposed improvement. They shall also provide the specifications for any sidewalks which they may decide to construct. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 2; Code 1979, § 7-302)
Sec. 1-7-32. - Bids; award. 
The county commissioners by a majority vote shall have the right to determine whether said work shall be done by contract or by the county. Should said work be done by contract, the resolution shall provide for the receiving of sealed bids at a time and place therein specified. At the time and place specified in said resolution the commissioners shall examine all bids received and shall award the contract to the lowest and best bidder, provided he can make a proper performance bond. The commissioners shall have the right to reject any and all bids and readvertise for other bids when the bids submitted are not, in their judgment, satisfactory. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 3; Code 1979, § 7-303)
Sec. 1-7-33. - County labor. 
Should said work be done by the county, it shall have the right to use its own employees, convict labor, its own machinery and equipment, and to charge therefor according to the prevailing practice of uses and wages. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 4; Code 1979, § 7-304)
Sec. 1-7-34. - Notice to property owners. 
When said resolution has been passed by a majority of the commissioners, notice shall be given to the abutting property owners by publication of the resolution in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements are published once a week for two (2) weeks. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, § p. 2084, § 5; Code 1979, § 7-305)
Sec. 1-7-35. - Protest by property owners. 
In the event such improvement shall be initiated by the county commissioners, the property owners affected may, within thirty (30) days from the date of the first insertion of the resolution in the newspaper, protest in writing, and if the owners of fifty-one (51) percent or more of the lineal footage affected shall sign said protest, the county commissioners may in their discretion declare said resolution null and void. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 6; Code 1979, § 7-306)
Sec. 1-7-36. - Assessment of costs. 
After the contract shall have been let, or the improvement shall have been made by the county in the event the commissioners elect to have the work done by the county, as the case may be, and the cost of such improvement, which shall include the cost of engineering services, printing, appraising, advertising and all other expenses incurred by the county incident to said improvement in addition to the contract price for the work and materials, or in addition to the cost of materials, labor, machinery, equipment and services used in the making of such improvement in the event the work is done by the county, shall have been ascertained, the county engineer, subject to examination and approval by the county commissioners, shall appraise and apportion the cost and expense of said improvement among the abutting property owners on a lineal foot basis, and shall assess them accordingly. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 7; Code 1979, § 7-307)
Sec. 1-7-37. - Public hearing; approval. 
When said appraisal, apportionment and assessment shall have been approved by the county commissioners, the same shall be filed with the clerk of said commission. The commissioners shall appoint a time for the holding of a session for the purpose of hearing any complaints or objections that may be made concerning said appraisal, apportionment and assessment by any person interested, and notice of the purpose, time and place of such session shall be published by the clerk of the county commissioners once a week for two (2) weeks in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements are published, which notice shall provide for an inspection of said appraisal, apportionment and assessment by any interested party. The time fixed for the hearing shall not be less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days from the date of the last publication. The commissioners at said session shall have the power, and it shall be their duty, to hear all objections to said appraisal, apportionment and assessment, to review and correct it, and to confirm it either as originally made or as corrected. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 8; Code 1979, § 7-308)
Sec. 1-7-38. - Reassessment. 
In the event any assessment shall be found to be invalid or insufficient in whole or in part for any reason whatsoever, the county commissioners shall cause a new assessment to be made in the manner in which the original assessment was made. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 9; Code 1979, § 7-309)
Sec. 1-7-39. - Payment; collection. 
Assessments shall be payable within thirty (30) days from the date of confirmation at said hearing. In the event of failure to pay as above provided, the clerk of the county commissioners shall issue an execution for the collection of such assessment and said assessment shall be a lien against said abutting property of equal rank with state and county taxes. Said execution shall be issued in the name of Dougherty County and signed by the clerk and attested by the chairman of the board of county commissioners. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 10; Code 1979, § 7-310)
Sec. 1-7-40. - Affidavits of illegality. 
Any property owner whose property is assessed for an improvement under this resolution shall have the right within thirty (30) days after final confirmation of the appraisal, apportionment and assessment by the county commissioners, to file an affidavit denying that the whole or any part of the amount for which said execution issued is due, stating fully and in detail the grounds on which he contends same is not due, and stating what amount, if any, he admits to be due, which amount so admitted to be due shall be paid and collected before the affidavit is received. Said affidavit shall be filed with the clerk of the county commissioners and shall be returned by him to the superior court of Dougherty County, Georgia, there to be tried and the issue determined as in cases of illegality, subject to all the pains and penalties provided for in other cases of illegality for delay under the laws of this state. In the event said illegality is withdrawn or dismissed for any reason, then the assessment as made by the county engineer and approved by the county commissioners shall be considered as final. The remedy of affidavit of illegality is exclusive and exhaustive of all other remedies except those questioning the validity of the resolution. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 11; Code 1979, § 7-311)
Sec. 1-7-41. - Enforcement of executions. 
Any execution issued under the provisions of this Act may be sold, transferred or assigned, in the discretion of the governing authority. Said executions shall be enforced by the sheriff in the manner provided by law for the enforcement of tax executions, and all of the provisions respecting same shall apply, including the execution of the deed. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 12; Code 1979, § 7-312)
Sec. 1-7-42. - Intent. 
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as imposing the duty on the county to repair or maintain any road, street, alley or other improvement made under this Act, nor shall the making of any of said improvements be construed as accepting same as a part of the public road system of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 13; Code 1979, § 7-313)
Sec. 1-7-43. - Severability. 
If any section or portion of this Act be declared unconstitutional, the remaining sections or portions thereof shall not be affected thereby, and shall not be invalidated, but shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2084, § 14; Code 1979, § 7-314)
Chapter 1-8 - SCHOOLS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-8-1. - Authority to merge school systems of City of Albany and Dougherty County. 
Article VIII, section 5, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of Georgia is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph to read as follows: 
"Merger of existing independent school system of City of Albany and existing school district in Dougherty County outside the corporate limits of said city into one (1) school district or system. The General Assembly of Georgia is hereby authorized to pass a Special Act or Acts to merge the existing independent school system of the City of Albany and the existing school district in the County of Dougherty outside the corporate limits of said city so that the entire area of Dougherty County shall constitute one (1) school district or system, the independent school system in the City of Albany and the existing school district in Dougherty County outside said corporate limits of said city being thereby abolished. 
"The school district so created by the General Assembly is hereby authorized to incur bonded indebtedness for the purpose of constructing, erecting, enlarging, repairing and improving the necessary school buildings, and for acquiring the necessary property therefor. 
"The General Assembly shall provide for a new political entity, the affairs of which are to be managed by a board of education, to bear such name and have such powers as may be provided in said Act. The General Assembly shall also provide the terms and method of appointing or electing the members of the board of education. The board members shall have such qualifications and shall be paid such compensation as may be fixed by law. The said board of education is hereby authorized and empowered to operate, conduct and control said system of public schools and its fiscal affairs, including the right and authority to create indebtedness as may be authorized by the General Assembly, not in conflict with this Constitution; to contract and be contracted with, to appoint and employ teachers and to fix their salaries, and to do all and every act or acts as may be necessary for the proper maintenance and operation of a comprehensive school system throughout the limits of Dougherty County. 
"From and after the ratification of this amendment, the voters of Dougherty County shall no longer elect the county school superintendent. The General Assembly shall have authority to abolish, without a referendum, the term of the present county school superintendent of Dougherty County. The board of education shall elect or employ a superintendent of education and fix his salary. He shall have such qualifications as may be fixed by law. 
"Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the fiscal authorities of Dougherty County shall levy a tax for the support and maintenance of said school system of not greater than twenty (20) mills upon the dollar (as recommended by the board of education) uniform throughout the county, of all taxable property in the county. 
"Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution or any provisions of law, the commissions or fees of the tax collector of Dougherty County for collection of monies for school purposes shall not exceed the following rates: Two and one-half (2½) percent on the first $125,000.00 collected. One (1) percent on the second $125,000.00 collected. One-half (½) of one (1) percent on all amounts collected above $250,000.00. The above schedule of rates shall apply to all collections of moneys for school purposes including that collected for operation, maintenance, bond retirements, interest payments and for any other school purpose by whatever name called. Should the tax collector of Dougherty County be changed from a fee to a salary, this provision shall become inoperative. 
"The General Assembly may authorize the City of Albany and the County of Dougherty to appropriate money from their general funds to the board of education herein created for educational purposes. 
"The specifications of certain powers herein is not intended to be exclusive, it being the intention hereof that all powers hereby granted to the General Assembly and all powers to be granted by the General Assembly pursuant hereto are to be liberally construed so as to effectuate the general purposes of establishing and maintaining a comprehensive system of public education throughout the limits of Dougherty County. 
"The powers hereby granted to the General Assembly and the powers to be granted by the General Assembly to effectuate the purposes herein set forth shall exist notwithstanding other provisions of this Constitution, or any general or special laws of the state. 
"The General Assembly may from time to time enact Special Acts amending the Act or Acts enacted pursuant hereto." 
(Ga. Laws 1950, p. 465, § 1; Code 1979, § 6-101)
Editor's note— This constitutional amendment has been continued in existence. 
Sec. 1-8-2. - Merger of school systems of Albany and Dougherty County. 
The existing independent school system of the City of Albany and the existing school district in the County of Dougherty outside the corporate limits of said city are hereby merged into one (1) school district, coextensive with the limits of Dougherty County, and said existing independent school system of Albany and the school district in said county outside the corporate limits of said city are hereby abolished. Said merged school district shall constitute a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, separate from the political entities of the City of Albany and the County of Dougherty, and shall be known as the Dougherty County School System. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, §§ 1, 2; Code 1979, § 6-102)
Sec. 1-8-3. - General powers. 
(a)	The said Dougherty County School System is hereby vested with the power to conduct a system of public education throughout the limits of said county, together with all powers set forth in said amendment to the Constitution and in other provisions of the Constitution and the general and special laws of Georgia relating to public school systems and districts, and all powers incidental thereto; it is expressly enacted, however, that such other provisions of the constitution and general and special laws of Georgia relating to public school systems and districts shall in no manner limit the powers expressly or impliedly granted in said constitutional amendment, nor in this Act, nor in amendments thereto. The "general laws" of Georgia which are made applicable to the county-wide school district created by this Act include all laws, and amendments thereto, which constitute every county in the state, one (1) school district, and all general laws relative thereto. 
(b)	The Dougherty County School System by and through its board of education, its successors or assigns, is hereby specifically authorized to acquire real property and to acquire, construct and equip buildings and facilities and to use and equip existing buildings for education beyond the high school level, and to maintain and operate the same, and further, in its discretion, to contribute funds to the board of regents of the University System of Georgia, acting for and on behalf of the regents of the University System of Georgia or to such other appropriate state agency, to be applied towards the acquisition of real property and the acquisition, constructing and equipping of buildings and facilities for education beyond the high school level, and for the maintenance and operation of the same and to convey or otherwise transfer property, buildings, facilities and equipment now owned or hereafter acquired to the board of regents of the University System of Georgia or to such other appropriate state agency, its successors or assigns, to be operated and maintained under such terms and conditions agreed upon between the said Dougherty County School System and the board of regents or such other appropriate state agency. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 4; Ga. Laws 1963, p. 3303, § 1; Code 1979, § 6-103)
State Law reference— See O.C.G.A. § 20-2-370. 
Sec. 1-8-4. - Transfer of funds, taxes, property; exception. 
All school funds in the custody of the existing independent school system of said city for the operation of schools in said city, and all school funds in the custody of the existing school district in the County of Dougherty outside the corporate limits of said city for the operation of schools in said district, and all school funds in the custody of the State of Georgia and any other political unit for the operation of schools in said independent school system of said city or in said district outside the corporate limits of said city; and all taxes levied by the City of Albany, the State of Georgia and any other political unit for operation of said existing independent school system in said city, and all taxes levied by the commissioners of the County of Dougherty, the State of Georgia and any other political unit for operation of said existing school district in said county outside the corporate limits of said city prior to merger, but which are not collected until after the merged school system actually begins operation, shall, when collected, be paid into the operating fund of said merged school system. All property, real and personal, including moneys, options to purchase and choses in action, owned or held by said city for its existing independent school system or by the existing school district in said county outside the corporate limits of said city, and all such property and funds held by or in the custody of any other person or political unit for the benefit of said independent school system and said district, shall, when said merger actually becomes operative, pass to and be held by said merged system for school purposes. Provided, however, that in case of any property which has been heretofore conveyed to said city for school and other purposes and placed under the jurisdiction of the existing board of education of Albany, Georgia, said property, upon said merger actually becoming operative, shall be held by the board of education of said merged system for all the purposes, and according to the terms, of the deed by which such conveyance was made. The term real property used in this section is limited to existing school buildings and adjacent grounds. Vacant lots are expressly excepted. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 9; Code 1979, § 6-104)
Sec. 1-8-5. - Taxes. 
For the purpose of providing funds for the merged system hereby created, returns for taxation of all property in said county liable for taxation shall be made to the same officials, county and state, as in case of returns of taxes for county and state purposes, and the same provisions, as to time, method and officials and boards in which powers are vested under the laws of Georgia relating to state and county taxes, tangible and intangible (except as herein specifically stated), shall be applicable to taxation for any of the purposes of said merged system, including the time, place and manner of making returns; assessments for taxation; equalization of assessments; payment and collection of taxes; date, rank and fixation of tax liens; issuance and levy of executions; sales to satisfy executions; rights of redemption, transfer of executions; recording of executions; affidavits of illegality and other defenses, and all other methods and provisions provided under the laws of Georgia necessary to financing said merged school system. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 13; Code 1979, § 6-105)
Sec. 1-8-6. - Contracts; obligations; limitations. 
(a)	No contract or other obligation (except as herein specifically provided) shall be incurred by said merged system or in its behalf, unless at the time of incurring same, said merged system shall have in hand, or will have in hand during the fiscal year when such contract is made or obligation incurred, from taxes levied for that fiscal or calendar year or prior years, by the State of Georgia or the board of Dougherty County, sufficient funds to meet the terms of the contract or obligation. Provided, that the above limitation on incurring obligations shall not be applicable to written contracts with teachers and other personnel of said system when such contracts comply strictly with the provisions of section 8 [section 1-8-27] of this Act relating to such written contracts. 
(b)	The Dougherty County School System by and through its board of education, its successors or assigns, is hereby specifically authorized to convey all of its interest in that certain real estate located in the City of Albany, Georgia, upon which is located Mills Memorial Stadium and which is bounded by Stadium Drive, Van Buren Drive, Society Avenue and Tift Avenue, together with the improvements thereon, to the Albany Stadium Authority, and, in its discretion, to enter into contracts with said stadium authority relative to the use, maintenance and control of said property for periods of time not exceeding twenty (20) years from the date of the approval of this Act. The Dougherty County School System, by and through its board of education, its successors or assigns, is hereby further specifically authorized to make payments or contributions to said stadium authority as may be called for by said contracts for the use of the facilities of said stadium authority by the school system and to provide funds for the maintenance thereof by the authority. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 12; Ga. Laws 1964, p. 2006, § 1; Code 1979, § 6-106)
Sec. 1-8-7. - Liens. 
(a)	All liens for school taxes unpaid at the time said merger actually becomes operative, whether said liens were created for the benefit of the existing independent school system of said city or for the benefit of the existing school district in said county outside the corporate limits of said city, shall remain of full force and effect, and all powers provided for enforcement thereof shall also remain of full force and effect. 
(b)	The said merged school system shall be entitled to its pro rata portion of all school funds now or hereafter provided for school purposes by the laws of the State of Georgia or of the United States. 
(c)	The merged school system may receive donations from any source, and administer them for the purposes for which donated. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 13; Code 1979, § 6-107)
Sec. 1-8-8. - Teachers' retirement system. 
Said Dougherty County School System and teachers employed by it shall be subject and entitled to the provisions of the teachers' retirement system of said state, as established by Act approved March 19, 1943 (Georgia Laws 1943, p. 640), and existing and future amendments to said law; the word "teachers" as herein used to have the same meaning as said word is defined in said Act. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 19; Code 1979, § 6-108)
Sec. 1-8-9. - Commission or fees on school funds. 
The commissions or fees of the tax collector of Dougherty County for collection of monies for school purposes shall not exceed the following rates: Two and one-half (2½) percent on the first one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) collected. One (1) percent on the second one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) collected. One-half (½) of one (1) percent on all amounts collected above two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). The above schedule of rates shall apply to all collections of monies for school purposes including that collected for operation, maintenance, bond retirements, interest payments and for any other school purpose by whatever name called. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 20; Code 1979, § 6-109)
Cross reference— See also § 1-8-1. 
Sec. 1-8-10. - Previous school system abolished. 
The existing independent school system of Albany, Georgia, the City Board of Education of Albany, Georgia, the existing school district in the County of Dougherty outside the corporate limits of Albany, the board of education of Dougherty County, and the office and term of the present county school superintendent of Dougherty County are all hereby abolished. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 16; Code 1979, § 6-110)
Secs. 1-8-11—1-8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF EDUCATION 

Sec. 1-8-20. - Members; selection; terms; qualifications; vacancies; oath. 
The administration of said school system shall be vested in a board to be known as the Dougherty County Board of Education. The board of education shall consist of seven (7) members, men or women, or some of both, who at the time of their appointments shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age and have been bona fide residents of Dougherty County for at least four (4) years. No person shall be eligible for appointment as a member of the board whose term of appointment would cause such person to serve more than twelve (12) consecutive years as a member of board, and such person thus becoming ineligible shall not be again appointed unless the term to which such person is appointed shall begin not less than one (1) year from the end of the previous term served by such person. Members of the board shall be persons of good moral character, who shall have a fair knowledge of the elementary branches of an English education and be favorable to the common school system. Two (2) members shall be appointed by the board of city commissioners of the City of Albany; two (2) members shall be appointed by the board of county commissioners of Dougherty County; two (2) members shall be appointed by the grand jury of Dougherty County, and the six (6) members appointed as aforesaid shall elect a seventh member by a majority vote. The first appointments by the grand jury shall be for one (1) year. The first appointments by the county commissioners shall be for two (2) years. The first appointments by the board of city commissioners of the City of Albany shall be for three (3) years. The person elected by the members appointed as aforesaid shall be for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter all succeeding appointments shall be for three (3) years from the expiration of the previous term. All members of the board of education shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified. In case of a vacancy on said board of education by death, resignation or from any cause other than the expiration of such member's term of office, the board of education shall by secret ballot elect his successor for the unexpired term. All members appointed for a full term shall take office at the organizational meeting provided for in section 6 [section 1-8-22]. All members appointed for an unexpired term shall take office immediately upon their appointment. Each member of the board of education upon assuming office shall take an oath to faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 5; Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2314, § 1; Code 1979, § 6-201)
Editorial note—Transitional provisions respecting initial appointments have been omitted. 
Sec. 1-8-21. - Meetings; quorum; attendance. 
(a)	The said board of education shall hold regular monthly meetings except during July and August of each year, on a date fixed by said board. The said board may hold special meetings upon twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to its members. At all meetings four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(b)	All of said members shall serve as members of the board without compensation. No person shall be qualified to serve as a member of said board of education while holding any kind of public office for which compensation is paid, except the office of notary public, or secretary and treasurer of the board. Absence by a member of said board from three (3) consecutive regular meetings shall be held to be a resignation from the board, but such absences may be excused by a vote of a majority of the board. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 5; Code 1979, § 6-202)
Sec. 1-8-22. - Organization; officers; duties; official seal. 
(a)	The board of education shall organize at the last regular meeting of the fiscal year. At the organization meeting, the board of education shall select from its membership a president and a vice president, the president to preside at all meetings, and the vice president to preside in the absence of the president. The president, or vice president, shall have such duties as set forth hereinafter, as well as such duties as may be delegated to him by said board, and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this Act. At the organizational meeting the board shall select a secretary and a treasurer, who shall receive such compensation as the board deems proper. The offices of secretary and treasurer may be performed respectively by one (1) and the same person, and may be a person or persons other than a member of said board. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the secretary to attend all regular and special meetings of the board, keep minutes of such meetings, to be custodian of all books and records of said board, keep and use the official seal of said board, and perform such other duties as may be required of said board and which are usually common to officials of his class. 
(c)	The treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds of said merged system and of said board. He shall give bond, with corporate surety by a company authorized to do business in Georgia, in such form and in such amount, as will, in the opinion of said board, protect, as fully as possible, funds and property of said board, the premium to be paid by the board of education. 
(d)	The board of education shall adopt an official seal, for use when necessary, the wording on said seal to read "Dougherty County School System (Georgia), Organized 1951." 
(e)	Immediately upon the appointment and qualification of the members of the board of education, the board shall organize as hereinabove provided, and the elected officers shall hold office until the last meeting in the fiscal year and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 6; Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2314, § 2, Code 1979, § 6-203)
Sec. 1-8-23. - Appointments; superintendent, assistant principals, teachers, employees, legal counsel. 
The said board of education shall appoint a superintendent of education, whose official title shall be Superintendent of Education, Dougherty County, and may appoint such executive assistants to said superintendent as the board deems proper. The board shall also appoint such teachers, principals of schools and their assistants, employees, legal counsel and such other personnel, professional and lay, as said board may deem necessary to the proper functioning of said merged school system. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 7; Code 1979, § 6-204)
Sec. 1-8-24. - Duties of superintendent and other personnel; limitations. 
The duties of the superintendent of education shall be the same as those of county superintendents of schools under the general laws of Georgia, but such duties may be decreased, increased or otherwise modified by action of said board; and the duties of the assistants to said superintendent, teachers, employees, legal counsel and other personnel shall be the same as the duties of their respective classes under the general laws of Georgia, but all such duties may be increased, decreased or otherwise modified by action of said board. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 7, Code 1979, § 6-301)
Sec. 1-8-25. - Powers as to expenditures by superintendent; limitation on contracts by board; executing contracts with teachers. 
The superintendent of education may make contracts for supplies, labor, repairs and other necessary school purposes, binding said merged school system where the expenditure involved does not exceed the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). All expenditures for such purposes in excess of that amount must be first authorized by resolution adopted at a regular or special meeting of the board. No purchase involving an expenditure of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be made in any case without an opportunity for competitive bids. No contracts in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for construction, alteration or repair of buildings, or installation of equipment, which involve the doing of labor or the furnishing of materials shall be entered into by said board without taking the statutory performance bond required of counties and cities by the laws of said state in such cases. Contracts with teachers and other personnel shall, when authorized by said board, be executed by the superintendent of education alone. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, §§ 10, 11; Code 1979, § 6-302)
Sec. 1-8-26. - Rules and regulations. 
The board of education shall have the power and authority to adopt and enforce all rules and regulations, not in conflict with the provisions of this Act, necessary to the maintenance of discipline within said merged system; and such rules and regulations may delegate to officers, principals of schools, teachers and other employees such authority as the board deems necessary to that end. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 7; Code 1979, § 6-205)
Sec. 1-8-27. - Requirements as to contracts. 
(a)	The board of education may enter into written contracts with teachers and other personnel of said merged school system, and into contracts for transportation of pupils, but none of such contracts shall be made for a longer period than twelve (12) months; except that said board may enter into a written contract with a superintendent of education for a longer period than twelve (12) months, but in no case for a period longer than four (4) years. 
(b)	Written contracts made with teachers and other personnel by the existing independent school system of the City of Albany, and written contracts made with teachers and other personnel by the existing school district in the County of Dougherty outside the corporate limits of said city, prior to the time when said merged school system actually becomes operative, shall, when such contracts are made for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months, continue of full force, after said merger actually becomes operative, in accordance with the terms of said contracts. Nothing in this section shall prevent the board of education, after the merger, from increasing the compensation of any of said teachers and other personnel holding such prior written contracts which were in existence at the time of the merger, so as to provide for proper adjustments of compensation within said merged school system. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 8; Code 1979, § 6-206)
Sec. 1-8-28. - Powers as to finances; suits; property. 
(a)	The merged system hereby created, through its said board of education, shall have power to use for the operation of said merged system all funds appropriated for that purpose. The Dougherty County School System may create debts, borrow money, purchase supplies, make contracts, construct, alter, repair, improve and equip buildings and related facilities for school educational and physical development purposes. 
(b)	The Dougherty County School System is hereby authorized to incur bonded indebtedness, and to issue bonds and other evidence of indebtedness, for the purpose of constructing, erecting, enlarging, repairing and improving the necessary school buildings and related facilities, for school, educational and physical development and for acquiring the necessary property therefor, and paying the expenses incident thereto. 
(c)	The Dougherty County School System hereby created shall have power to sue, and be sued, but its object is declared to be governmental and shall not be liable to suit in actions arising ex delicto, except where specifically authorized by law. 
(d)	When in the opinion of said board of education it is necessary to acquire property for the purposes of said merged system, the said board may exercise all the powers of eminent domain, with all the remedies to execute such powers, provided under any of the laws of said state. 
(e)	Title to all property acquired or held by said merged system shall be taken in the name of Dougherty County School System. 
(f)	Property of said merged system which in the opinion of the board of education is no longer available for its purposes may be sold, exchanged or otherwise disposed of in such manner as the board may deem fit and the proceeds used exclusively for school purposes. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 10; Code 1979, § 6-207)
Sec. 1-8-29. - Method of disbursement; execution of contracts. 
(a)	All disbursements of said merged system shall be paid by check signed by the treasurer. In case of absence or disability of the treasurer, the board may designate a person to perform the duties of the treasurer required by this Act; provided adequate bond is given. 
(b)	All contracts, bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be executed by the president (or vice-president) and the secretary of the board of education in the name of Dougherty County School System; contracts of the board with the superintendent of education shall be signed by the president (or vice-president) and the secretary of the board. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 10; Code 1979, § 6-208)
Sec. 1-8-30. - Tax levy. 
The board of education of said merged school shall annually, within the time required by law, recommend to the commissioners of Dougherty County the rate of the levy necessary to be made for taxes for the support and maintenance of said school system. As provided in the amendment to the Constitution of Georgia pursuant to which this Act is enacted, the fiscal authorities of Dougherty County shall levy a tax for the support, operation and maintenance of said merged school system of not greater than twenty (20) mills, (as recommended by the board of education) uniform throughout the county, of all taxable property in the county. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 13; Code 1979, § 6-209)
Sec. 1-8-31. - Bonded indebtedness; election; issued by board of commissioners. 
(a)	The bonded indebtedness herein authorized shall be incurred pursuant to Article VII, section 7, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Constitution of Georgia, 1945. The election required shall be called by said board of education by the adoption of a resolution to that effect, said resolution specifying what amount of bonds are to be issued, for what purposes, what interest they are to bear, how much principal and interest are to be paid annually, and when they are to be paid off, and all proceedings relative to the issuance of said bonds shall be in accordance with the general law applicable to the issuance of bonds now or hereafter of force. 
(b)	If the majority of the qualified voters of said county voting in said election assent to the issuance of said bonds, the board of education shall recommend, and the commissioners of said county shall, at or before incurring the indebtedness by issuing the bonds, provide for, the assessment and collection of an annual tax sufficient in amount to pay the principal and interest of said debt within thirty (30) years from the date of the incurring of said indebtedness, as is provided by Article VII, section 7, paragraph 2 of the Constitution of Georgia of 1945 and in accordance with the terms of said bonds. The Dougherty County School [district] created being a political subdivision separate from the political entities of the City of Albany and the County of Dougherty, debts may be incurred by said district pursuant to the above cited provisions of the Constitution of 1945 to the extent of seven (7) percent of the assessed value of all the taxable property in Dougherty County without any regard to the amount of any indebtedness of said city and county governments. The taxes levied for the payment of the principal and interest on bonds issued by said school system shall be in addition to taxes levied yearly for the support and maintenance of schools, and other operations coming within the jurisdiction of said school system and its board of education. Proceedings for validation of said bonds shall be had pursuant to provisions of Chapter 87-3 of the Code of Georgia of 1933, as amended [O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 82]. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 14; Code 1979, § 6-210)
Sec. 1-8-32. - Temporary loans; restrictions; limitations. 
(a)	In addition to obligations allowed to be incurred by other provisions of this Act, and the general and special laws of said state, authority is hereby given to the board of education to make temporary loans in each year for the benefit of the Dougherty County School System, hereby created, for the support and maintenance of schools coming within the jurisdiction of said system and its board of education, the temporary loans to be made between January first and December thirty-first in each year to pay the expenses of said support and maintenance for such year. 
(b)	The aggregate amount of temporary loans outstanding at any one (1) time shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total gross income of said Dougherty County School System from taxes collected from all sources during the preceding year. The aggregate amount of temporary loans which may be made for the benefit of said school system for 1951 shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total gross income of the existing independent school system of Albany and the school system of Dougherty County outside the corporate limits of Albany for the calendar year 1950. 
(c)	Each such loan shall be payable on or before December thirty-first of the calendar year in which such loan is made. No loan may be made in any year under the provisions of this paragraph when there is a loan then unpaid which was made in prior year under the provisions of this paragraph. 
(d)	There shall not be incurred for the benefit of said school district in any one (1) calendar year an aggregate of such temporary loans and other contracts or obligations for the support and maintenance of said school district in excess of the total anticipated revenue of said district, from all sources, for such calendar year; provided, that where temporary loans are incurred, pursuant to this section, for the purpose of paying contracts and obligations for the support and maintenance of said school district maturing within the calendar year in which such loans are incurred, and the amount secured by said loans are paid to cancel or reduce the amount of such other contracts or obligations, such temporary loans shall not be held to be obligations in addition to the amount of such other contracts or obligations, but shall be held to be in diminution of the amounts of such other contracts and obligations; and, provided further, that creditors making such temporary loans to said school district may rely exclusively upon the contents of a resolution adopted by the board of education to the effect that the funds are borrowed to be applied as herein provided, and failure of said board or any officials of said school district so to apply said funds shall be no defense to any action upon the part of said creditor, and said obligations incurred by said temporary loans shall be legal and binding. 
(e)	There shall not be issued for the benefit of said district, in one (1) calendar year, obligations for such temporary loans in a total amount in excess of such anticipated revenue for said year. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 15; Code 1979, § 6-211)
Sec. 1-8-33. - Liberal construction. 
The specifications of certain powers herein of the Dougherty County School System is not intended to be exclusive, it being the intent of the General Assembly that all powers granted to the board of education are to be liberally construed so as to effectuate the general purposes of establishing and maintaining a comprehensive system of public education throughout the limits of Dougherty County. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 17; Code 1979, § 6-212)
Sec. 1-8-34. - Workers' compensation. 
The board of education is authorized, in its discretion, to make the Dougherty County School System and its employees subject to the provisions of the workmen's [workers'] compensation law of said state in the same manner as said workmen's [workers'] compensation law now or hereafter applies to municipal corporations and their employees. 
(Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2233, § 18; Code 1979, § 6-213)
State Law reference— Workers' Compensation Law, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-8-35. - Board of education in certain counties authorized to provide group insurance. 
(a)	The board of education of any county having a population of not less than seventy-six thousand (76,000) or more than one hundred thirty-five thousand (135,000), according to the 1960 United States decennial census or any such future census is hereby authorized and empowered to make contracts of insurance with any insurance company authorized to transact business within the State of Georgia, insuring its elected or appointed officers and employees or any class or classes thereof under a policy or policies of group insurance covering life, health, hospitalization, medical service or accident insurance, and for such purposes, may agree to pay part or all of the premiums or charges for carrying such contracts, and may appropriate out of its treasury or funds, any money necessary to pay such premium or charges or portion thereof. 
(b)	Such boards of education are hereby authorized, enabled and permitted to deduct from the officer's or employee's pay, salary or compensation, such part of the premium as is payable by the officer or employee and as may be so authorized by the officer or employee in writing. 
(c)	All contracts procured hereunder shall conform and be subject to all the provisions of any existing or future laws concerning group insurance and group annuity contracts. 
(Ga. Laws 1965, p. 3420, §§ 1—3; Code 1979, § 6-214)
STATE LAWS OF LOCAL APPLICATION - COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location, within Part I, of those session laws of Georgia included herein. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 2-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Dougherty County, Georgia," and may be so cited. Reference to the Dougherty County Code shall mean Part I, State Laws of Local Application, and Part II, Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 2-1-2. - Specific rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the county board of commissioners: 
General. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Commission. The terms "commission," "county commissioner," "board of commissioners," "governing authority," and "governing body" shall mean the board of commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Dougherty County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Designation of one (1) gender includes the other gender. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to three (3) or more persons may be executed by a majority of them. 
Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular or plural number each includes the other. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, departments. Whenever titles of various officers, departments or other agencies are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such offices, departments or agencies of Dougherty County, Georgia; and shall include their duly authorized subordinates and representatives. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as such person's place of habitation, and to which, whenever such person is absent, such person has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed such person's residence. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street and road between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The word "street" or "road" shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future. 
Week. The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1-2)
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; "sidewalk" and "street" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
Sec. 2-1-3. - Statutory rules of construction. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the same rules shall be applied in construing provisions of this Code, and ordinances, resolutions and motions of the board of commissioners, as are applied in construing the statutes of this state, which rules are found in Official Code of Georgia Annotated, sections 1-3-1 through 1-3-3, and the same meanings are to be given words as are given similar words found in the statutes of this state. 
Sec. 2-1-4. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 2-1-5. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
Ordinances and resolutions which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time, shall take effect immediately after their passage, or as otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 2-1-6. - Amendments; new provisions. 
(a)	All ordinances and resolutions passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances and resolutions, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Dougherty County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Dougherty County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All subsections, sections, articles, or chapters desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by subsection, section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1-6)
Sec. 2-1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances and resolutions passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance or resolution included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances, resolutions and parts thereof included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize ordinances and resolutions into appropriate subdivisions.
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code, where necessary to accommodate new material, changes in existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance," "this resolution" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinances and resolutions incorporated into the Code). 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance or resolution sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1-6)
Sec. 2-1-8. - Violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever herein the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, or as otherwise provided by the laws of this state. 
(b)	Each day any violation of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(c)	In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance or resolution shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the county as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60, 36-1-20; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-1-8.1. - Enforcement of county resolutions by citation. 
(a)	Violations of county resolutions may be tried upon citations as provided in O.C.G.A. section 15-10-63, and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusation by the county attorney. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)	The chief building inspector of the county, or his authorized representatives, the members of the county police department, the members of the county sheriff's department and the county attorney are all authorized to issue citations in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 15-10-60 through section 15-10-66. 
(Res. No. 89-030, §§ 1, 2, 10-16-89)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 89-030, adopted Oct. 16, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 as § 2-1-8.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-1-9. - Effect of repeal of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinance or resolution in force before or at the time the ordinance or resolution repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance or resolution repealed, nor any right acquired or liability incurred under any ordinance or resolution repealed. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1-4)
Sec. 2-1-10. - Provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the county.
(4)	Any right or franchise granted by the county.
(5)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order relating to specific public improvements or assessments therefor. 
(6)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order providing for the levy or collection of taxes or for an annual budget or appropriations. 
(7)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order pertaining to zoning.
(8)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order relating to the investment of county funds.
(9)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order, rule or regulation prescribing regulations, compensation, positions, classification, and other matters pertaining to county officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith. 
(10)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the county. 
(11)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order naming, renaming, opening, closing, prescribing grades, etc., of streets, roads, bridges and other public ways. 
(12)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order establishing utility connection charges, deposits, service charges or other charges not inconsistent with this Code. 
(13)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order creating, establishing, prescribing or abolishing housing authorities, urban renewal projects and minimum housing standards. 
(14)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order not inconsistent with this Code prescribing or providing traffic regulations at specific places, such as speed limits, through streets, stop intersections, yield intersections, one-way travel, no left turns, no right turns, traffic-control by electrical devices, truck routes, loading zones, no parking zones and limited parking zones; this enumeration is not to be by way of exclusion. 
(15)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order pertaining to or providing for zoning or subdivision regulations, or airport hazard districts; or accepting any plat. 
(16)	Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order enacted after December 1, 1986.
All such ordinances, resolutions, etc., are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 2-1-11. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code, and of codes or other provisions adopted by reference herein, are severable, and if any such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code and provisions adopted by reference, since the same would have been enacted by the county commission without the incorporation therein of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Chapter 2-2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire Code board of appeals, 2-7-21 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Boards; appointment procedure. 
The following provisions shall constitute a policy and procedure to be followed by the board of commissioners in the appointment of persons to county boards: 
(1)	General notification shall be given to the public of impending vacancies on boards to be filled by appointment by the board of commissioners by advertising a notice in the official county organ one (1) time at least one (1) month prior to the date on which such appointment will be considered. 
(2)	The notice shall advise persons who are interested to submit resumes to the county administrator giving their backgrounds and stating the appointments in which they are interested. The county administrator shall receive such resumes, and shall distribute them to the commissioners. 
(3)	No persons will be considered for appointment to county boards except residents of the county. 
(4)	If any person appointed to any board by the board of commissioners shall miss three (3) consecutive meetings of such board, such person shall stand automatically removed from the board, and a vacancy shall exist. 
(Res. No. 85-029, § 1, 12-2-85)
Cross reference— Fire code board of appeals, appointment, § 2-7-22. 
Sec. 2-2-2. - County attorney; duties. 
The county attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the county and in such capacity shall: 
(1)	Advise the board of commissioners, county administrator and constitutional officers, when requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of county business; 
(2)	Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the board of commissioners;
(3)	Give opinions upon any legal matter or question submitted by the board of commissioners or the county administrator; 
(4)	Attend or have an assistant attend all regular or special meetings of the board of commissioners for the purpose of giving any legal advice requested by its members; 
(5)	Prepare or review for execution all contracts and instruments to which the county is a party and approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the county; 
(6)	Prepare, when authorized by the board of commissioners, all complaints filed, and appear in any court in the prosecution of every case to protect the rights of the county; see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the county; 
(7)	Defend suits and actions at law or equity brought against the county unless otherwise directed by the board of commissioners, 
(8)	Make immediate report to the board of commissioners on the outcome of any litigation in which the county has an interest; 
(9)	Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall remain the property of the county: 
(a)	All suits in which the county had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties; the nature of the action; the disposition of the case; its status, if pending; and the briefs of counsel, and 
(b)	All written opinions prepared by the county attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by the county attorney to the county, or any department or official thereof; and 
(10)	Render such other legal services as may be required by the board of commissioners.
(Code 1979, § 1-3-4)
Cross reference— County attorney, appointment and compensation, § 1-3-4. 
Sec. 2-2-2.1. - Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority—Manner of appointment; method of filling vacancies. 
(a)	From and after July 2, 1990, all appointments to the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority, with the exception of the position held by the president of the medical staff of Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital (Resolution No. 78-130), shall be made directly by the board of commissioners without the necessity of receiving a submission of names from the authority. 
(b)	From and after July 2, 1990, each vacancy in the membership of the authority because of death, resignation, removal of residency from the county, or for any other reason other than the normal expiration of a members term of office shall be filled under the same method of appointment as stated in subsection (a) above. 
(c)	No authority member shall be appointed to serve in excess of two (2) full five-year terms with the exception of those members appointed to fill vacancies. Should a vacancy occur, an Authority member may be appointed for the duration of the term created by the vacancy as well as for two (2) full five-year terms. Sitting members of the authority, having now served in excess of two (2) full five-year terms, will remain as authority members for the duration of their current term but will not be eligible for reappointment. 
(Res. No. 90-047, §§ 1—3, 7-2-90)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 88-058, adopted Sept. 27, 1988, from which § 2-2-2.1 derived, was repealed by § 4 of Res. No. 90-047, §§ 1—3 of which were included herein as a new § 2-2-2.1 at the discretion of the editor. The repealed provisions pertained to similar subject matter. 
Cross reference— Ninth member of hospital authority, § 2-2-3.1. 
Sec. 2-2-3. - Same—Eighth member. 
(a)	The eighth member of the Albany Dougherty Hospital Authority shall be the president of medical staff at Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital. Such member's term of office shall be the same as such member's term as president of medical staff of Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital, except as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)	In the event the same person serves as president of medical staff of Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital for a period in excess of three (3) consecutive years, then the membership of the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority shall revert to seven (7) members at the expiration of such period of three (3) consecutive years and shall remain so until a new president of medical staff of Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital is elected, at which time the membership of the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority shall again increase to eight (8). 
(c)	The eighth member (president of medical staff of Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital shall have the same duties and powers as the other members of the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority, with the exception that such eighth member shall not be eligible to serve as chairman or vice-chairman of the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5-23)
Cross reference— Creation of hospital authority authorized, § 1-4-50. 
Sec. 2-2-3.1. - Same—Ninth member. 
(a)	The number of members on the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority [shall] be increased from eight (8) members to nine (9) members. 
(b)	The ninth member of the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority [shall] be a sitting member of the board of commissioners of the county and [shall] be appointed for a term of five (5) years, beginning January 1, 1988. 
(c)	The designated county commissioner member [shall] continue to serve throughout the duration of his or her term for so long as he or she remains a sitting member of the board of commissioners of the county. Should the designated commission member's term of office on the board of commissioners of the county expire for any reason, then and in that event, the member's term of office on the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority shall immediately terminate and the membership position on the authority shall be deemed vacant. 
(d)	The term of office of any member on the Albany-Dougherty Hospital Authority shall be limited to two (2) consecutive terms, with the exception of the current sitting members of the authority whose terms and future terms of office will not be affected by this section. 
(Res. No. 88-021, §§ 1—4, 3-2-88)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 88-021, adopted Mar 2. 1988, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1—4 as § 2-2-3.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-2-4. - Worker's compensation coverage. 
The elected county officers and elected members of the governing authority of Dougherty County shall be considered employees of Dougherty County for purposes of workers' compensation coverage, and thereby subject to the Workers' Compensation Act of the State of Georgia. The purpose of this resolution is to allow elected officials in Dougherty County to be eligible for workers' compensation coverage as any other employee of Dougherty County. Those elected officials this resolution specifically intends to include are: the board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, magistrate judges, state court judge, superior court judges, clerk of court, and coroner. 
(Res. No. 83-035, § 1, 11-7-83; Ord. No. 12-020, § I, 7-16-12)
State Law reference— Workers' compensation law, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-5. - Change of name of municipal airport. 
From and after the adoption of this section, the Albany-Dougherty County Airport shall bear the name and designation "Southwest Georgia Regional Airport." The name of the building shall remain "McAfee Air Terminal." 
(Res. No. 88-045, § 1, 8-22-88)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 88-045, adopted Aug. 22, 1988, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as § 2-2-5 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-2-6. - Emergency telephone system fee. 
(a)	Established; amount; purpose. Immediately upon the adoption of this resolution [Res. No. 93-019], a fee of one dollar ($1.00) is fixed and established to be paid by each telephone subscriber in Dougherty County, Georgia, the proceeds of said fee to be used for the construction and maintenance of a computer-aided dispatch system for the enhanced emergency telephone number "911" service in Dougherty County. Said fee shall be in lieu of the other fees heretofore established for the construction and operation of the system, and all such prior fees are hereby repealed and rescinded. 
(b)	Fund. The funds collected pursuant to this section shall be kept in a separate fund to be known as the emergency telephone system fund, and shall be used only for the purposes enumerated in O.C.G.A. 46-5-134(e). 
(c)	Collection. The 911 maintenance fee which has been heretofore imposed and collected shall continue to be imposed and collected until the effective date of this section whereupon collection of the previous fees shall be discontinued, and the fee provided in this section shall be collected. 
(Res. No. 90-081, §§ 1—4, 11-15-90; Res. No. 93-019, § 1, 6-21-93; Res. No. 95-001, § 1, 2-6-95) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 90-081, adopted Nov. 5, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1, 2, 4 as § 2-2-6 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-2-7. - Wireless enhanced 911 charge. 
A wireless enhanced 911 charge is imposed upon each wireless telecommunications connection subscribed by the subscribers whose billing address is within the jurisdiction of Dougherty County, Georgia at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per month per wireless connection. 
(Res. No. 98-035, 10-5-98)
Sec. 2-2-8. - Naming county owned buildings for individuals. 
The board of commissioners hereby adopts as its written policy that it will not consider applications and/or requests for the naming of county owned buildings after individuals. 
(Res. No. 02-050, § I, 11-18-02)
Sec. 2-2-9. - [Prepaid wireless 911 charge.] 
There is hereby imposed in all of Albany and Dougherty County a prepaid wireless 911 charge of seventy-five cents ($0.75) on each purchase of prepaid wireless telecommunications service for other than retail. 
(Ord. No. 11-027, § 1, 10-25-11)
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 11-027, adopted Oct. 25, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-2-9 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-2-10. - Appointment of county legislative coordinator (CLC). 
To most effectively respond to legislative proposals affecting counties, there shall be one county official or staff person designated by the board of commissioners to serve as the county legislative coordinator (CLC) for Dougherty County. 
The CLC for Dougherty County shall have the following: 
(1)	Access to all department heads and county officials to obtain information and data.
(2)	Access to the members of the board of commissioners.
(3)	Working knowledge of county operations.
(4)	The ability and time to respond to requests for information from ACCG policy staff in a timely manner. 
(5)	Authority within the county government structure to request and receive timely responses to requests for information. 
(6)	Knowledge of the various departments within the county and the points of contact within each to obtain information and feedback. 
(7)	Ability to provide periodic reports to the members of the board of commissioners and other county officials regarding the legislative reports and activities of ACCG. 
(Res. No. 14-002, 1-6-14)
Editor's note— Res. No. 14-002, adopted Jan. 6, 2014, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-2-10 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-2-11—2-2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Commission district, § 1-2-3.

Sec. 2-2-20. - Rules of order; agenda; quorum; special meeting notice; voting; minutes. 
(a)	Roberts' Rules of Order Newly Revised (Sarah Corbin Robert edition, revised 1970) shall be used as a guide to proper parliamentary procedure, in all commission meetings. All meetings shall be conducted in a businesslike, orderly manner. 
(b)	An agenda shall be prepared on all regular meetings twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting and commissioners shall be provided the agenda twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. It shall be acceptable to receive this agenda by telephone. This shall not prevent the placing of additional items on the agenda by unanimous consent of the board of commissioners. 
(c)	Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum.
(d)	The chairman shall give all members of the board three-day notice of any specially called meeting of the board, and such notice to the public as is reasonably possible. By attendance at a specially called meeting any member waives the requirement of a three-day notice. 
(e)	All commissioners shall have one (1) vote each. When the chairman or vice-chairman is presiding, that member shall be recorded as having voted for the motion unless that member registers a vote against the motion. 
(f)	All actions of the board of commissioners with any legal effect on the county shall be taken at a meeting of the board of commissioners under this section and shall be entered in the official minutes of the meeting by the clerk of the board of commissioners. The official minutes shall be open to the public for inspection and copying. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1-2; Res. of 10-1-79, § 1)
Sec. 2-2-21. - Use of county property by commissioners. 
No individual commissioner shall use or command to be used any county equipment, facilities, supplies, manpower, employee, vehicle, or other instrumentality without first seeking the approval of the county administrator or the approval by a majority vote of the board of commissioners at a meeting. Such use shall only be for directly related county business affecting the citizens of the county. 
(Res. No. 80-123, § 1, 1-7-80)
Sec. 2-2-22. - Expenditures outside of county—Limits. 
Expenditures outside of the county by individual commissioners on the business of the citizens of the county as hereinafter set forth, shall be reimbursed to such commissioners for the following itemized and approved purposes, upon the receipt by the county administrator by such individual commissioner of an itemized voucher, together with receipts for such approved expenses. Advance funds may be disbursed at the discretion of the county administrator or upon approval of the majority of the board of commissioners upon application of an individual commissioner. 
(1)	Approved expenditure for travel expense: 
(a)	For travel by private conveyance, using standard state roadways for computing distances: Twenty cents ($0.20) per mile. 
(b)	For travel by common carrier; bus, rail, or air: Actual cost of the travel ticket. Note: Air travel will usually be at tourist rate. 
(c)	Parking fees in commercially operated lots or garage.
(2)	Approved expenditure for lodging: Actual cost for single room. 
(3)	Approved expenditure for meals: In conjunction with the above-mentioned travel and lodging excluding expenditures for alcoholic beverages. 
(4)	Approved expenditure for telephone expense: Directly relating to county business. (All above-listed expenses must be supported by receipt) 
(5)	Approved expenditure for gratuities: In conjunction with meals, not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of the actual expense of each meal. 
(6)	Approved expenditure for individual entertainment expense: Other than the above-listed items will not be reimbursed. 
(7)	Approved business outside the county: 
(a)	Any regular meeting, convention, or seminar of any organization of which the county is a member. 
(b)	Normal activities of county government which are directly related to county issues which do not extend outside of the bounds of the state. 
(Res. No. 80-123, § 2, 1-7-80)
Cross reference— Reimbursable expenses generally, § 2-6.3. 
Sec. 2-2-23. - Same—Outside of state. 
Notwithstanding any provision of section 2-2-22, no expenditures for travel, lodging, meals, or other expenditures by any individual commissioner outside of the state will be compensated without the express prior approval of the majority of the board of commissioners of such travel and related expenses, prior to such expenditures being made. 
(Res. No. 80-123, § 3, 1-7-80)
Sec. 2-2-24. - Appointment of vice chairman of board of commissioners. 
(a)	The vice chairman of the board of commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia will be appointed on a rotating basis at its first regular session meeting of each year beginning with the January 6, 1992 regular session meeting. 
(b)	The term of each appointment will be one (1) year.
(c)	The appointments will be made according to county commission district numbers in the following order: 
CCD No. 2, CCD No. 3, CCD No. 4, CCD No. 5, CCD No. 6 and CCD No. 1. 
It is the intent of this section that the elected official from County Commission District No. 2 shall first be appointed Vice Chairman on January 6, 1992 with each county commission district having its elected official serve as vice chairman for a one-year term thereafter on a rotation basis. 
(d)	The elected official now serving county commission district No. 6 will continue to serve as vice chairman from this date until the date of the new appointment on January 6, 1992. 
(e)	To be eligible for the appointment of vice chairman hereunder, the elected county commissioner shall have served for a period of at least one (1) year prior to appointment. Should the situation arise where the rotation is such that this requirement has not been met, then and in that event, the rotation procedure will skip to the next eligible county commission district and continue from that point forward. 
(Res. No. 91-011, §§ 1—5, 2-18-91)
Editor's note— Res. No. 91-011, adopted Feb. 18, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—5 as 2-2-24. was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-2-25—2-2-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY DEPARTMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Department of family and children's services, O.C.G.A. § 49-3-1.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-2-30. - Administrative-legislative department. 
An administrative-legislative department is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of the county administrator and such other employees as may be necessary. The supervision and control of the department shall be vested in the county administrator. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5-1)
Sec. 2-2-31. - Tax department. 
(a)	There is hereby created a tax department for the county, which department shall have all of the duties and responsibilities as now provided by the laws of the state, or as hereafter provided by the laws of the state, pertaining to county tax collectors, county tax receivers, and county tax commissioners, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)	The head of the tax department shall be the tax director, who shall be appointed by the county administrator, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the county administrator. 
(c)	All employees of the tax department shall be selected by the tax director, subject to the approval of the county administrator in accordance with the county personnel policies and procedures. 
(d)	The salaries of the tax director and all employees of the tax department shall be established by the board of commissioners in the same manner as other county employees. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-2)
Cross reference— Board of tax assessors, § 2-16-2. 
Sec. 2-2-32. - Public works departments. 
(a)	A public works department is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county administrator, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the director. All employees shall be appointed by the county administrator in accordance with the county personnel policies and procedures. 
(b)	The public works department includes the county engineer and such other staff as is necessary, as well as the following divisions: 
(1)	Roads and bridges;
(2)	Engineering;
(3)	Environmental control;
(4)	Sanitation; and
(5)	Vehicle maintenance.
(Code 1979, § 1-5-2)
Sec. 2-2-33. - Department of emergency medical services. 
An emergency medical service is hereby created for the county which shall operate county wide. The department shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county administrator, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the director. All employees shall be appointed by the county administrator in accordance with the county personnel policies and procedures. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5-5)
Sec. 2-2-34. - Joint city-county departments. 
The following joint city-county departments created by contract with the City of Albany function county-wide: 
(1)	Albany-Dougherty County Recreation Department;
(2)	Albany-Dougherty County Collection Department;
(3)	Albany-Dougherty County Inspection Department; and
(4)	Albany-Dougherty County Purchasing Department.
(Code 1979, § 1-5-7)
Editor's note— The operation and division of funding of the above joint departments and the delineation of services and functions to be performed by the City of Albany and by Dougherty County are set forth in agreement between the city and county emerged into July 1, 1972 may be found in App. A. 
Cross reference— City-county emergency preparedness organization, § 2-5-2. 
Secs. 2-2-35—2-2-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-2-40. - Creation; composition; supervision. 
A police department is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of a chief of police and any police officers and other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county administrator and board of commissioners, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the chief of police. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5-3)
Annotations—The board of commissioners may not delegate its authority to appoint county police, fix salaries, levy tax to pay same, fix bond or discharge officers. Levine v. Perry et al., 204 Ga. 323, 49 S.E. 2d 820 (1948). The creation of a county police force does not diminish the power and authority of the sheriff to enforce the law and preserve the peace. Welfe et al. v. Huff et al., 232 Ga. 44, 205 S.E. 2d 254 (1974). 
State Law reference— Authority to create county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-41. - Chief of police; powers and duties. 
The chief of police, or county police officers under the chief's direction, shall: 
(1)	Execute all lawful orders and directions of the county administrator or board of commissioners;
(2)	Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the county by the enforcement of all county ordinances and state and federal laws; 
(3)	Strive to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the police department, and make recommendations from time to time to the board of commissioners for improvements which the board may assist in making in the department; 
(4)	Make a monthly report in writing to the board of commissioners on the actions of the police department; 
(5)	Insure that at all times there are sufficient officers on duty to carry out the tasks assigned to the police department; 
(6)	Discipline officers in accordance with the county personnel policies and procedures;
(7)	Maintain written rules and regulations for the police department, approved by the board of commissioners; 
(8)	Post copies of all police department rules and regulations and this division in a conspicuous place in the department. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-1)
Sec. 2-2-42. - Patrol powers. 
(a)	The police officers of the county shall have the authority to patrol any street, alley, path, sidewalk or park, in and around any stores, cafes taverns, restaurants, dance halls, service stations or any other establishment in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)	An officer while on duty for the county shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours, and while close to the public, an officer for the county has authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)	An officer for the county shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residence or public place within the unincorporated areas of the county if the officer has probable cause or sufficient reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a county ordinance; a personal injury or damage to property; or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(d)	No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant, unless such officer has the voluntary consent of the owner or occupant or is in pursuit of a fugitive of whom the officer has personal knowledge or of whom there is probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a crime. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-2)
Sec. 2-2-43. - Abuse of position. 
(a)	No police officer shall use official position or official identification cards or badges: 
(1)	For personal or financial gain;
(2)	For obtaining privileges not otherwise available to the officer except in the performance of duty; or 
(3)	For avoiding consequences of illegal acts.
(b)	Police officers may not lend their identification cards or badges to another person, or permit them to be photographed or reproduced without approval of the chief. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-3)
Sec. 2-2-44. - Abuse of process; withholding evidence. 
Police officers shall not convert to their own use, manufacture, conceal, falsify, destroy, remove, tamper with, or withhold, evidence or information, or make false accusations of a criminal or traffic charge. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-4)
Sec. 2-2-45. - Departmental reports; truthfulness. 
(a)	Police officers shall submit all necessary reports on time and in accordance with established departmental procedures. 
(b)	Reports submitted by officers shall be truthful and complete and no officer shall knowingly enter or cause to be entered any inaccurate, false, misleading or improper information. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-5)
Sec. 2-2-46. - Endorsements and referrals. 
Police officers shall not recommend or suggest in any manner, except in the transaction of personal business, the employment or procurement of a particular product, professional service or commercial service such as an attorney service, ambulance service, towing service, bondsman, mortician or the like. In the case of ambulance or towing service, when such service is necessary and the person needing the service is unable or unwilling to procure it or requests assistance, officers shall proceed in accordance with established departmental procedures. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1-6)
Secs. 2-2-47—2-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-2-71—2-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY 911 SYSTEM ADVISORY BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Resolution No. 92-010, adopted Feb. 25, 1992, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—3 as Ch. 2-2, Art. IV, Div. 2, §§ 2-2-91—2-2-93 was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 2-2-91. - Board established. 
An advisory board consisting of individuals from Dougherty County and the City of Albany knowledgeable of the Emergency "911" System and the emergency needs of the citizens of Dougherty County and the City of Albany is hereby established. The following individuals, or their designees, shall be members of the advisory board: county administrator; city manager; chairman, public safety committee of the board of county commissioners; chairman, public safety committee of the board of city commissioners; chief, Albany Police Department; Sheriff of Dougherty County, Georgia; chief, Dougherty County Police Department; Director, Emergency Medical Services; Fire Chief, Albany Fire Department; Director, Public Safety and Communications. 
(Res. No. 92-010, § 1, 2-25-92)
Sec. 2-2-92. - Duties. 
The advisory board shall prepare recommendations and assist the local governing authorities. 
(1)	Reviewing and analyzing the progress of public safety agencies in developing "911" system requirements; 
(2)	Recommending steps of action to effect the necessary coordination, regulation and development of a "911" system; 
(3)	Identifying mutual aid agreements necessary to effect the "911" system;
(4)	Assisting in the promulgation of necessary rules, regulations, operating procedures, schedules and other such police and administrative devices as shall be deemed necessary and appropriate; and 
(5)	Providing other services as may be deemed appropriate by the local government.
(Res. No. 92-010, § 2, 2-25-92)
Sec. 2-2-93. - Compensation. 
The members of the advisory board shall not be entitled to any compensation by reason of their service on the advisory board. 
(Res. No. 92-010, § 3, 2-25-92)
Secs. 2-2-94—2-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITIZEN'S TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note—Res. No. 92-048, adopted Oct. 5, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—4 as Ch. 2-2, Art. IV, Div. 3, §§ 2-2-101—2-2-104 was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 2-2-101. - Created. 
There is hereby created for the City of Albany, Georgia, Lee County, and Dougherty County, Georgia, a citizen's transportation committee to be composed of nine (9) members. Said citizen's transportation committee is referred to herein as "CTC." 
(Res. No. 92-048, § 1, 10-5-92)
Sec. 2-2-102. - Composition. 
The CTC shall be composed of nine (9) citizens from the City of Albany, Lee County and Dougherty County, Georgia, appointed by the respective governing authorities, as follows: 
(1)	Three (3) members: Albany City Commission;
(2)	Three (3) members: Dougherty County Commission;
(3)	One (1) member of Albany/Dougherty Planning Commission: Albany/Dougherty Planning Commission; 
(4)	One (1) member: Lee County Commission;
(5)	One (1) member of Lee County Planning Commission: Lee County Planning Commission.
Said members may be removed by their respective governing authorities at any time. All appointments shall be for a period of three (3) years commencing January of 1993. 
(Res. No. 92-048, § 1, 10-5-92)
Sec. 2-2-103. - Rules and procedures. 
The CTC shall meet as soon as practical after adoption of this division, and shall establish all rules and procedures necessary to conduct the business of said CTC. The CTC shall elect one (1) member to serve as chairman. Staff assistance shall be provided by the Albany/Dougherty Planning Commission for all meetings. 
(Res. No. 92-048, § 3, 10-5-92)
Sec. 2-2-104. - Compensation. 
The members of the CTC shall serve without compensation. 
(Res. No. 92-048, § 4, 10-5-92)
Secs. 2-2-105—2-2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRAVEL POLICY 

Sec. 2-2-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorizing party means the individual authorized to approve or disapprove all travel-related requests. Individual is assumed to be in a level of authority such that he/she can accurately evaluate the need for and the cost and benefit of such travel. 
County business shall pertain to either of the following: 
(1)	Business travel means travel for the purpose of conducting official county business. 
(2)	Professional/educational travel means travel to attend meetings, conferences and training programs for professional growth and development as well as the mutual benefit of the county. 
Requesting party means the individual who will be reimbursed for travel costs incurred. 
(Res. No. 06-024, 6-19-06)
Sec. 2-2-132. - Guidelines for authorization of travel. 
(a)	Decisions as to what travel is authorized begin with the budgetary process. Travel needs must be anticipated and submitted in the budget each year for approval by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	The authorizing party's responsibility is to stay within his/her departmental budget's travel allocation as approved by the board of commissioners. 
(c)	Prior to approving a travel request, the authorizing party is responsible for determining that a sufficient, unexpended appropriation remains in the travel budget to reimburse all expected costs of the travel. 
(d)	Personal items, alcoholic beverages, and expenses of family members are not authorized. Expense reports must be prepared to reflect only actual expenses of the employee which are essential to the conduct of county business. 
(e)	Requests for travel, travel advances, and actual expense reimbursement should be authorized by the county administrator upon recommendation of the department manager or elected official. 
(Res. No. 06-024, 6-19-06)
Sec. 2-2-133. - Expense reimbursement policies. 
The following reimbursement guidelines are intended to set forth maximum standards. Employees and officials of the county are expected to spend funds prudently: 
(1)	Lodging. Reimbursement for lodging is authorized when the individual's travel requires overnight accommodation. Overnight accommodations are not considered necessary within the Albany-Dougherty County area. Receipts are required for all lodging costs. 
a.	The county will pay only actual room rental costs supported by the hotel bill for each day that lodging away from home is required for business reasons. 
b.	All employees and officials shall attempt to incur only reasonable hotel expenses when out of town. Employees shall request standard rooms and governmental rates. 
c.	Hotel receipts must be attached to the expense report. Charges other than actual room cost should be itemized on the expense report. 
d.	Employees and officials must obtain a hotel/motel tax exemption request form and a sales tax exemption form from the finance department and present it to the hotel at time of check-in when traveling on official business within the State of Georgia. 
e.	When two (2) employees or officials share a room, one (1) employee or official shall pay and request reimbursement for the full lodging charge. The second employee or official shall not be entitled to any reimbursement since he/she did not incur any expense. 
(2)	Meals. Employees are entitled to reimbursement for meals based on a per diem amount of thirty-eight dollars ($38.00/day) for travel out of the county for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours. For travel increments of less than twenty-four (24) hours, meals will be reimbursed as follows: 
Breakfast .....$8.00 
Lunch .....$10.00 
Dinner .....$20.00 
a.	No reimbursement will be allowed when meals are included as part of a registration fee or are provided free by a common carrier. 
b.	Where scheduled official conference or convention meals are not included as part of the registration fees, and where it can be clearly shown that the cost of such meal(s) exceeds the per diem meal limit, the applicable limit may be increased to the required amount when supported by receipts and approved by the county administrator. 
c.	In conjunction with meals, gratuities are not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of actual expense for each meal. 
d.	Occasionally, due to the location of the travel, the thirty-eight dollars ($38.00) per diem may be insufficient. Reimbursement in excess of thirty-eight dollars ($38.00) per day will be considered but only when supported by receipts and approved by the county administrator. This is intended to reimburse the traveler for higher costs in major cities and not to encourage additional daily expenses. 
(3)	Transportation. The county will reimburse the cost incurred for transportation by use of common carrier, county vehicles, or private vehicles in accordance with the following guidelines: 
a.	Airline: 
1.	It is the obligation of each employee and official to choose the least expensive flight from alternatives. 
2.	The approved class of transportation for all employees is coach/tourist. Most major airlines offer excursion or other discounted fares under certain conditions. Every effort should be made to take advantage of these rates by planning and ordering tickets within the required time frames. 
3.	A copy of the ticket coupon and travel itinerary must be attached to each expense report. 
b.	Rail and bus fare: 
1.	Receipts are required for reimbursement of these transportation costs.
2.	Transportation reservations shall be obtained at the most economical rate available.
c.	County vehicles: 
1.	The use of a County vehicle is authorized for travel to destinations of up to four hundred (400) miles from Dougherty County. Operation of a county vehicle outside the State of Georgia requires the prior approval of the county administrator or department head. 
2.	Only the minimum number of county vehicles should be used when more than one (1) employee travels to the same location. 
3.	Receipts must be obtained for all county vehicle expenses, including gasoline purchases.
4.	County vehicles may be driven only by authorized county employees and officials.
d.	Personal vehicles: 
1.	Use of a personal vehicle is authorized only if one (1) of the following conditions is met: 
(i)	No suitable county vehicle is available;
(ii)	Round trip travel mileage is less than one hundred (100) miles;
(iii)	The requesting party has a physical handicap which required the use of a specially equipped vehicle; 
(iv)	An employees' family member(s) accompany the employee on the trip.
2.	Advance approval must be obtained.
3.	When more than one employee is traveling to the same location, as separate car allowances will not be approved unless separate arrival and departure times are dictated by other county business. 
4.	The reimbursement rate for personal mileage is forty cents ($0.40) per mile.
e.	Rental cars: 
1.	Rental vehicles are not to be used unless the cost is less than that of other available transportation such as taxis, airport limousine, or hotel/airport shuttle services. If a car rental is necessary to reduce costs, the employee or officials should share rental cars. 
2.	Employee or official shall accept the collision damage waiver ("CDW") insurance, but reject any other insurance offered by the rental agency. 
3.	Car rental contracts and/or express checkout receipts are to be submitted as documentation for reimbursement. Receipts for gasoline purchases are required for reimbursement. 
f.	Local ground transportation: 
1.	Local transportation cost incurred while out of town on county related business will be reimbursed. 
2.	Receipts for the above services should be obtained when possible and provided to support reimbursement. 
(4)	Registration fees. Registration fees for conferences or seminars are reimbursable when supported by receipts. Whenever possible, advance registration should be used. 
(Res. No. 06-024, 6-19-06)
Sec. 2-2-134. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)	Parking and shuttle will be reimbursed when supported by receipts.
(b)	Telephone charges for county related business are reimbursable when supported by receipts.
(Res. No. 06-024, 6-19-06)
Sec. 2-2-135. - Nonallowable expenses. 
(a)	It is the county's policy to reimburse the employee or official for all reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in transacting the affairs of business; however, there are specific types of expenses which are considered to be truly personal nature and are nonallowable: 
(1)	Air travel and other trip insurance;
(2)	Barber, manicurist, shoe polisher, masseur;
(3)	Briefcases or other items of personal use;
(4)	Entertainment expenses (such as airline headsets, theater, movies, and sporting events) of the employees and officials; 
(5)	Personal reading materials or services;
(6)	Repairs, maintenance, or insurance on personal vehicles;
(7)	Traffic fines and court costs;
(8)	Unauthorized club or other membership dues or fees;
(9)	Alcoholic beverages, entertainment, gifts, or donations.
(b)	Employees and officials are responsible for lost or stolen personal property while traveling on county business. 
(Res. No. 06-024, 6-19-06)
Sec. 2-2-136. - Procedure for request for authorization to travel. 
(a)	When it becomes necessary to travel, the requesting party shall prepare and submit a travel requisition and accounting form provided by county finance department. The form must be approved by the authorizing party. 
(b)	All county officials authorized to travel on behalf of the county may request a travel advance to cover the projected cost of transportation, lodging, meals, and registration. A travel advance may be requested no more than two (2) weeks prior to the date of travel. 
(1)	No travel advance over five hundred dollars ($500.00) will be issued without the prior approval of the county administrator. 
(2)	Employees are encouraged to use personal credit cards for travel expenses wherever possible, rather than carrying large amounts of cash. 
(c)	Exceptions to the two-week rule may be made where advance registration for a seminar is necessary. In this case, only the registration fee may be requested. 
(Res. No. 06-024, 6-19-06)
Sec. 2-2-137. - Expense reimbursement procedures. 
(a)	Within seven (7) days after returning from an authorized trip, the requesting party shall present to the authorizing party a complete itemization of all trip expenses on a travel requisition and accounting form. The requesting party shall include payment for any travel advance not used. 
(b)	The authorizing party shall review, sign and submit the expense statement to the finance department within two (2) working days. 
(c)	The finance department shall audit all travel requisition and accounting forms to determine mathematical accuracy; cross-reference amounts claimed to appropriate receipts; and review the appropriateness of expenditures in accordance with this policy. 
(d)	In the event the actual expenses exceed any advance taken, the finance department will issue a check to the employee to reimburse the net amount due. 
(Res. No. 06-024, 6-19-06)
Chapter 2-3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses, § 2-10-2.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-3-1. - Granting or revoking licenses at board's discretion. 
Licenses to sell alcoholic beverages may be granted or revoked at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-36)
Sec. 2-3-2. - Sale on election days authorized. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 3-3-20(b)(2)(B), the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages, to-wit: Distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are opened. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-59; Res. No. 85-028, § 1, 12-2-85)
Sec. 2-3-3. - Excise tax. 
There is hereby imposed, levied and assessed a special or excise tax upon the sales of malt beverages, wine and spirituous liquors: 
(1)	Upon the retail sales of malt beverages, wines and spirituous liquors within the County and outside the municipality of Albany, a special or excise tax to be computed upon the following basis: 
a.	Retail dealers in spirituous liquors, eighty cents ($0.80) per wine gallon;
b.	Retail dealers in wine, eighty cents ($0.80) per wine gallon; and
c.	Wholesale dealers in malt beverages; fifty-three and one-third cents ($0.531/3) per gallon; provided that where the sale of malt beverages is in bottles, cans or other containers of sizes less than or more than one (1) gallon, the tax imposed on such container will be that proportion of fifty-three and one-third cents ($0.531/3) which the size of the container bears to one (1) gallon; provided further that the tax on tap or draft beer sold in or from a barrel or other bulk container be at the rate of nineteen and thirty-five hundredths cents ($0.1935) per gallon. 
(2)	The above taxes shall be in addition to all other taxes or licenses now imposed against such retail dealers. 
(3)	The above tax on retail sales shall be paid by the retail dealers to the clerk of the commissioners by the tenth day of each month and all provisions of the law shall be applicable thereto. 
(4)	The wholesale dealers are hereby authorized to collect the taxes herein imposed upon retail dealers in such malt beverages, wine and liquor in accordance with the schedule and regulations hereinabove stated and remit the same to the clerk of the board of commissioners by the tenth day of each month; provided, further, that the provisions of this section shall apply to all of the wholesalers selling to the retail trade within the county and outside the municipality of Albany, regardless of the residence or place of business of such wholesaler. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-51)
Cross reference— Joint agreement for collection, § 1-2-20(10). 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-80, 3-4-131, 3-5-80, 3-6-60, 3-7-61. 
Sec. 2-3-4. - Enforcing underage drinking law coalition established. 
(a)	The establishment of an enforcing underage drinking law coalition between the City of Albany and Dougherty County is hereby approved and authorized. 
(b)	The Albany Police Department will be the lead agency in a county-wide collaborative effort to request funds for addressing the issue of underage drinking in Dougherty County. The City of Albany will be the fiscal agent for any grant funds received. 
(c)	Upon receipt of grant funds, the city police department, the county sheriff's office, and the county police department, along with the district attorney of Dougherty County's office will work together to implement any grant funds received. The Albany Dougherty Drug Unit will coordinate the law enforcement efforts. 
(d)	The objectives of the coalition will be to:
(1)	Provide for educational and public awareness campaigns and organizational activities;
(2)	Develop comprehensive strategic plans based on local needs assessments which include input from law enforcement, youth, vendors, community leaders and parents; 
(3)	Develop uniform local data collection systems to gather information on violations of state and local alcohol laws and regulations; 
(4)	Institute more effective local laws and regulations governing alcohol beverage industry sales, advertising and licensing; 
(5)	Establish youth coalitions or other youth led initiatives to assist in the development and implementation of local strategies; 
(6)	Provide additional resources to law enforcement agencies allowing them to expand the number of undercover compliance checks aimed at local alcohol vendors; 
(7)	Provide responsible alcohol service training and technical assistance to vendors and their employees to assist them in curtailing illegal sales to underage persons; 
(8)	To coordinate all local activities through statewide policy development and public education/awareness campaign. 
(Res. No. 02-033, §§ 1—4, 8-5-02)
Editor's note— Res. No. 02-033, §§ 1—4, adopted Aug. 5, 2002, pertained to the establishment of and enforcing underage drinking law coalition. Such resolution did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion as § 2-3-4 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-3-5. - Training required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distribute or to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail in the unincorporated area of Dougherty County any alcoholic beverage without having the required alcohol beverage license. 
(b)	All existing holders of alcoholic beverage licenses for consumption on premises or the retail sale of alcoholic beverages at the time of the passage of this section [December 6, 2004] shall be required to pay for and complete county certified license holder training within three (3) months immediately following the passage of this section. 
(c)	All new applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses for consumption on premises or the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be required to pay for and complete county certified license holder training before such alcoholic beverage license shall be issued. 
(d)	The license holder certification shall be valid for three (3) years for the license holder. Any change in the ownership for license holder will require the license holder to again pay for and complete county certified license holder training. 
(e)	All holders of alcoholic beverage licenses for consumption on premises and for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages establishments, shall be responsible for training all employees engaged by the holder in the sale of alcoholic beverages. If the license holder allows any employee to sell or serve alcoholic beverages in violation of section 2-3-81, such license holder shall be subject to an administrative penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 1, 12-6-04)
Secs. 2-3-6—2-3-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF DISTILLED SPIRITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-3-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Distilled spirits: Include, but are not limited to, whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila and all alcoholic beverages of a similar nature and a similar alcoholic content. 
Hotel: Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, and having one (1) or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen where meals are regularly served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. 
Licensee: A person holding a license to engage in the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises. 
Lounge: An establishment which shall have all booths, stools and tables unobstructed and open to view. 
Nightclub: An establishment which shall have all booths and tables unobstructed and open to view and providing a band and/or other professional entertainment, a minimum of twenty (20) days per month, every month, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. All such nightclubs shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for their patrons, provided that nightclubs located in hotels having dining room and kitchen facilities may be excluded from maintaining a kitchen in connection with such nightclub. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment and the serving of food and of distilled spirits shall be incidental thereto. 
Premises: The definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building wherein distilled spirits are sold by the drink. 
Private club: A corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the unincorporated areas of the county immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests. 
Restaurant: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one (1) meal per day shall be served at least six (6) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-41)
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-2, 3-3-20, 3-4-1, 3-5-1, 3-5-29, 3-6-1, 3-7-1. 
Sec. 2-3-21. - Employee restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any employees of such nightclubs or of lounges to dance or sit with customers in the premises or for any customer to be permitted to purchase food or drink for such employees in such premises. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-43)
Sec. 2-3-22. - Service only by employees. 
Drinks hereunder shall only be served by the employees of the establishment. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-56)
Sec. 2-3-23. - Employees to be instructed. 
It shall be the duty of the management of premises licensed hereunder to maintain a copy of this article on such premises and to instruct each employee of the terms thereof. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-77)
Sec. 2-3-24. - Premises to be kept sanitary; disturbances, obscenity, etc. 
(a)	All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-42)
Sec. 2-3-25. - Sale to minors or incapacitated persons. 
No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall sell or give away, or permit the sale or gift to, or the procuring for, any such beverages to any minor, to any person who is mentally incompetent or to any person who is physically or mentally incapacitated due to the consumption of alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-44)
State Law reference— Sale, etc., as to minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; sale, etc., to intoxicated person, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 2-3-26. - Minors prohibited on licensed premises unless accompanied by parent or guardian. 
No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of the nightclub or lounge unless such minors are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; provided, however, that such minors shall be permitted in restaurants or private clubs as defined herein without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-45)
Sec. 2-3-27. - Misrepresentation of age by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to falsely misrepresent such minor's age in any manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-46)
Sec. 2-3-28. - Service in back rooms. 
The sale of spirituous liquors for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms and, provided further, that this prohibition shall not apply to private clubs hereunder or to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-47)
Sec. 2-3-29. - Advertising of liquor by drink. 
No licensee hereunder shall advertise in any news media or by any other means the fact that distilled spirits by the drink may be purchased at such establishment; provided that the licensees hereunder shall be permitted to use the words "your favorite beverages served." 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-75)
Sec. 2-3-30. - Size of containers. 
The holders of licenses may purchase from wholesalers licensed by the City of Albany or the county, in sizes of one-fifth of a gallon, seven hundred fifty (750) milliliters, or larger containers unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size contents, and then said license holders may purchase said brand in the nearest size to said containers. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-52)
Sec. 2-3-31. - Legal hours of sale. 
No license holder shall sell, give away or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 8:00 a.m., Monday and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on other days. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-54)
State Law reference— Sales on Sunday, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7, 3-3-20. 
Sec. 2-3-32. - Refilling bottles; misrepresenting brand. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees hereunder to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-55)
Sec. 2-3-33. - Outside sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the building, premises or place of business licensed for such sale except as permitted herein. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-57)
Sec. 2-3-34. - Employment of minors. 
No licensee hereunder shall employ any minor in such licensee's establishment. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-60)
Sec. 2-3-35. - Trains and airplanes exempt. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit the serving of distilled spirits by the drink on dining or club cars of trains or on airplanes in transit on regular schedules. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-53)
State Law reference— Dispensing by minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Secs. 2-3-36—2-3-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 2-3-40. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell distilled spirits for use or consumption on the premises without the license required herein. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-78)
Cross reference— License tax, § 2-10-2. 
Sec. 2-3-41. - Disqualifying factors. 
(a)	Conviction of crime. No original license shall be issued to any person organized for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal or stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or such person's spouse, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or violation of any municipal ordinance except traffic violations; the term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; where the offense was a misdemeanor or a violation of a municipal ordinance, the board of commissioners may, after investigation, waive same as a disqualification. 
(b)	Citizenship. No license hereunder shall be granted to any person unless the person or such person's manager or the person actually in charge of the operation of the business is both a resident of Dougherty County and a citizen of the United States. 
(c)	Issuance to restaurants, etc., only. No license shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, hotel, private club, lounge or nightclub as defined herein. 
(d)	Interest in wholesale liquor business; financial assistance. No person shall hold a license hereunder who also have any direct financial interest in any wholesale liquor business. No financial aid or assistance to any licensee hereunder from any wholesaler or manufacturer of intoxicating liquors shall be permitted; provided, however, that this section shall not be applicable to private clubs as defined herein. 
(Code 1979, §§ 7-2-49, 7-2-68; Res. No. 16-015, § I, 4-4-16)
Sec. 2-3-42. - Application—Filing; form. 
(a)	The board of commissioners shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications hereunder. 
(b)	New applications hereunder shall be dated with the time of filing with the office of the board of commissioners and designated as to type of operation (nightclub, lounge, restaurant, hotel and motel, etc.) followed by a number to designate the order of filing; said numbers to begin anew with each calendar year; preference shall be given, in each category, whenever feasible, to the order in which said applications are filed. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-67)
Sec. 2-3-43. - Same—Notice. 
All applicants for new licenses hereunder shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement once a week for four (4) weeks prior to a regular commission meeting in the daily paper published in the county in which the legal advertisements of the county are carried, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and the date and time the board of commissioners would hear the application. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than six-point capital and lower case. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-62)
Sec. 2-3-44. - Same—Applicants must furnish requested information. 
(a)	All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the board of commissioners and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. 
(b)	Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the board of commissioners, considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce any such person within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-73)
Sec. 2-3-45. - Same—Misinformation cause for denial or revocation. 
Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission from any original, renewal or transfer application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial thereof, and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, there shall be cause for the revocation of same. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-74)
Sec. 2-3-46. - Public safety committee; authority. 
(a)	The public safety committee of the board of commissioners is delegated the authority to conduct the hearings herein and report its findings and recommendations to the board of commissioners. 
(b)	The public safety committee is delegated the authority to suspend any license hereunder; said suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners. Nothing herein limits the public safety committee's power to suspend for a time expiring prior to the first regular meeting of the board of commissioners occurring thereafter. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-65)
Sec. 2-3-47. - Factors considered in issuing licenses. 
In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, the following, among other things, shall be considered, in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)	The applicant's reputation and character, and mental and physical capacity to conduct the business; 
(2)	If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(3)	If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which applicant conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(4)	The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values; 
(5)	The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought; 
(6)	If dancing is to be permitted upon the premises for which the license is sought, and the applicant has previously permitted dancing upon any premises controlled or supervised by such applicant, the manner in which applicant controlled or supervised such dancing to prevent any violation of any law, regulation or ordinance; and 
(7)	Whether applicant is a person whose license issued under the police powers of the county has been previously suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-48)
Sec. 2-3-48. - Granting or denying. 
(a)	Licenses hereunder shall be mere grants or privileges and the board of commissioners shall have the discretion to approve or deny any application for a license to sell distilled spirits by the drink. 
(b)	No license shall be issued until the application for the license has been approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, §§ 7-2-63, 7-2-69)
Sec. 2-3-49. - License fee; amount, due date, proration; expiration of permit. 
(a)	An annual license fee as provided in section 2-10-2 shall be charged for the initial license is sued to any licensee hereunder and for each renewal. 
(b)	A license granted hereunder shall include the combined purposes of selling distilled spirits, wines, champagnes and malt beverages by the drink. 
(c)	All license fees hereunder shall be paid in advance on or before January first of each year and any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration, except that the fee for a new license granted after June thirtieth in any calendar year shall be fifty (50) percent of the above-stated annual fees for the remainder of that calendar year. 
(d)	All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than two (2) weeks from the date of the approval of the application by the board of commissioners and if not so obtained, the permit shall be void. 
(Code 1979, §§ 7-2-50, 7-2-61)
State Law reference— Maximum fee, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 2-3-50. - Licenses issued for calendar year; no refunds. 
No license shall be issued for less than a calendar year period, or the remainder thereof, and in case of the revocation or surrender or such license before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-58)
Sec. 2-3-51. - License forfeited for nonuse. 
Any holder of license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the products as authorized in the license, but who shall, for a period of nine (9) consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in the license, shall upon completion of the nine-month period automatically forfeit the license, which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-72)
Sec. 2-3-52. - License renewal. 
All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-66)
Sec. 2-3-53. - Licenses nontransferable. 
(a)	Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided herein. In case of the death of any person holding such a license, or any interest therein, the same may, in the discretion of the board of commissioners, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(b)	Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one (1) or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(c)	Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee. The new location shall be considered as a new license hereunder. 
(d)	However, a licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee personally received directly none of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-71)
Sec. 2-3-54. - License authorizes sale for consumption on premises only; sale of beer and wine. 
Licensees hereunder shall not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by the bottle or package. Such persons holding such licenses shall have the right to sell wines, champagnes or malt beverages to the public by the bottle or can for consumption on the premises without the issuance of a separate retail license therefor. The licensees hereunder shall have the right to serve malt beverages for consumption on the premises during the same hours as are permitted hereunder for the serving of distilled spirits, wines or champagnes by the drink. Nothing herein is intended to repeal the hours of serving of malt beverages in any other type establishment not covered under licenses permitted by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 7-2-70)
Sec. 2-3-55. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the county hereunder shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon the prior three (3) day written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state or federal law. 
(Code 1979, §§ 7-2-64, 7-2-76)
State Law reference— Due process guidelines, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Secs. 2-3-56—2-3-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HANDLERS IDENTIFICATION CARD 

Sec. 2-3-81. - Required generally. 
(a)	All persons who are actively engaged in the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages in any establishment holding a Dougherty County alcoholic beverages license for consumption or retail sale are required to obtain and to carry on their person at all times while on the job an alcoholic beverage handlers identification card from county. Persons who make application for an alcoholic beverage license identification card in which they certify that they have been trained in, and made aware of, the penalties for the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors and for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays are provided a grace period extending: (1) thirty (30) days from the date of application; or (2) to the date their application is denied, whichever is less. 
(b)	One-day charitable license holders are exempt from the requirements of this Code section.
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-82. - Application. 
(a)	Upon application and prior to issuance of an alcohol beverage handler's card, all applicants will be required to certify that they have been trained in, and made aware of, the penalties for the sale of alcohol beverages to minors and for the sale of alcohol beverages on Sundays. 
(b)	Applicants shall make application in writing to the issuing agent, the Dougherty County Chief of Police and/or his designee, on application forms to be provided and approved by the issuing agent. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-83. - Denial of application; appeal. 
(a)	If any applicant is found to have a record of violations of any federal or state law or regulation respecting the manufacture, possession or sale of any alcoholic beverage or has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or who shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violations, the issuing agent shall deny the application and shall issue a letter to the employee and to the employer stating that the employee is ineligible for employment. 
(b)	Within ten (10) days of such action, the applicant may appeal therefrom to the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, which board may reverse the action of the issuing agent if it determines that because of the nature and age of the offenses, the applicant's record and conduct since the offenses were committed and other circumstances, it is not contrary to the public interest to issue the identification card. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-84. - Issuance fee. 
If none of the violations in section 2-3-83 are found, the issuing agent shall furnish the applicant an identification card with pertinent information thereon relating to the height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth, Social Security number, name of establishment employing the card holder and containing a photograph of the holder of such identification card. A fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged to cover the expense of processing the application and issuing the identification card. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-85. - Obtaining under false pretenses prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not to obtain an alcoholic beverage handlers identification card or to obtain same upon false information or by the concealment of information. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-86. - Replacement; possession. 
Identification cards may be replaced when lost or upon mutilation or when photograph or writing thereon is not clearly legible. This card must be in the possession of the person affected when engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-87. - Expiration; renewal. 
Alcoholic beverage handlers identification cards shall expire four (4) years from the date thereof, and the holder shall apply for renewal in the same manner as original applications are made. The fee for renewal shall be five dollars ($5.00) payable at the time of the filing of the application for renewal. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-88. - Employers responsibility. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every employer of employees covered under this article to see that all employees are carrying on their persons an alcoholic beverage handlers identification card at all times while on the job. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-89. - Change of employment. 
Whenever an identification card holder becomes employed by an establishment other than the one named in the card, the card holder shall notify the issuing agent of the change within fifteen (15) days after such change. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-90. - Suspension; revocation. 
Any person who, while employed on premises operating under an alcoholic beverage license, shall violate any federal, state or local statute, law or regulation by selling alcoholic beverages to a person not of lawful age to purchase the same, or by selling alcoholic beverages on Sunday, shall have his identification card suspended by the issuing agent for a period of two (2) weeks, and until a reinstatement fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is paid. If another offense of either kind is committed by such person within twenty-four (24) months after payment of the reinstatement fee and reinstatement of the identification card, the identification card shall be revoked by the issuing agent. Any person whose alcoholic beverage handlers identification card is revoked or suspended for a period of time in excess of two (2) weeks may petition the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County to review the decision, and the board may, in its discretion, either review or refuse to review the same. If the board elects to review the decision, it may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the issuing agent. No identification card shall be suspended or revoked for selling to a person not of lawful age to purchase where the sale was induced by the furnishing of false identification by the purchaser. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Sec. 2-3-91. - Upon sale to minors; on Sundays. 
(a)	In the case of alcohol beverage violations involving selling to persons not of lawful age to purchase or selling on Sundays, all alcoholic beverage license holders who hold a valid and current certificate of certified license holder training from the county will be referred to the Georgia Department of Revenue, Alcohol and Tobacco Division (GDRATD) for prosecution. To qualify for renewal, a licensee must provide competent evidence of adjudication or other disposition of any violation previously referred to the GDRATD for prosecution. 
(b)	Regardless of the kind of alcoholic beverage license held, and regardless of whether or not the owner was present on the premises at the time the violations occurred, whenever there occur four (4) violations of either or both kinds described in this section at the same location within a twenty-four-month period, revocation of the alcoholic beverage license shall be mandatory. For purposes of this section, each location of a business having more than one (1) location shall be considered independently of the other locations, and only that location at which the offense occurred shall be affected or held accountable. 
(Res. No. 04-042, § 2, 12-6-04)
Chapter 2-3.5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-3.5-1—2-3.5-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 2-3.5-1 pertained to nuisance animals as derived from Res. No. 96-044, adopted Nov. 4, 1996. Such section was deleted as being superseded by the public nuisance animal provisions set forth in Art. II of this chapter. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Res. No. 03-029, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2003, pertained to animal control regulations. Such resolution did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as §§ 2-3.5-21—2-3.5-3 was at the discretion of the editor. Sec. 2 of such resolution provided for the immediate enforcement of all sections of the animal control regulations pertaining to vicious and dangerous animals, and for enforcement of the balance of the animal control regulations to begin with the completion of the county's animal shelter.

Sec. 2-3.5-21. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the Animal Control Regulations of Dougherty County. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 1, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-22. - Definitions. 
When used in these regulations, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, except human beings. 
Animal control officer means an employee or agent of Dougherty County, Georgia, designated by its county administrator to administer and enforce the requirements contained within these regulations. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by either Dougherty County, or The Albany Humane Society, Inc., for the temporary care, confinement and detention of animals and for the humane killing and other disposition of animals. The term shall also include any private facility authorized by the county administrator to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal. 
At large means that an animal is off the property of its owner and not under restraint. Exceptions are: Domestic cats; a dog while actually working livestock, locating or retrieving wild game in season for a licensed hunter, assisting law enforcement officers or while actually being trained for any of these specifically enumerated pursuits; and an animal that is within the confines of the real property that the owner had permission to use or is within a motor vehicle (excluding an unleashed animal in an open bed of a truck). 
Cat means any animal of the feline species. 
County means the unincorporated area of Dougherty County, Georgia. 
Guard or attack dog means a dog trained to attack on command or to protect persons or property, and who will cease to attack upon command. 
Impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer, or any authorized representative thereof. 
Leash or lead means a thong, cord, rope, chain or similar tether which holds an animal in restraint and which is not more than six (6) feet in length. A leash or lead longer than six (6) feet in length or a retractable lead of variable length may be used when exercising or training an animal provided that the use of the leash or lead does not allow the animal to interfere with public access to or use of public areas. 
Owner means any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights to, any animal covered by these regulations. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) or more consecutive days. 
Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Any animal that is at large;
(2)	Any animal in any section of publicly owned property unless the animal is controlled by a leash or lead; 
(3)	Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on any property other than that of its owner; 
(4)	Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(5)	Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(6)	Any animal in heat that is not humanely confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals; 
(7)	Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons on a public right-of-way; 
(8)	Any animal that chases motor vehicles, bicycles or individuals in a public right-of-way;
(9)	Any animal that attacks domestic animals;
(10)	Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(11)	Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue either of the number of animals maintained at a single location or the inadequacy of the facilities; and 
(12)	Any animal not in compliance with either Georgia state law or rules and regulations promulgated by the Dougherty County Board of Health relative to rabies control. 
Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness necessary to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
Under restraint means that an animal is either secured by a leash or lead and under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal or beside a competent person and is obedient to that person's commands. 
Vicious or dangerous animal means any animal that attacks, bites, or physically injures human beings, domestic animals, or livestock without adequate provocation, or which, because of temperament or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or physically injure human beings, domestic animals, or livestock. Any animal that without provocation has bitten or attacked a human being or other animal shall be prima facie presumed vicious or dangerous. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 2, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-23. - Nuisances. 
No owner shall keep any animal on any property located within the county when keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance animal. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 3, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-24. - Caring for animals. 
(a)	No owner shall engage in any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death of an animal is caused or permitted, including failure to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, veterinary care or nutritious food in siphoned quantity. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, no owner or any other person shall fail to employ the most humane methods reasonably available. 
(b)	No owner of any animal shall willfully abandon such animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of another person. 
(c)	No owner of any animal shall fail to comply with either Georgia state law or rules and regulations promulgated by the Dougherty County Board of Health relative to rabies control. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 4, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-25. - Sanitation. 
(a)	No owner of any animal shall cause or allow such animal to soil, defile or defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area, or upon private property other than that of the owner, unless such owner immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such animal by the following methods: 
(1)	Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and 
(2)	Removal of such bag or container to the property of the animal owner and disposition thereafter in a manner as otherwise may be permitted by law. 
(b)	No owner of any animal shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the property of the owner or on the property of others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner's property or to abutting property of others. 
(c)	No owner of any animal shall cause unsanitary dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 5, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-26. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)	No owner or any other person shall willfully or maliciously strike, beat, abuse, or intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any act that causes either injury or death to such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or dangerous animals. 
(b)	No owner or any other person shall administer poison to any animal or knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent to injure any animal. The provisions of this section are not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control insects and wild rodents. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 6, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-27. - Restraint and confinement, generally. 
(a)	No owner of any animal shall allow such animal to be at large.
(b)	No owner of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance animal. 
(c)	Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet in height and shall be topped with an anti-climbing device constructed of angle metal braces with at least three (3) strands of equally separated barbed wire stretched between them. All anti-climbing devices shall extend inward at an angle of not less than forty-five (45) degrees nor more than ninety (90) degrees when measured from the perpendicular. The areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked, and all fences properly maintained and escape proof. The premises on which a guard or attack dog is located must be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is such a dog on the property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies. 
(d)	Every animal in heat shall be confined by its owner in a building or other enclosure in such a manner that the animal cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding purposes as allowed by either Georgia state law or rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(e)	Every vicious or dangerous animal shall be confined by its owner or authorized agent of its owner within a building or secure enclosure and, whenever off the premises of its owner, shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not more than three (3) feet in length, or caged. Every person harboring a vicious or dangerous animal is charged with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in such a way that children do not have access to such animal. The premises on which the vicious or dangerous animal is located must be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a vicious or dangerous animal on the property. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 7, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-28. - Return of animal to owner. 
If the name of the owner of an animal found at large is known or can be obtained with reasonable dispatch, the animal control officer shall return the animal to the residential address of the owner. If there is no one present, the animal control officer shall leave written notice of whom the owner must contact to reclaim the animal. The officer shall then remove the animal to an animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 8, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-29. - Impoundment. 
In addition to any other remedies provided in these regulations, an animal control officer or a police officer may impound and confine to an animal shelter any of the following animals: 
(1)	Any animal at large;
(2)	Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the public;
(3)	Any vicious or dangerous animal;
(4)	Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order of the chief health officer of the county; 
(5)	Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of care;
(6)	Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected;
(7)	Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
(8)	Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous, or dangerous where an animal control officer or the county administrator determines that there is a threat to public health and safety; 
(9)	Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed; or 
(10)	Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or evicted from his regular place of residence. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 9, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-30. - Notice to owner and redemption. 
(a)	Upon impoundment of an animal, the animal control officer shall immediately attempt to notify the owner either by telephone or certified mail. If the owner is unknown, the animal control officer shall post written notice at the animal shelter and in any other conspicuous place in the county, as determined by the county administrator, describing the animal and the time and place of taking. Any notice to the owner shall also include the location of the animal shelter where the animal is confined, hours during which the animal can be reclaimed, and fees to be charged to the owner. The owner shall also be advised that the failure to claim the animal within a specified period of time shall result in the disposition of the animal. 
(b)	Animal control officers or other designees of the county administrator shall be enforcement officials for these regulations. These officials, along with police officers, shall have the authority to act on behalf of the county in investigating complaints, impounding and destroying animals, issuing citations, and taking other lawful actions as required to enforce the provisions of these regulations. It shall be a violation of these regulations to interfere with any animal control officer or other enforcement official in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 10, 12-15-2003)
Sec. 2-3.5-31. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	It shall be a violation of these regulations to:
(1)	Fail to comply with any provision; or
(2)	Fail to comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer or police officer unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed. 
(b)	Any person violating any provision of these regulations, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If a violation continues, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)	In addition to any other remedy available, these regulations may be enforced in the Magistrate Court of Dougherty County, Georgia as provided in O.C.G.A. section 15-10-60 through section 15-10-66, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 03-029, § 11, 12-15-2003)
Chapter 2-4 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building permit compliance, § 1-7-11; state law and minimum fire safety standards take precedence over this chapter, § 2-7-1; mobile home park construction, § 2-9-22 et seq.; floodplain management, § 2-18-3; signs, § 2-13-20 et seq.; historic area commission, § 2-12-8 et seq.
State Law reference— Applicability of state energy code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-22.

Sec. 2-4-1. - Incorporation of resolutions by reference. 
The following resolutions of the board of commissioners, regulating the matter herein specified, constituting legislation enacted jointly with the City of Albany, and as amended, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Code by reference, as fully as if set out at length herein: 
(1)	Building: All matters pertaining to building, construction, alterations, repairs, moving, removal, demolition, and all materials and appliances used in connection with the same within the unincorporated area of the county. (Res. No. 82-035, § 1.1, 12-6-82) 
(2)	Plumbing: All matters pertaining to plumbing work within the unincorporated area of the county. (Res. No. 82-037, § 1.1, 12-6-82) 
(3)	Gas: All matters pertaining to gas work within the unincorporated area of the county. (Res. No. 82-038, § 1.1, 12-6-82) 
(4)	Housing: All matters pertaining to the basic minimum housing standards within the unincorporated area of the county. (Res. No. 82-039, § 1, 12-6-82) 
(5)	Air conditioning, heating and ventilation: All matters pertaining to air conditioning, heating and ventilation within the unincorporated area of the county. (Res. No. 85-014, § 1.2, 7-23-85) 
(6)	Electrical: All matters pertaining to electrical installations, including alterations, repairs, and equipment, within or connected to the electrical system serving the county, within the unincorporated area of the county. (Res. No. 85-015, § 1.2, 7-23-85) 
Chapter 2-5 - CIVIL PREPAREDNESS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Res. No. 92-012, adopted March 10, 1992, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been codified as superseding former Ch. 2-5, §§ 2-5-1—2-5-7, relative to emergency management. Former Ch. 12 derived from Code 1979, § 1-5-6 and Res. No. 80-155, §§ 2—6, adopted Aug. 18, 1980.
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection Ch. 2-7.

Sec. 2-5-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "emergency management" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of man-made or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Res. No. 92-012, § 1, 3-10-92)
Cross reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A, § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 2-5-2. - Emergency management agency, emergency management director; duties. 
It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the City of Albany, Georgia, and Dougherty County, Georgia, that the City of Albany, Georgia, be a part of the Dougherty County Emergency Management Agency. The Chairman, Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, with concurrence of the Mayor of the City of Albany, Georgia, shall nominate for appointment, by the Governor, the Chief of the Albany Fire and Emergency Services Department as emergency management director for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director, in conjunction with the emergency management coordinator, are charged with the following duties: 
(1)	To represent the governing officials of the city and county on matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)	To assist city and county officials in organizing city and county departments for emergency operations; 
(3)	To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the Dougherty County Plan for emergency functions set forth in section 2-5-1 of this chapter. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Natural Disaster Operations Plan and Nuclear Emergency Operations Plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Dougherty County, Georgia and the City of Albany, Georgia, therein for approval, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval; 
(4)	To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Dougherty County Emergency Management Program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency; 
(5)	To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc.; 
(6)	To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Dougherty County Emergency Operating Center; and 
(7)	To coordinate the activities of the Dougherty County Emergency Operating Center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of Dougherty County governing officials. 
(Res. No. 92-012, § 2, 3-10-92)
Sec. 2-5-3. - Functional organization. 
The Dougherty County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described in section 2-5-1 above are assigned as follows: 

 
Heads of city departments listed above are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for their emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management coordinator for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Res. No. 92-012, § 3, 3-10-92)
Sec. 2-5-4. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of a man-made or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the City of Albany, Georgia, the Mayor of the City of Albany, Georgia, separately, or jointly with the Chairman, Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, or in their absences the county administrator and the city manager, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)	To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)	To seize, or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)	To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)	To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Res. No. 92-012, § 4, 3-10-92)
Sec. 2-5-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the City of Albany, Georgia, performing emergency functions pursuant to this resolution and ordinance, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city and county officers and employees. 
(Res. No. 92-012, § 5, 3-10-92)
Sec. 2-5-6. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this resolution or ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Res. No. 92-012, § 6, 3-10-92)
Chapter 2-6 - FINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Bids, reports, purchasing agent, § 1-3-3; expenditures outside of county, §§ 2-2-22, 2-6-3; occupational licenses, § 2-10-2 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 2-16.

Sec. 2-6-1. - Local government investment pool. 
(a)	Any one (1) of the following officers shall be authorized with discretion to make deposits to or withdrawals from the local government investment pool on behalf of this political subdivision in accordance with the applicable laws, policies and procedures: County administrator and finance director. 
(b)	All local government investment pool transactions shall be wired to/from the following demand account of this political subdivision: First State Bank & Trust Company, Albany office, Dougherty County General Fund #25011194-06, Bank of the South, Atlanta. 
(c)	Notification of change in the above stated authorizations shall be made by cancellation or replacement by new resolution to the Fiscal Division, Department of Administrative Services, P. O. Box 38198, Capitol Hill Station, Atlanta, Georgia 30384. Until notification of such change is received by the fiscal division, this section shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Res. No. 85-006-B, §§ 1—3, 3-4-85)
State Law reference— Local government investment pool, O.C.G.A. § 36-83-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-6-2. - Deferred compensation plan for county employees. 
(a)	The board of commissioners hereby adopts a restatement of the ACCG 457 Deferred Compensation Plan (Government Employee Benefits Corporation of Georgia) substantially in the form attached to Resolution 02-052 and by this reference fully incorporated herein. The purpose of said restatement is to adopt and comply with the Economic and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act, and all other lax laws and changes that have been enacted since the plan was established. 
(b)	The chairman and county administrator of the board of commissioners of the county are hereby authorized to do all things necessary to carry out and accomplish the foregoing resolution and restatement of the ACCG 457 Deferred Compensation Plan, including the execution of any and all documents. 
(Res. No. 82-014, §§ 1—3, 6-21-82; Res. No. 02-052, §§ I, II, 12-16-2002)
Editor's note— Res. No. 02-052, §§ I, II, adopted Dec. 16, 2002, adopted a restatement of the ACCG 457 deferred compensation plan. Such resolution did not specifically amend the Code; however, those provisions have been codified as superseding § 2-6-2. Res. No. 03-002, adopted Jan. 22, 2003, adopted Amendment No. 1 to the deferred compensation program. The compensation plan referenced in § 2-6-2 and the Amendment No. 1 are not set out at length herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the county administrator. 
Sec. 2-6-3. - Reimbursable expenses. 
The following standards and regulations are the established policy of this commission relative to reimbursable expenses incurred in travel and temporary duty away from the county: 
(1)	All such travel shall be performed in the interest of and for the benefit of the county.
(2)	Department heads shall be responsible for determining the need for, and shall approve, travel requisitions for their respective employees. 
(3)	The county administrator shall receive all travel requisitions from department heads and shall be responsible for providing advance funds when applicable and for final audit upon completion of the travel. 
(4)	Reimbursable travel expenses shall be paid as follows:
a.	For travel by private conveyance, using standard state road maps for computing distances: Twenty-five cents ($0.25) per mile. 
b.	For travel by common carrier: bus, rail or air: Actual cost of travel ticket. Note: Air travel will normally be at tourist rate. 
c.	For travel by county vehicle. Only out-of-pocket expense for vehicle operating cost.
d.	Cost for lodging. Actual cost for single room as evidenced by paid receipt from the hotel or motel. 
e.	Meals in conjunction with travel and lodging.
f.	Gratuities in conjunction with lodging or meals, not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of the actual cost of each meal. 
g.	Registration fees for meetings or seminars related to county business.
h.	Parking fees in conjunction with meeting or seminar.
i.	Expense for personal habit or entertainment will not be reimbursed.
j.	Mode of travel will be most economical and expeditious available to meet the requirements of the county. 
k.	When two (2) or more county employees travel together in private conveyance only, the owner shall receive mileage expenses. 
l.	Request for travel shall be submitted on forms furnished by the county.
m.	The first duty day after completion of travel, the person performing the travel will complete the travel requisition form and submit it to the county administrator for final processing. 
(Res. No. 85-003, § 1, 1-21-85; Res. No. 90-083, § 1, 12-3-90)
Cross reference— Reimbursable expenses of members of board of commissioners, §§ 2-2-22, 2-2-23. 
Sec. 2-6-4. - Assignment and use of county vehicles. 
The following standards and regulations shall be the established policy of this commission relative to the assignment and use of county vehicles: 
(1)	County vehicles shall be assigned to departments based on justified needs as submitted in the annual budgetary process. As services or vehicular usage declines, departmental vehicle assignment may be adjusted according to need. 
(2)	Police, emergency medical services and public works heavy equipment shall be assigned based on job need and hours of operation. Purchase of heavy equipment and seasonal use vehicles must be justified as cost-effective to renting or leasing for usable periods. 
(3)	General purpose vehicles such as automobiles and pickup trucks shall be justified based on the following criteria: 
a.	County administrator.
b.	Department heads responsible for supervising outside work on a continuing basis.
c.	Supervisors and foremen who daily supervise outside forces and subject to emergency call-out after normal working hours. 
d.	Employees whose daily job duty requires transportation on a continuing basis during duty hours. 
e.	Official carpools designed to coordinate full utilization of county vehicles. Carpools may be operated among more than one (1) department. 
(4)	The following personnel are authorized to drive assigned vehicles to their place of residence: 
a.	County administrator.
b.	Department heads responsible for supervising outside work forces on a continuing basis, as approved by the county administrator. 
c.	Other personnel as approved by the county administrator.
(5)	Only employees with a valid Georgia Driver's License of applicable class are permitted to drive county vehicles. Use of county transportation requires strict observance to all traffic laws and highway courtesy. 
(6)	Misuse of county vehicles or violation of this policy is cause for disciplinary action, which may include written reprimand, suspension or dismissal. 
(7)	County vehicles are prohibited from leaving the confines of the county unless on official business. No vehicle assignment shall be made to drive a county vehicle to a place of residence for nights or weekends if said place of residence is or moves outside of the county. County vehicles and equipment shall not be used for personal business or pleasure at any time. County vehicles or equipment shall not be loaned to others or driven by persons not in the employ of county. Exception is that certain special purpose equipment may be loaned to another governmental unit for the benefit of the county with the approval of the county administrator. 
(8)	Passengers in county vehicles shall be limited to county employees or persons who have official business with the county. Unauthorized personnel are forbidden from using or accompanying personnel at any time. 
(9)	Maintenance, care and security of assigned vehicles will be the responsibility of the respective department heads. Said department heads will ensure that accurate records, maintenance reports and trip tickets, if required, are maintained for each vehicle. Preventive maintenance on a timely basis will be performed on all assigned vehicles. Vehicular accidents shall be reported promptly to the county administrator for insurance processing. The county administrator may appoint an accident review board to investigate and determine the cause of any accidents and recommend action to prevent recurrence. 
(10)	The use of personal vehicles for county business either in county or out of county will be reimbursed at the rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per mile. Mileage of a personal nature will not be reimbursed. Prior approval by the department head and county administrator is required for use of personal vehicles for county business. 
(Code 1979, § 1-4-41; Res. No. 79-168, § 1, 12-3-79)
Sec. 2-6-5. - Investments by county tax director. 
The county tax director is authorized to make all legal investments of money under such director's custody and control. 
(Res. No. 82-008, § 1, 3-1-82)
Sec. 2-6-6. - Defined benefit and retirement plan and trust. 
(a)	The board of commissioners hereby adopts an amendment and restatement of the Dougherty County Defined Benefit Retirement Plan and Trust (the "Plan") substantially in the form of the plan document attached to Resolution 02-027 and by this reference fully incorporated herein. The purpose of said amendment and restatement is to adopt and comply with the tax qualification requirements enacted by the General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade, Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996, the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1998, the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 and the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000, and all other tax laws and changes that have been enacted since the plan was last amended, as such laws apply to tax-qualified government retirement plans. 
(b)	The chairman and county administrator of the board of commissioners are hereby authorized to do all things necessary to carry out and accomplish the foregoing resolution and amendments to the plan, including the execution of any document or amendment which may be necessary or appropriate to maintain the qualification of the aforesaid plan under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(Res. No. 02-027, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-2002)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 03-012, adopted June 2, 2003, adopted Amendment No. 1 to the county defined benefit retirement plan and trust. The plan referenced in § 2-6-6 and the Amendment No. 1 are not set out at length herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the county administrator. 
Chapter 2-7 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention districts, § 1-7-14 et seq.; authority, § 1-7-17; building codes, § 2-4-1; civil preparedness, Ch. 2-5; special districts for fire protection, § 2-16-10.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-7-1. - State minimum fire safety standards—Adopted by reference; effect on technical codes. 
(a)	The state minimum fire safety standards, as adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated by the state fire safety commissioner pursuant to Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as said rules and regulations now exist, and as they shall be lawfully amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by this county, and the City of Albany, hereinafter referred to as "city." Future amendments to and changes in such standards as reflected in future amendments to or changes in said rules and regulations are hereby adopted and shall become effective in the county and the city upon promulgation without the necessity of further action on the part of the county or the city. 
(b)	The joint building code, gas code, plumbing code, heating, ventilation and air conditioning code, housing code, electrical code and the county sign regulations shall remain in full force and effect, but wherever state law or the state minimum fire safety standards are inconsistent with [these codes or regulations,] or impose more stringent requirements, the provisions of state law or the state minimum fire safety standards shall control. 
(Res. No. 86-014, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-86)
Sec. 2-7-2. - Same—Buildings presenting special hazards. 
No plans or specifications for the construction of any building or structure which is subject to the provisions of section 25-2-13 of the official Code of Georgia Annotated shall be utilized, and no building permit shall be issued for the construction of any such building or structure until after such plans and specifications shall have been submitted to the chief of the city fire department and approved by such chief as being in compliance with the state minimum fire safety standards herein adopted. No temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall issue with respect to said buildings or structures without the certification of the chief of the city fire department that construction has been in accordance with the state minimum fire safety standards. 
(Res. No. 86-014, § 3, 4-28-86)
Sec. 2-7-3. - Inspection and enforcement responsibility—Chief of city fire department; designee of chief. 
(a)	For the purpose of making inspections and carrying out and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, including the state minimum fire safety standards, the chief of the city fire department shall have all of the powers and authority granted to the chief building official and such official's designees under the joint county and city codes referred to in section 2-7-1(b). Specifically, and without in any way limiting the generality of the foregoing provision, the chief of the city fire department shall have all of the powers granted to the building official of the county and the city by sections 103.2, 103.4 and 103.5 of the joint building code, as the same shall be amended from time to time. The chief of the city fire department shall have authority to delegate any or all of the powers and authority herein granted to one (1) or more designees. 
(b)	Any designee of the chief of the city fire department who has been duly certified by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Council in the performance of such designee's duties under this chapter, shall have all of the powers of a peace officer as defined by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act. 
(Res. No. 86-014, §§ 4, 6, 4-28-86)
State Law reference— For such Act see O.C.G.A. §§ 35-8-1—35-8-20. 
Sec. 2-7-4. - Same—Coordination of activities. 
The inspection and enforcement activities of the fire department and the inspection department shall be coordinated so as to conserve time and expense and result in a minimum of inconvenience to property owners, lessees, tenants, and builders, and said departments and the personnel thereof shall cooperate with each other to the fullest extent in carrying out their respective functions and duties. 
(Res. No. 86-014, § 5, 4-28-86)
Sec. 2-7-5. - Same—Abatement of hazardous conditions. 
(a)	Any person who fails or refuses upon demand of the fire chief or the chief's designee to correct any hazardous condition or any condition which is in violation of the state minimum fire safety standards, or is otherwise unlawful, or denies the fire chief or the chief's designee the right of entry and inspection of property or in any way interferes therewith, or fails to obey any lawful order of the fire chief or the chief's designee, or otherwise violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-4 of the Code of the city or section 2-1-8 of this Cede. Each day any condition, failure, or refusal, or violation described in this section continues shall be a separate offense punishable as aforesaid. 
(b)	Any condition which constitutes a fire hazard or is in violation of the state minimum fire safety standards shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abatable under Chapter 13 of the Code of the city or otherwise under authority of law. 
(Res. No. 86-014, §§ 7, 8, 4-28-86)
State Law reference— Remedies in case of violation of codes, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-10; abatement of nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-7-6. - Joint fire prevention code adopted; authority of fire chiefs to inspect buildings and certain premises. 
(a)	Applicability. There is hereby adopted by the board of commissioners of the City of Albany and Dougherty County a fire prevention code that allows the fire chief or his designee of the City of Albany and Dougherty County the authority to inspect all buildings and premises except one- and two-family dwellings. However, this code shall also apply to one- and two-family dwellings in which the building or premises contains a business required to be licensed by a federal, state or local government agency. The fire chief or his designee is granted the right of entry to inspect for fire hazards and to make recommendations as to the abatement of such fire hazards in accordance with state minimum fire safety standards. 
(b)	Buildings used for personal care homes, etc. The fire chief or his designee is granted the right of entry to any and all buildings of whatever size or nature which are being used for personal care homes and housing individuals not related by blood or marriage. The fire chief or his designee is granted the right of entry to inspect for fire hazards, to make recommendations as to the abatement of such fire hazards, and to enforce the abatement of such fire hazards in accordance with state minimum fire safety standards. 
(c)	Fire hydrants. All fire hydrants located within the City of Albany and Dougherty County must be clearly visible, accessible, and painted yellow with silver bonnets. No fire hydrants may be used for any purpose other than firefighting without the express permission of the water, gas and light commission. 
(d)	Access roads and fire lanes. All access roads and fire lanes shall be capable of supporting the loads of fire apparatus and shall have a minimum of thirteen (13) feet, six inches of vertical clearance. 
(e)	Private fire water systems, etc. All private fire water systems, fire hydrants, valves and other associated equipment for fire protection installed within Dougherty County and the City of Albany shall be compatible with the existing water systems, their fixtures, and approved by the water, gas and light commission prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 88-026, § 5, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 92-052, § 1, 11-16-92)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 88-026, adopted May 16, 1988, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—5 as § 2-7-6 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-7-7. - Fire department user fees within unincorporated areas of county. 
The Albany Fire Department in providing and affording fire protection in the unincorporated areas of Dougherty County, Georgia, is hereby authorized to impose the following user fees within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(a)	A flat fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the review of sprinkler/stand pipe plans. 
(b)	A flat fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each tank removal/installation at any particular site. 
(c)	A flat fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for permitting an inspection for commercial burning. The permit will be valid for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of issuance for each location. 
(d)	A flat fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second re-inspection of any fire code violations, and if necessary, a flat fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional re-inspection until all violations are cleared. 
(Res. No. 99-010, § 1, 3-1-99)
Secs. 2-7-8—2-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE BOARD OF APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Inclusion of §§ 1—5 of Res. No. 88-005, adopted Jan 19, 1988, as §§ 2-7-21—2-7-25, comprising a new Art. II to Ch. 2-7, was at the editor's discretion, the resolution being nonamendatory of the Code.
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2-2; appointment to boards, § 2-2-1.

Sec. 2-7-21. - Established. 
There is hereby established a fire code board of appeals for Dougherty County and the City of Albany, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "board of appeals." 
(Res. No. 88-005, § 1, 1-19-88)
Sec. 2-7-22. - Organization. 
(a)	Membership; appointment. The fire code board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members, to be appointed jointly by the board of county commissioners and the board of city commissioners from nominations received from the county administrator and city manager. Anyone eligible to hold office in Dougherty County and the City of Albany shall be eligible for appointment to the board of appeals. 
(b)	Initial appointments. Initially, the board of county commissioners and the board of city commissioners shall appoint one (1) citizen member each, to serve for a term of three (3) years, and three (3) members jointly, to serve for a term of two (2) years. All citizen members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. 
(c)	Removal of members; vacancies. The board of county commissioners and the board of city commissioners, on the recommendation of the board of appeals, shall have the right to remove any member of the board of appeals who is absent for three (3) consecutive meetings unexcused by the board of appeals or who is otherwise delinquent in the performance of his or her duties on the board of appeals. Vacancies occurring prior to termination of the term of a member shall be filled by the board of county commissioners and the board of city commissioners jointly for the remainder of the term. 
(d)	Officers. The board of appeals shall elect a chairperson and such other officers as the board of appeals shall determine. Officers shall be elected for a term of one (1) year and until their successors have been elected. 
(e)	Quorum. Three (3) voting members of the board of appeals shall constitute a quorum, and the vote of a majority of those present at a meeting at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient to take action. 
(f)	Rules of procedure. The board is authorized to adopt such rules of procedure as it shall deem appropriate. 
(g)	Meetings. The board of appeals shall meet whenever directed by the appointing authority to interpret the provisions of the fire code and to consider and rule on any properly filed appeal from a decision of the fire marshal, giving at least five (5) days notice of hearing, but, in no case, shall it fail to meet on an appeal within thirty (30) days of the filing of notice of appeal. All of the meetings of the board of appeals shall be open to the public. 
(h)	Compensation. Members of the board of appeals shall not be entitled to compensation for service on the board of appeals except for actual expenses necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(Res. No. 88-005, § 2, 1-19-88)
Sec. 2-7-23. - Powers. 
The board of appeals shall provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of the fire code and rule on appeals from decisions of the fire marshal. 
(Res. No. 88-005, § 3, 1-19-88)
Sec. 2-7-24. - Appeals—Stay of order of fire marshal. 
Pending final decision of the board of appeals, the order of the fire marshal based on his interpretation of the code shall be stayed unless there is an immediate fire hazard to life or property. 
(Res. No. 88-005, § 4, 1-19-88)
Sec. 2-7-25. - Same—Procedures. 
(a)	Appeal to fire marshal. Where any person seeks relief from a decision of a fire official enforcing provisions of the fire prevention code applicable to Dougherty County and the City of Albany, including permits, certificates, waivers, alternate materials, alternate methods, approvals, or variances or matters of code interpretation, that person may request reconsideration of the fire official's decision by appealing in writing to the fire marshal within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the decision stating the reasons why relief is sought and what decision the person feels should be forthcoming. The fire marshal shall, within ten (10) days after receiving a copy of the appeal in writing, hold a hearing and decide the question after hearing testimony from all concerned persons. The fire marshall shall render a written decision within five (5) days after the hearing is completed. 
(b)	Appeal to board of appeals. After such a hearing by the fire marshal, any person seeking relief from a decision of the fire marshal regarding provisions of this code may appeal to the board of appeals within fifteen (15) days after receipt of written notice of the fire marshal's decision. Such appeal shall be in writing and directed to the fire marshal. Copies of the appeal shall be promptly transmitted to the board of appeals by the fire marshal. Upon giving not less than five (5) business days' notice to the person interested, a hearing shall be held. The board may, after such a hearing, by a majority vote, affirm, annul, or modify the action of the fire marshal. The decision of the board shall be in writing, and a copy shall be mailed to the appellant within seven (7) business days after the conclusion of the hearing and any decisions made shall be final. 
(Res. No. 88-005, § 5, 1-19-88)
Chapter 2-8 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Garbage collection authority, §§ 1-2-21, 1-2-30.
State Law reference— Power to provide, Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 2, ¶ 3(a)(3); regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-8-1. - Emergency medical service fees. 
The following schedule of fees and charges shall be in effect: 
Emergency calls .....$350.00 
Nonemergency calls .....200.00 
Advanced life support (ALS-2) .....450.00 
Specialized care transport .....550.00 
Mileage (transport only), per mile .....6.00 
(Code 1979, 2-3-12; Res. No. 81-122-A, § 1, 6-15-81; Res. No. 86-027, § 1, 7-7-86; Res. No. 90-034, § 1, 5-7-90; Res. No. 91-026, § 1, 6-3-91; Res. No. 93-020, § 1, 6-1-92; Res. No. 99-017, 6-7-99; Res. No. 01-022, 7-2-2001) 
Sec. 2-8-1.1. - Ambulance service. 
Every person, firm or corporation providing ambulance service from origins within the county, shall be staffed and equipped to provide advanced life support as presently defined in the rules of the department of human resources, Chapter 290-5-30, as the same now or may hereafter exist. 
(Res. No. 95-003, § 1, 3-20-95)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 95-003, § 1, adopted March 20, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-8-1.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-8-2. - Junk vehicles—Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, a junk vehicle is defined as any motor vehicle which is either in a state of disrepair or unmovable under its own power. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-1)
Sec. 2-8-3. - Same—Unlawful parking; nuisance. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any junk vehicle on public property or on any private lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the county. The presence of any junk vehicle on any property shall be deemed a public nuisance except as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding any motor vehicle on the real property of another, including public property, or to permit or allow junk vehicles to be parked or maintain on a person's own property. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-2)
Sec. 2-8-4. - Same—Exceptions. 
Section 2-8-3 shall not apply to: 
(1)	Any motor vehicle in an enclosed building;
(2)	Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary for the operation of the business; or 
(3)	Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinances and other ordinances of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-3)
Sec. 2-8-5. - Same—County police notice. 
When the county police deem a junk vehicle to be a public nuisance, the department shall issue a warning notice to the parties owning or in apparent possession of the motor vehicle to remove the vehicle. If the vehicle is not removed within ten (10) days, the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which it is located, may be tried for an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 2-1-8, and the cost of having the vehicle removed shall be added to the court cost. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-4)
Sec. 2-8-6. - Same—State law adopted by reference. 
The state Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 40, Chapter 11, is adopted and made a part hereof, and is cumulative and supplemental to this Code dealing with the removal of junk vehicles. 
(Code 1979, § 9-2-5)
Sec. 2-8-7. - Smoking in county facilities. 
The United States Surgeon General recently reported that exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke may cause significant health risks to nonsmokers; and, many allergic individuals and healthy nonsmokers report discomfort when exposed to secondhand smoke on the job. The county recognizes the need to strike a reasonable balance between the needs of person who smoke and the rights of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air. Therefore, be it resolved, that in all facilities owned and/or occupied by county employees and agents, the following restrictions regarding smoking shall apply: 
(1)	Smoking will be permitted only in designated smoking areas. Areas in which smoking will not be permitted shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.	Employee work areas, except as noted in subsection (2) of this section.
b.	Employee break rooms, lounges, snack bars and restrooms, except as noted in subsection (2) of this section. 
c.	Conference and meeting rooms, auditoriums, courtrooms and other public assembly chambers.
d.	Elevators and hallways with a single entrance and egress.
(2)	Smoking will be permitted in the following areas:
a.	Private offices, provided said offices have floor-to-ceiling walls and doors remain closed while smoking. 
b.	Lobbies and connecting hallways.
c.	Designated employee break rooms, in building where space permits.
(3)	"No Smoking" signs shall be placed conspicuously in county facilities to serve as a directive to employees and the general public. Georgia law (O.C.G.A. Section 16-12-2) prohibits smoking in areas clearly marked by "No Smoking" signs. 
(4)	In all cases the rights of nonsmokers to protect their health will take precedence over persons who desire to smoke. Voluntary compliance with these policies is desired. However, violation of these policies by employees may subject them to disciplinary action under provisions of the county personnel policies. Members of the public who smoke in restricted areas will be asked to comply with these policies by extinguishing all smoking materials. Persons refusing to extinguish smoking materials will be escorted from the building by appropriate law enforcement officials. 
(Res. No. 87-033, §§ 1—4, 8-17-87)
Editor's note— Inclusion of Res. No. 87-033, adopted Aug. 17, 1987, as § 2-8-7 was, at the editor's discretion, the resolution being nonamendatory of the Code. 
Sec. 2-8-7.1. - Smoking in the Albany-Dougherty County Governmental Building and Central Square Government Center. 
(a)	Upon the adoption of this resolution by both bodies and after the effective date of this resolution, [Jan. 1, 1992] and except as hereinafter provided in subsection (b), the smoking of tobacco in the Albany-Dougherty County Governmental Building and in the Central Square Government Center presently under construction is hereby prohibited. 
(b)	A designated smoking area will be provided in the Albany-Dougherty County Governmental Building and in the Central Square Governmental Center presently under construction with the necessary ventilation system added to prohibit the recirculation of the smoke air. Smoking will be permitted in such designated areas only. 
(c)	Signs shall be placed in all appropriate places in both buildings indicating that smoking is not allowed except in the designated smoking area. Department heads and elected officials shall ensure that all employees are continually made aware of the no smoking policy. 
(d)	Employees who have difficulty stopping smoking may be referred to Smoking Cessation Classes by the Employee Assistance Program. All prospective new city and county employees shall be informed of the no smoking policy before they are hired. 
(e)	City or county employees who violate this resolution shall be required to attend a smoking awareness class prior to being subject to the normal employee disciplinary process. Such smoking by nonemployed persons shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. 
(Res. No. 91-063, §§ 1—5, 10-7-91)
Editor's note— Res. No. 91-063, adopted Oct. 7, 1991, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—5 as § 2-8-7.1 was at the discretion of the editor. A prior resolution, Res. No. 91-050, was not codified as it did not include signatures of both the City of Albany and the County of Dougherty. 
Sec. 2-8-8. - Hazardous materials incidents. 
(a)	Hazardous materials emergency response; responsibility. Whenever there shall occur, within the boundaries of the county, any incident involving a chemical or material, defined by federal, state or local law as a hazardous substance or which is in fact hazardous in the natural state to the public health or safety, or when such chemical or material is involved in a release to the atmosphere, fire, chemical reaction or detonation, and, when such incident shall endanger any portion of the population or property of the citizens of the jurisdiction or shall expose anyone within such boundaries to potentially toxic or lethal agents, the Albany Fire Department is authorized and directed to mitigate the incident. 
The provisions of section 12-16 of the Code of City Ordinances, City of Albany, relating to the emergency operations plan, shall apply in all cases requiring the efforts of multiple governmental agencies in the mitigation of such incidents. 
(b)	Recovery of costs for hazardous materials mitigation; responsibility for cleanup of same. Within this section, the "responsible person" shall be defined as the person or company operating any facility or vehicle involved in the incident, or, the property owner upon whose property the involved chemical or chemicals were stored at the time of the incident. 
All costs incurred by the county or any other agencies or persons involved in the mitigation of incidents defined within this section shall be borne by the responsible person. 
(Res. No. 89-019, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-89)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 89-019, adopted July 10, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 as § 2-8-8 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 27; solid waste, Ch. 2-14. 
Sec. 2-8-9. - Fees for environmental health services. 
The fees for environmental health services shall be as follows: 

 
(Res. No. 93-021, § 1, 7-13-93; Res. No. 95-013, § 1, 9-6-95; Res. No. 98-049, 12-21-98)
Sec. 2-8-10. - Local emergency planning committee. 
(a)	That a local emergency planning committee has been created to effect implementation of the requirements of SARA Title III encouraging communication and cooperation between the public and private sectors of our community and concerned citizens. Additionally, the LEPC will have authority to request plans and information concerning hazardous materials from local industries and assisting local businesses and industries in meeting the compliance requirements of federal and state regulations. 
(b)	That Dougherty County will participate with the City of Albany, Georgia, by appointing three (3) members to said committee from the following groups: elected county officials, law enforcement, civil defense, firefighting, first aid, health, local environment, hospital personnel, transportation, broadcast media, print media, interested community groups, and owners and operators of regulated facilities. 
(Res. No. 94-043, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-94)
Editor's note— Res. No. 94-043, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 19, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-8-10 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-8-11. - Discharge of firearms within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm, within an area of the unincorporated portions of the county which is designated, according the Dougherty County Zoning Regulations, as residential or within five hundred (500) feet of a residence, place of worship, business or public meeting place. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer while in the discharge of official duties, nor in defense of person or property as otherwise authorized by the general law of this state, nor to any person hunting upon such person's premises or the premises of another with the owner's consent in any area of the county zoned other than residential according to the Dougherty County Zoning Regulations. 
(c)	This section shall not apply to the discharge of firearms at private or public skeet or trap facilities or other official shooting ranges. 
(d)	In addition to any other remedy available, these regulations may be enforced in the Magistrate Court of Dougherty County, Georgia as provided in O.C.G.A. section 15-10-60 through section 15-10-66, as amended. 
(Res. No. 02-020, § I, 4-1-2002)
Sec. 2-8-12. - [Pre-disaster mitigation plan.] 
(a)	The Albany Dougherty Pre-Disaster Mitigation Committee has developed a multi-jurisdictional hazard mitigation plan which includes all natural, technological and manmade hazards to which the county and city are susceptible per Section 322 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act; and 
(b)	Dougherty County and Albany, Georgia have been assessed for its susceptibility to natural, technological, and manmade hazards; and 
(c)	The Albany Dougherty Pre-Disaster Mitigation Committee has compiled a list of all structural assets and estimated potential losses which could be suffered in the event of any of the identified hazards; and 
(d)	The Albany Dougherty Pre-Disaster Mitigation Committee has identified and analyzed mitigation measures, established objectives, and prioritized mitigation strategies for dealing with identified potential hazards in the city and county; and 
(e)	The Albany Dougherty Pre-Disaster Mitigation Committee has agreed to hold annual committee and public meetings to review and update the Albany Dougherty Pre-Disaster Mitigation Plan. 
(Res. No. 11-005, 3-22-11)
Editor's note— Res. No. 11-005, adopted March 22, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-8-12 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-8-13—2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 2-8-21. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of the ordinance, hereinafter referred to as the "article", is to ensure protection of the community's groundwater supply. 
All local governments must adopt protection measures when their jurisdiction contains any part of a significant groundwater recharge area. These areas are identified in Hydrologic Atlas 18: Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia. 
Protection required within the significant recharge areas is further refined (rated high, medium or low), based upon local susceptibility to human induced pollution. These ratings are illustrated in Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia. 
More than ninety-nine (99) percent of Dougherty County is identified as a significant groundwater recharge area with high susceptibility to pollution. Since contamination plumes have been identified in the county's groundwater and pollution susceptibility cannot be mapped with absolute accuracy, the entire county will be treated as a significant groundwater recharge area with high susceptibility to pollution. 
(Res. No. 99-024, § 1, 6-21-99)
Sec. 2-8-22. - Jurisdiction. 
This article shall apply within the unincorporated area of Dougherty County. 
(Res. No. 99-024, § 2, 6-21-99)
Sec. 2-8-23. - Applicability of other code or regulatory requirements. 
If any provision or requirement of this article is found to be in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this article or of any other applicable governmental law, resolution, rule or other governmental regulation of any kind, the regulation which establishes the more restrictive rule or higher standard shall govern. 
(Res. No. 99-024, § 3, 6-21-99)
Sec. 2-8-24. - Definitions. 
(a)	Aquifer means any stratum or zone or rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
(b)	DRASTIC means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA 600/2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluation of pollution susceptibility). 
(c)	Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
(d)	Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
(e)	Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
(f)	Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped as such by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Recharge areas in Dougherty County include surface outcroppings of the extensively used Floridan aquifer, karst topography and soils having high permeability, according to the 1976 1:750,000 Soils Association Map of Georgia. 
(Res. No. 99-024, § 4, 6-21-99)
Sec. 2-8-25. - Regulations pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-18. 
(1)	Regulations. 
(a)	The Department of Natural Resources shall not issue any permits for new sanitary landfills not having synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(b)	The Department of Natural Resources shall not issue any new permits for the land disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(c)	The Department of Natural Resources shall require all new facilities permitted or to be permitted to treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste to perform such operations on an impermeable pad having a spill and leak collection system. 
(d)	New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of six hundred sixty (660) gallons, shall have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of such tanks or one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. (Note: These figures are consistent with US EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1). 
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. (The average size of existing agricultural waste impoundments in Georgia is about fifteen (15) acre-feet; sheeps-foot rollers or pans with heavy rubber tires, which are normal equipment for most Georgia earth moving contractors, should be able to compact clay to the recommended vertical hydraulic conductivity.) 
(e)	New homes served by septic tank/drain field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified on Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR Table MT-1"). One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1, because Dougherty County is a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(f)	New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitation as identified on Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR Table MT-2"). One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2, because Dougherty County is a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(g)	For multifamily residential dwelling, all other nonsingle-family dwellings and commercial properties, the maximum allowable rate of sewage flow per unit of land shall be one hundred fifty (150) percent of the minimum lot size of Table MT-2 because Dougherty County is a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(h)	If Dougherty County, or the Dougherty County Health Department requires a larger lot size than that required by (f) above for homes or by (g) above for mobile homes, the larger lot size shall be used. 
(i)	Any lot of record in Dougherty County, on the date of the adoption of these lot size standards, is exempt from the size requirements of (f) or (g) or (h), provided all other provisions of applicable regulations are met. 
(j)	No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Dougherty County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Rules of the Department of Human Resources Chapter 290-5-26 Onsite Sewage Management Systems, the accompanying DHR Manual and (f), (g), (h), (i) and (j) above. 
(k)	The Southwest Georgia Regional Development Center is responsible for considering, in its regional plan, the cumulative environmental effects of a significant number of septic tank systems being used in close proximity to each other. In so considering, the regional development center shall not approve any local plans that would result in adverse environmental effects on another area. The Southwest Georgia Regional Development Center may consult with the Department of Human Resources and the Department of Natural Resources for technical assistance as to appropriate densities of lots served by septic tanks in significant recharge areas. 
(l)	New facilities which handle hazardous materials, of types and in amounts determined by the Department of Natural Resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems, as prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources. 
(m)	The Department of Natural Resources shall require conservative design in any new permits for the spray irrigation of wastewaters or the land spreading of wastewater sludge in areas having high pollution susceptibility. This shall be accomplished by comparing the Department's Criteria for Slow Rate Land Treatment (February 1986 or latest edition) with amendments and other technical publications to site specific information submitted by a registered professional engineer for each project. 
(n)	Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(o)	Exclusive of mining settling basins, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(2)	Lot size requirements. 
(a)	Single-family dwellings. Lot sizing requirements are as follows for single-family dwellings such as mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, etc., and also included are individual lots in subdivisions and mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks. See subsections (1)(a) through (f) and Table MT-1, as follows: 
Table MT-1 Minimum Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths, and Maximum Allowable Sewage Flow With Types of Water Supply System 

 
(b)	Multifamily residential, nonsingle-family dwellings, and commercial structures. Lot sizing requirements are as follows for multifamily residential dwellings, all other nonsingle-family dwellings and commercial structures, and this also includes mobile homes located in commercial mobile home parks. Subsections (1)(a) through (f), above, also apply to Table MT-2. 
Table MT-2 Minimum Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths, and Maximum Allowable Sewage Flow With Types of Water Supply System 

 
(Res. No. 99-024, § 5, 6-21-99)
Secs. 2-8-26—2-8-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Res. No. 02-034, § I, adopted Aug. 12, 2002, enacted nuisance abatement provisions which pertained mainly to nuisance premises. Such provisions were an attachment to the resolution, and did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Art. III, §§ 2-8-36—2-8-43, was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 2-8-36. - Short title. 
This article is known as and may be cited as "The Dougherty County Nuisance Abatement Resolution." 
(Res. No. 02-034, § I(Attach. (1)), 8-12-2002)
Sec. 2-8-37. - Intent and purpose. 
The board of commissioners hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform and exclusive summary procedure for use in the abatement of public nuisances in unincorporated Dougherty County. The provisions hereof are adopted pursuant to the authority provided by O.C.G.A. section 41-2-7, et seq. as amended. It is the further purpose and intent of this article that the procedures established hereunder shall comply with the minimum provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, et seq., as amended. 
(Res. No. 02-034, § I(Attach. (2)), 8-12-2002)
Sec. 2-8-38. - Conflicting law. 
This article shall not be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, county resolution or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law, resolution, legislation or regulation. 
(Res. No. 02-034, § I(Attach. (3)), 8-12-2002)
Sec. 2-8-39. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners finds that there exist in unincorporated county properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; which have other conditions that render such properties unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county; or which are vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes. 
(Res. No. 02-034, § I(Attach. (4)), 8-12-2002)
Sec. 2-8-40. - Definitions. 
As used throughout this article, the term: Applicable codes means: 
(1)	Any housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated including standard minimum codes as adopted now or hereafter by resolution of the county, or by operation of law, or other property maintenance or building standards or codes as adopted now or hereafter by resolution or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; and 
(2)	Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Any such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Owner means both the current owner of record and any current mortgagee holding legal title by virtue of a security instrument as shown by a fifty (50) year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia. 
Parties in interest (for the purposes of service under section 2-8-43) are the owner and any other persons or entities included within the following categories: 
(1)	Persons in possession of said property and premises;
(2)	Persons having of record in the county any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property based upon a fifty (50) year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)	Persons having paid an occupation tax within the previous calendar year to the Business License Division of Dougherty County for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)	Persons having filed a property tax return with the tax commissioner as to the subject property for the most recent tax year in which such returns have become due. 
Property means any lot, tract, or parcel of real estate whether improved or unimproved. It shall include any dwelling, building, structure, or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouse, improvement, and appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term shall expressly include, for means of amplification and not limitation, swimming pools and wells. Also as used in this article, the term shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Public authority means any member of the board of commissioners, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of county government relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning properties in the county; however, in no event shall any such public authority who files a request for investigation under section 2-8-42 be the public officer exercising the powers conferred upon public officers under this article. 
Public officer means either the director of the Albany-Dougherty Planning and Development Services Department or his or her designee, or the director of public works or his or her designee. 
Repair means altering or improving a property so as to bring any dwelling, building, or structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and/or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create unsanitary and unsafe conditions which are an endangerment to the public health or safety in or about any property. 
Resident means any person residing in unincorporated Dougherty County on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Res. No. 02-034, § I(Attach. (5)), 8-12-2002)
Sec. 2-8-41. - Duties of property owners. 
(a)	It is the duty of the owner of every property located within the unincorporated [areas of the] county: 
(1)	To construct and maintain such property in conformance with applicable codes in force within unincorporated Dougherty County, or such resolutions which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any property in violation of such codes or resolutions; and 
(2)	To keep such property reasonably clean and free of any materials or conditions which create a health or safety hazard either on such property or to surrounding persons or properties. 
(b)	No owner shall allow any property located within unincorporated Dougherty County to be used in the commission of drug crimes. 
(Res. No. 02-034, § I(Attach. (6)), 8-12-2002)
Sec. 2-8-42. - Nuisance abatement procedure. 
(a)	Appointment and designation of public officer. The director of the Albany-Dougherty Planning and Development Services Department, or his or her designee and the director of public works or his or her designee, are hereby appointed and designated as a public officer with authority to carry out the powers and duties of this article. 
(b)	Complaint and investigation. Whenever a request is filed with a public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the unincorporated area of Dougherty County charging that any property: 
(1)	Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or 
(2)	Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or
(3)	Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
the public officer with whom the request is filed shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific property to determine if such conditions exist under applicable codes. The public officer shall have the authority to enter upon premises to conduct an inspection, provided such entry is made with the least possible inconvenience to the person(s) in possession. If such an inspection is necessary, the public officer shall endeavor to obtain the permission of the owner to conduct such inspection. If permission is withheld, the public officer may seek the assistance of the county attorney's office to obtain an inspection warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The public officer may determine that the property is being used in the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency. 
(c)	Judicial complaint and summons. If the public officer's investigation or inspection confirms that any property meets one (1) or more of the three (3) enumerated standards from subsection (b), the public officer may file in a court of competent jurisdiction a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property wherein the nuisance complained of exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the parties in interest of such dwelling, building, or structure pursuant to the provisions of section 2-8-43. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(d)	Time of hearing. The summons shall notify the parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held no sooner than fifteen (15) days and no later than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. However, in the event that service upon the probate judge is necessary under the provisions of section 2-8-43, the hearing will be held no sooner than thirty (30) days following service upon the probate judge, though still in no event shall the hearing be held more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint. 
(e)	Right to be heard. The parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(f)	Order. If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the property in question meets one (1) or more of the standards enumerated in subsection (b) so as to constitute a public nuisance, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which does one (1) of the following: 
(1)	If the repair of the said property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to its present value, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time, to repair such property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to effect a closing of any structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)	If the repair of the said property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value thereof, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time, to demolish and remove the noncompliant dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, in cases in which the nuisance complained of is a dwelling, building, or structure of any kind, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, qualified building contractors with a current business license to do work in the county, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations. 
(g)	Remedies of public officer in the event of noncompliance with order. 
(1)	The order entered under subsection (f) shall further provide that, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, demolish, or close the property within the specified time, the public officer may cause such property to be repaired, demolished, or closed, whichever the order required. The public officer is also authorized to file a motion for attachment for contempt against the owner with the court which issued the order as an alternate or additional remedy. 
(2)	If the public officer chooses to have the work done as ordered on any dwelling building or structure, he or she shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful. 
(h)	Salvage. If the public officer has a structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. Neither the public officer nor the county shall have any liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(i)	Lien for costs. The order shall provide that the amount of all costs associated with the abatement action shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such costs shall include but not be limited to the cost of demolition, reasonable attorneys' fees and all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, restoration to grade of the real property should it be demolished, and title examination costs. The order should recite the amount of costs incurred by the county as of the date of the order. Upon preparing a final statement of costs, the public officer shall prepare a "lien for costs of abatement" detailing any and all such costs. Such Lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition, in the office of the clerk of superior court, and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 2-8-43(b). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien for costs of abatement on the general execution docket. Such lien should cross-reference the order and include the original caption and case number from the nuisance abatement action. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid in full. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the tax commissioner. 
(j)	Enforcement of lien. It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property; however, the tax commissioner shall be authorized to bill the amount of the lien as it comes due separately from the annual ad valorem tax bill in order to ensure prompt notice of the amount of the lien and so as to not interfere with the regular billing cycle of the annual ad valorem taxes. The tax commissioner shall have the full authority to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. section 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the general fund of the county. Thirty (30) days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(k)	Waiver of lien. The board of commissioners may waive and release any such lien imposed on property of the owner for costs incurred by the county up to the time of the entry of the order and any additional costs incurred subsequent thereto in attempting to bring the property into compliance by entering into a contract with the owner in which the owner agrees to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(l)	Appellate procedure. Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a property shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. section 5-3-29. 
(m)	Alternate remedies. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit or impair the authority of public officers or other county employees under existing and future resolutions to issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by resolutions, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and to seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. The issuance of a citation for a violation of any such codes or resolutions shall not be required as a prerequisite to issuing a complaint in rem under this section. 
(Res. No. 02-034, § I(Attach. (7)), 8-12-2002)
Sec. 2-8-43. - Service and notice. 
(a)	Copies of the complaint and summons shall be served in each of the following ways as applicable: 
(1)	In all cases, by conspicuously posting a copy on the subject dwelling, building, structure, or property within three days of the filing of the complaint; 
(2)	In all cases, by mailing a copy to the property address by first class mail addressed to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)	By personal service upon each party in interest if the identity and whereabouts of said parties are reasonably ascertainable and if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by resolution to abate nuisances, by any law enforcement officer of the county, or by permanent process server; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(4)	By certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax records and real estate records and mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing if any party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county or if any party in interest is a nonresident of this state, if the addresses are known; 
(5)	By publication for nonresidents and residents of the state who reside outside of the county whose mailing addresses are unknown. A notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; 
(6)	By personal service upon a guardian or other personal representative in the event that any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities. If such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsections (4) and (5) of this section. If such party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by personally serving the judge of the probate court at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person; 
(7)	By personal service upon the judge of the probate court in the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof. Service shall be perfected at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen; 
(8)	By publication in all other cases where the whereabouts of any party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section. In such event, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (5) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(b)	A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(c)	Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint and summons shall be served in the manner provided in this section or in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12, including certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, on any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Res. No. 02-034, § I(Attach. (8)), 8-12-2002)
Chapter 2-9 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-9-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Accessory structure or use: A detached building or parcel of land necessary as an adjunct to the establishment of a mobile home park and services rendered to its occupants. Such term shall refer to travel trailers when in storage on a residential lot. 
Adjoining property line: The boundary line between a mobile home park or a site occupied by a mobile home and property in another ownership, and shall, for the purpose of these regulations, include street, railroad or utility rights-of-way. 
Alteration: The relocation of mobile homes within a park; also any change in the exterior dimensions of accessory structures. 
Building permit: A duly authorized form signed by the building official authorizing the location of a mobile home or the construction of an accessory structure, cabana, sign or other improvement. Such permit shall be valid for a period of six (6) months and shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the approved location of the mobile home or construction. 
Cabana: A semi-permanent addition to a mobile home, measuring no greater than nine hundred (900) square feet. 
Extension: The enlargement of a mobile home park by the provision of further utility and road improvements or the addition of mobile homes or trailers to the park, in excess of the number of improved sites existing at the time of the adoption of the enactment from which this section is derived. 
Mobile home: A detached single-family dwelling unit, designed for a long-term occupancy, which has usually been prefabricated and then transported to its site or to a sales lot on its own wheels, on a detachable undercarriage, or on a flatbed or other trailer conveyance and requires only minor work before occupancy, such as connection to utilities or to a foundation. Such units are usually fully equipped and furnished as opposed to a prefabricated house. 
Mobile home pad: The paved portion of a mobile home stand equal to the length and width of the mobile home placed on the stand. 
Mobile home park: An operation which leases or rents spaces for permanent or for temporary occupancy for mobile homes and, under some conditions, travel trailers. Under no condition shall spaces be offered for sale. 
Mobile home stand: The site designed for the placement of a mobile home and its cabana, accessory structures, utility connections and off-street parking facilities. 
Mobile home subdivision: A subdivision of land intended for the sale of lots to individuals for the placement and occupancy of mobile homes. It shall comply with the subdivision regulations of the governing body. 
Nonconforming trailer or mobile home: A unit occupied as a permanent residence which is located outside of the confines of an approved mobile home park or a subdivision designed and approved for mobile home living or a unit and its accessory structures which does not conform to a minimum construction or health standards required herein. 
Nonconforming trailer or mobile home site: A site located on private property which does not conform to the general requirements set forth herein, or to zoning regulations adopted by the governing body. Such term shall also refer to trailer and mobile home sites or lots located within a park which do not comply with the requirements set forth herein. 
Occupancy permit: A permit required for any mobile home not located within the confines of a mobile home park stating any conditions legally imposed by the building official or the board of zoning appeals. 
Travel trailer: A vehicular portable structure of not more than eight (8) feet in width, when portable, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation uses. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-3)
Sec. 2-9-2. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern the design and improvement of parks for mobile homes in the unincorporated area of the county. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to mobile homes so long as the same are on a sales lot or on the premises of a mobile home manufacturer and are not occupied as residences. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-2)
Sec. 2-9-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)	The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by the building official. This official shall have the right to enter any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out such official's duties in the enforcement of these regulations. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to occupy a mobile home until the building official has issued a building permit or issued an occupancy permit for such mobile home, unless such home meets the construction standards set forth herein and is located on a site as prescribed in section 2-9-6(5). 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-4)
Sec. 2-9-4. - Amendment, etc. 
These regulations may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the governing body, but no proposed amendment or modification of these regulations shall be adopted unless such amendment or modification shall have been first submitted to the joint planning commission. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-5)
Sec. 2-9-5. - Punishment for violation. 
Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee, broker or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of these regulations shall be punished as prescribed by law. Each day of the existence of any violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-6)
Sec. 2-9-6. - Mobile home requirements generally. 
Any mobile home located and occupied as a residence in the unincorporated area of the county for a period exceeding forty-eight (48) hours shall be located within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision meeting the requirements and minimum standards set forth herein. Mobile homes shall meet the following general requirements of the codes of the governing body: 
(1)	Building and construction codes. No mobile home shall be admitted to any mobile home park or allowed to be placed in the unincorporated area of the county for a period exceeding forty-eight (48) hours unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of the county building, plumbing, gas and electrical codes, which codes are, insofar as they are applicable, made a part of these regulations to the same extent as though herein set out in full. The Mobile Homes Manufacturing Association and the Trailer Coach Association (MHMA-TCA) seals will be accepted as evidence of the trailer's construction meeting local building and construction codes. Cabanas and other accessory structures shall require a building permit and shall meet all local building and construction codes. 
(2)	Park operator required to inspect. It shall be the responsibility of the park operator to inspect mobile homes being placed within the confines of the park and such operator's jurisdiction prior to the placement of the mobile home on its stand and the connection of utilities and occupancy of the mobile home. If the condition of the mobile home is questionable, the park operator shall inform the building official who shall inspect the mobile home prior to its occupancy. There shall be no fee charged for this inspection service. 
(3)	Annual inspections. At least once each year the building official at such official's convenience, shall inspect each mobile home park and the mobile homes within the park, to determine compliance with county codes. 
(4)	Health. Prior to the allowance of permanent occupancy of a mobile home in the unincorporated area of the county, such mobile home shall be connected with an approved water source and an approved sewage disposal method, in such a manner as to comply with the Georgia State Human Resources Department regulations and the state health laws (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 31) and the Water Quality Control Act (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 12-5-20 et seq.) which regulations and laws are, insofar as they are applicable, hereby made a part of these regulations to the same extent as though herein set out in full. 
(5)	Occupancy. Occupancy of a mobile home within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be as follows: 
a.	Mobile home park. In the event a mobile home is placed in a mobile home park, it shall conform to the site arrangements for its site with respect to location, utilities and registration. It shall be the responsibility of the park operator to inspect the installation of the mobile home prior to allowing its occupancy. It shall be the operator's further responsibility to maintain a dated log book indicating the name of the mobile home owner, the name of its occupants, its license, if so equipped, and whether it has a MHMA or TCA seal for each mobile home within the park. Said log shall be available for inspection by authorities of the governing body. 
b.	Mobile home subdivision. In the event a mobile home is placed within a mobile subdivision, a building permit and inspection of the foundation and utility provisions and the mobile home's construction and wiring, and plumbing, shall be required prior to the placement of the home on its foundation or the connections of the utilities. No mobile home shall be placed upon such a lot, nor shall utilities be connected to the mobile home, until an inspection has been made, and site foundation and utilities shall have been approved by the building official. 
(6)	Nonconforming mobile homes. All mobile homes located in the unincorporated area of the county at the time of the adoption of the enactment from which this section is derived, but not in conformity with its provisions, are hereby declared nonconforming. If occupied space or location is vacated for a period of six (6) months, said location or space is declared to be abandoned and shall not be leased, rented or occupied by any use other than a conforming use. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-21)
Sec. 2-9-7. - Mobile home "hardship" variance. 
(a)	The board of commissioners has adopted a policy of allowing a variance in its zoning regulations for the purpose of medical hardships only, by allowing in extreme cases only, mobile homes to be utilized in areas zoned for other purposes. The variance allowed is temporary only and shall be brought before the board annually for reconsideration. All prior variances and exemptions allowed shall continue to be reconsidered annually with the exception that the criteria for renewal shall only require medical proof of a continuing medical total disability and a continuing need for care by the applicant or person to be cared for by the applicant. 
(b)	All citizens requesting mobile home hardship exemptions in zoning must complete the county authorized request form, furnishing all information contained therein, under oath. 
(c)	The current authorized exemption for "hardship" is for total disability which requires the assistance of others on a continuing basis. 
(d)	The determination of a "hardship," which is solely at the discretion of the board of commissioners, shall have as minimum criteria the following: 
(1)	A sketch or drawing of the proposed location of the mobile home showing the relation to any other existing structure and to any existing county-or state-maintained road. 
(2)	A statement from two (2) or more adjacent landowners, stating whether they are either for or against this request. 
(3)	A medical "hardship" form completed and signed by any licensed physician of any state in the United States; the form to be furnished by the county. 
(4)	An impact statement from the joint planning staff as to the impact of a mobile home in the location requested. 
(5)	A statement from the applicant showing why other means of care, such as nursing home, cannot be utilized. 
(Res. No. 82-041, §§ 1—5, 12-20-82)
Secs. 2-9-8—2-9-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 2-9-20. - Continuation of existing mobile home parks. 
All existing mobile home parks containing two (2) or more acres of land and six (6) or more improved and occupied stands at the time of the adoption of the enactment from which this section is derived, are hereby declared to be conforming and shall be allowed to continue to exist and operate as presently designed and improved until expended or abandoned. However, such mobile home parks shall at all times conform to minimum health and sanitation codes of county and state governments. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-31(1))
Sec. 2-9-21. - Nonconforming mobile home parks because of size. 
Mobile home parks containing less than six (6) improved mobile home stands at the time of adoption of the enactment from which this section is derived are hereby declared to be nonconforming. If mobile home stands or spaces are vacated for a period of six (6) months, those stands or spaces are declared abandoned, and shall not be leased, rented or occupied by any use other than a conforming use. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-31(7))
Sec. 2-9-22. - Compliance by new mobile home parks. 
From and after the adoption of the enactment from which this section is derived, each new or expanded mobile home park development shall be presented in plan form, meeting the requirements for plats in local subdivision regulations for approval by the joint planning commission and shall conform to the minimum design and improvement standards required herein. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-31(2))
Sec. 2-9-23. - Conditional approval—Submitting plan. 
(a)	A person desiring to develop a mobile home park within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall provide nine (9) copies of a plan drawn to scale of a proposed layout, which shall conform to the minimum requirements stated herein, to the planning commission for conditional approval, prior to the issuance of a construction permit for a mobile home park. 
(b)	Such plans shall be prepared and submitted to the planning commission within ten (10) working days of the meeting in which the owner desires a hearing and review. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-31)
Sec. 2-9-24. - Same—Required before construction and improvements. 
No construction or public improvements shall commence on any land to be used as a mobile home park prior to conditional approval of its plan by the planning commission and the governing authority. After conditional approval of a plan has been granted to a mobile home park, if within three (3) years, the development has not taken place, the approval will then be null and void. Conditional approval shall not constitute approval of the final plat; rather, it shall be deemed as expression of approval of the layout and design which the developer has proposed. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-31(3), (5)(c))
Sec. 2-9-25. - Presenting final plat. 
Upon completion of the required improvements provided herein, the developer shall submit to the planning commission nine (9) copies of the final plat, drawn to scale and showing the location of the required improvements. The developer shall provide a letter of intent, stating that all minimum improvements have been met and that the mobile home park is available for occupancy. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-31(4))
Sec. 2-9-26. - Expansion of existing mobile home parks. 
A person desiring to expand an existing mobile home park to include more mobile home sites than are accommodated within such a park at the time this regulation was adopted shall submit plans and specifications for such improvements to the planning commission for conditional approval prior to initiating construction and improvements. Improvements, reconstruction and redesign of existing parks, required by the planning commission, shall conform to these regulations and shall be limited to those necessary to make access, utility service and design of both the new and old portion of the park compatible. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-31(6))
Sec. 2-9-27. - Minimum area of tract; minimum street frontage. 
A mobile home park shall have as a minimum size, five (5) acres and shall front upon a highway or platted street which shall have a minimum right-of-way of sixty (60) feet and shall conform to section 2-9-30(4). 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-32(1))
Sec. 2-9-28. - Minimum number of spaces. 
A mobile home park shall have as a minimum, fifteen (15) spaces prepared with all improvements in place prior to final approval. The planning commission may allow development of a park in stages or parcels according to an approved construction plan. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-32(2))
Sec. 2-9-29. - Length of residential occupancy. 
No space within a mobile home park, except as provided herein, shall be rented for residential use of a mobile home except for periods of thirty (30) days or more; provided, however, in the event a mobile home park fronts on a state or federal highway and the park owner desires to lease space for travel trailers or for short-term occupancy of a mobile home, the park shall prepare and reserve an area containing a minimum of six (6) spaces improved for temporary use in an area separate and screened from the view of spaces leased for permanent occupancy. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-32(3))
Sec. 2-9-30. - Design. 
The design of a mobile home park shall conform to the following design requirements: 
(1)	Setback. The mobile home park shall be designed so that mobile homes and their accessory structures shall be a minimum distance of: 
SETBACK PER STAND IN FEET 

 
(2)	Minimum stand size. The mobile home park shall be designed in such a manner that each mobile home stand will not have less than the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Community water and community sewage—four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
b.	Community water and septic tank—eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
c.	Individual water and septic tank—one (1) acre.
(3)	Typical stand layout. The developer will provide, along with the plans submitted for conditional approval and final approval, a typical mobile home stand layout, using a sixty-foot mobile home as typical rental. Dimensions and setback shall be designated on the plat in order to insure conformity to subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)	Access. If the mobile home park does not front on a public road, then the mobile home park shall be provided with a sixty-foot roadway (private) connecting the park to a county maintained road. Each mobile home site and its parking area shall have direct access to the internal street system of the park. 
(5)	Streets. Streets dedicated to public use shall be planned and developed in accordance with the subdivision regulations. In general, however, streets within a mobile home park shall be privately owned, constructed and maintained. Such private streets shall be well drained, provided with a minimum paved surface of ten (10) feet for one-way streets, and twenty (20) feet for two-way streets, with on-street parking prohibited, and meeting the standards established by the governing authority. 
Cross reference— As to subdivision regulations, see § 2-15-1. 
(6)	Parking. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. Parking on the interior streets within a park is hereby prohibited. The required front yard may be used for parking; however, required side and rear yards may not be utilized for parking. 
(7)	Density. A maximum of ten (10) mobile home stands per acre or fifteen (15) travel trailer stands per acre is allowed. 
(8)	Recreation. A minimum of five (5) percent of the gross site area of a mobile home park shall be devoted to recreational facilities. The designated area shall be provided with an acceptable fence with a minimum height of three (3) feet. 
(9)	Mobile home pad. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a paved surface equal to the length and width of the mobile home for which the stand is designed. Improvements must meet the standards established by the governing authority. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-33)
Sec. 2-9-31. - Park improvements. 
Mobile home parks constructed or reconstructed shall be provided with the following minimum improvements: 
(1)	Sewerage. The mobile home park shall be provided with a sewerage collection system, designed to comply with the state department of human resources requirements, so that each mobile home stand structure can be serviced. 
SEPTIC TANK REQUIREMENT—MINIMUM 
Individual hookup ..... 800 gallons 
Dual hookup .....1,500 gallons 
Drain field layout dependent on county health department approval. 
(2)	Water. A potable water supply meeting state department of human resources requirements shall be provided by the park operator. 
(3)	Easements. Publicly dedicated easements of proper size for their intended purpose shall be provided within the park if individual mobile home stands and accessory park uses are to be serviced by a public utility system. 
(4)	Utility placement. All water, sewer, electric or gas lines shall be buried a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches below the finished ground surface of the park and shall be provided with adequate valve systems to allow the cut-off of utility service to a mobile home stand at the mobile home stand and at the entrance of the utility service from the stand to the trunk line of a utility system. If overhead service lines are provided within the park, such lines shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet above the grade of interior streets (except that a ten-foot minimum be maintained at the service entrance) and so that no wires extend over a mobile home stand. 
(5)	Lighting. All recreation areas, park entrances, park streets and pedestrian easements shall be illuminated to at least three-tenths footcandles. 
(6)	Garbage and refuse. The park shall be provided with a garbage collection service which maintains a collection schedule of at least two (2) minimum collections per week. Adequate containers, maintained in a rodent proof and vermin proof condition shall be easily accessible to or within each mobile home stand, and in sufficient number and placement for recreation areas. Refuse collection shall also be provided on a weekly basis to remove debris from the park and recreation areas. Refuse on occupied mobile home stands shall be the responsibility of the occupants and shall be removed to designated spaces. Open burning of trash shall not be permitted. Incinerators, if provided, shall comply with governmental regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-34)
Sec. 2-9-32. - Stand improvements. 
Each mobile home stand shall be provided with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	Interior street access. Each stand shall be provided with access frontage of at least thirty (30) feet. 
(2)	Garbage cans. Each stand shall be provided with durable flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers of at least twenty (20) gallons and not more than thirty (30) gallons capacity. A garbage can rack designed to prevent rodent harborage and to allow for easy cleaning shall be provided by the park operator. 
(3)	Electric power supply. Each stand shall be provided with an adequate, properly grounded, water-proofed, electrical receptacle with a minimum rated capacity of one hundred (100) amperes. A properly sized over current device shall be installed as a part of each power outlet. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-35)
Sec. 2-9-33. - Mobile home subdivisions. 
Subdivisions designed and specifically restricted to mobile home occupancy shall be platted and developed under procedures established and required under the subdivision regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3-36)
Cross reference— As to subdivision regulations, see § 2-15-1. 
Secs. 2-9-33—2-9-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME LOCATION PERMIT 

Sec. 2-9-61. - Title. 
This article shall be known as "The Dougherty County Mobile Home Location Permit Ordinance." 
(Res. No. 01-020, § I, 6-18-2001)
Sec. 2-9-62. - Mobile home location permits/decal. 
(a)	All persons owning a mobile home based in the county on January 1 of each year shall obtain from the county tax commissioner a mobile home location permit before May 1, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. The issuance of the permit by the county tax commissioner shall be evidenced by the issuance of a decal, the color of which shall be prescribed for each year by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Revenue. Each decal will reflect the county of issuance and the calendar year for which the permit is issued. This requirement pertains to all mobile homes, including those exempt from taxation by homestead exemption or other provisions of state law. 
(b)	Such decals shall be affixed to the mobile homes in such a manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
(c)	Owners of mobile homes locating in the county after January 1 of any year shall report their mobile home to the county tax department within ten (10) working days. 
(Res. No. 01-020, § II, 6-18-2001)
Sec. 2-9-63. - Reports by mobile home park operators. 
(a)	Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park is required to give the county tax department an inventory of all mobile homes based in the park as of January 1 of each year. This shall be done no later than January 15 of each year. 
(b)	Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park shall furnish to the county tax department a lot map of each park. The lot map is to be furnished by January 15, 2002 and any future changes shall be reported by January 15 of each successive year. 
(c)	Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park is required to notify the county tax department of any change in ownership or name of any mobile home park within thirty (30) days of such change. 
(Res. No. 01-020, § III, 6-18-2001)
Sec. 2-9-64. - Transport of mobile homes without decal. 
(a)	No person shall move or transport any mobile home which is required to and which does not have attached and displayed thereon the decal provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492 and section 2-9-62 of this article. 
(Res. No. 01-020, § IV, 6-18-2001)
Sec. 2-9-65. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Any person who violates either section 2-9-62 or 2-9-63 of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), except that upon receipt of proof of purchase of a decal prior to the date of the date of the issuance of a summons, the fine shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)	Any person who violates section 2-9-64 of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)	Violations of any section of this article may be prosecuted in the Magistrate Court of Dougherty County in the manner prescribed for the enforcement of county ordinances set forth in Article 4 of Chapter 10 of Title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Res. No. 01-020, § V, 6-18-2001)
Chapter 2-10 - Occupation LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Authority, § 1-2-25; regulating peddling and fixing license fees, § 1-2-20(7); business and occupation taxes authorized, § 1-2-25; license to collect, transport or dispose of solid waste, § 2-14-7.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-10-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Business: Includes business, occupation, trade, profession, and calling. 
License: Both license and occupation tax. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-31; Res. No. 79-161, § 1, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-2. - License fee and occupation tax methodology. 
(a)	From the date January 1, 1996, each person, firm, company or corporation engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the unincorporated areas of Dougherty County, Georgia hereafter referred to as "county" shall register with the license inspector, obtain a business license and pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year unless exempted. 
All applicants for a new license or a renewal license shall be required to pay the license fee in order to defray administrative and inspection costs related to the regulation and issuance of business licenses. Fees are due at the time an application is submitted and fees are not refundable in any portion even if a license is not issued. Forms are available from the license inspector. 
All licenses are renewable on an annual basis and fees are due on or before March fifteenth of each calendar year. 
(b)	In addition to any business license fee, from the date January 1, 1996, each person, firm, company or corporation engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the county shall pay a flat occupation tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus an occupation tax, if applicable, based upon their number of employees as set forth in Exhibit "A" except those businesses, occupations or professions enumerated in subsection(d)4, which shall be taxed at a rate specified in this section. The term "number of employees" shall mean an individual who works forty (40) hours per week and receives a W-2 form from an employer. Part-time employees' total hours will be divided by forty (40) to determine the number of "full-time equivalents." 
(c)	Occupation tax. The occupation tax levied and assessed shall be determined in accordance with the following: 
(1)	Determine whether business, trade, profession or occupation is listed in subsection (d); if so, occupation tax is amount specified; 
(2)	Determine the number of employees as defined by this section, and find the applicable bracket in Exhibit "A" for the amount of tax. 
(d)	Specified occupation, privilege, and industrial taxes. The following trades, businesses, professions and occupations are hereby declared not subject to the flat occupation tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) nor any occupation tax based on employees as defined in subsection (b), and are hereby taxed annually in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)	Professionals. Each individual practitioner of law, medicine, osteopathy, chiropractics, podiatry, dentistry, optometry, veterinary medicine, landscape architecture, land surveying, massage and physiotherapy, public accounting, embalming, funeral directing, civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineering or architecture who maintains their principal office in the county shall pay by calculating the occupation tax due as a result of a flat occupation tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus an additional occupation tax, if applicable, based on number of employees in accordance with "Exhibit A" by paying the sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per year. No such levy shall be assessed upon or collected from any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the State of Georgia, a municipality or county of the State of Georgia, or any instrumentality thereof. 
(2)	Peddlers, transients, itinerant merchants or vendors. Peddlers, as defined in Code Section 2-10, and transient, itinerant merchants and vendors, as defined in Code Section 2-10: Flat occupation tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day business will be conducted plus an occupation tax based on number of employees, if applicable. 
A traveling salesperson engaged in taking orders for the sale of goods when no delivery of goods is made at the time of taking the order and a merchant, dealer or employee of either, the situs of whose business is outside the county who delivers goods to wholesale or retail customers in the county either on orders previously taken by his salespersons or on orders previously given directly to him by the wholesale or retail customer, are exempted from any license fee or occupation tax. 
(3)	State and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-6-93, an occupation tax is levied upon each state and national banking association, federal savings and loan association, state banking and loan association and other depository banking institution doing business from one (1) or more locations within Dougherty County, Georgia. 
The rate of occupation tax on any depository financial institution subject to this section shall be 0.25% of gross receipts of said institution during the calendar year immediately preceding the year for which the tax shall be due; provided, however, that the minimum amount of occupation tax due from any depository financial institution shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) minus the annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A., Section 48-6-93. Any occupation tax due under this subsection will be subject to a credit of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the annual license fee. 
Each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the City of Albany's Treasurer's office on or before March first of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of the State Department of Revenue and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be March fifteenth of each tax year. 
(e)	Exemption from license fee and occupation tax. The following persons, firms, companies, or corporations engaged in any trade, business, profession or occupation in the county are exempt from the requirement of paying a license fee and an occupation tax: 
(1)	Each person operating a business in the county under a veteran's certificate of exemption issued by the State of Georgia, Department of Veteran's Service. 
(2)	Any nonprofit organization conducting business activities directly related to its nonprofit status. A nonprofit organization is defined as an organization which is classified as nonprofit by the Internal Revenue Service and exempt from federal taxes under Internal Revenue Service regulations. 
A nonprofit organization doing business that is not directly related to its nonprofit status will be required to obtain a business license and pay an occupation tax for every business activity conducted that is not directly related to its nonprofit status. 
(3)	Businesses subject to a franchise fee. Any person, firm, company, or corporation engaged in any trade, business, profession or occupation in the county which is subject to payment of a franchise fee under state law county resolution shall not be subject to pay an additional occupation tax. 
All exempt organizations are required to file an application and obtain a business license under the applicable regulations as promulgated by the license inspector. All exempt organizations will be subject to the same requirements of businesses obtaining business licenses and paying license fees, although exempt organizations will not be subject to license fees or occupation taxes. 
(f)	Payment of estimated occupation tax. All occupation taxes fixed in accordance with this section shall be due on or before March fifteenth of each calendar year or on the date the business commences operations. 
(g)	License required for each business location. Each person or entity transacting, or offering to transact, business within the county, whether in connection with any other business or not, shall pay to obtain a business license, pay a license fee and occupation tax for each separate location in which the person or entity transacts, or offers to transact, business. 
(h)	Duration of license. Each license issued under this section shall be for the calendar year, or the remaining portion thereof, and shall expire on December thirty-first of the year of issuance, except as may be specifically provided otherwise. 
(i)	Change of address. Any person moving their business from one (1) location to another shall notify the license inspector in writing no later than the day of moving. The same business license will be valid at the new location provided the new location conforms to all applicable rules and regulations, proper notification of transfer has been made, and a transfer fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) has been paid. 
(j)	Renewal of license; estimated and actual occupation tax. 
(1)	The owner or agent of a business, trade, profession or occupation within the county on January first, who had been licensed in the previous year, is required to file an annual return or certification of number of employees on or before March fifteenth of each year. The return application shall be signed by the appropriate person set forth above and shall include the name, address, and dominant business activity, as well as the number of employees of the business, trade, profession or occupation for the preceding year, and other information as may be required by the license inspector, for the purpose of determining the occupation tax. 
(2)	For each calendar year, the occupation tax determined from the filing of a return, as above required, shall constitute the estimated occupation tax for the respective calendar year in which the return is required to be filed and shall constitute the actual occupation tax for the preceding calendar year inasmuch as the return shall disclose the actual number of employees. 
(3)	In the event the actual occupation tax for any calendar year, determined from the return disclosing the actual number of employees for that year, shall exceed the estimated occupation tax paid for that year, the difference in amount between the actual occupation tax and the estimated occupation tax paid shall be due and payable by the license holder to the county on or before April first of the immediately succeeding year in which the estimated occupation tax was required to be determined and assessed, and shall be delinquent if not paid on or before that date. 
(4)	In the event the actual occupation tax for any calendar year, determined from the return disclosing the actual number of employees for the year, should be less than the estimated occupation tax paid for that year, then the difference in amount between the actual occupation tax and the estimated occupation tax paid shall be refunded by the county to the license holder; or, if the business of the license holder continues to be conducted in the county, that difference in amount may be credited by the county on the amount of the occupation tax due from the business for the calendar year in which the business is continued. 
(5)	Each person, firm, company or corporation engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation may, at their option, pay any occupation tax incurred in the year in which the tax is incurred. Any excess occupation tax paid based on actual number of employees receipts for the year in which taxes have been paid will be refunded. 
(k)	Information required on return form. Every person, firm, company or corporation subject to the occupation tax under subsection (b) for the 1996 calendar year, and thereafter, shall, at the end of the preceding calendar year and on or before March fifteenth of the current year, file a return in writing to the license inspector, on a form supplied by him, setting forth under oath the following information: 
(1)	Name of the person, firm, company or corporation;
(2)	Location at which the trade, business or profession is conducted;
(3)	Exact nature of the trade, business or profession;
(4)	Number of employees of trade, business or profession. The annual number of employees shall be determined by counting the number of employees reported to the Employment Security Agency, State of Georgia, in the Employer's Quarterly Wage Summary, as being employed in the pay period of each month. New businesses shall estimate the average annual number of employees for the first year. 
All the information required by this section shall be given under oath by the owner, a member of the firm, an officer of a corporation, or by an authorized employee having knowledge of actual business done. 
(l)	Determination if no return made. If any person, firm, company or corporation fails to make a return, the license inspector shall make an estimate of the amount of the number of employees. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person or business failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the license inspector. 
The license inspector shall give the owner or agent notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the owner or agent at his address as it appears in the records of the license inspector. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(m)	Failure to file a return. Any owner or agent failing to comply with the provisions of subsection (j) as it pertains to filing a return on or before March fifteenth shall be guilty of an offense as defined by and as punishable by section 2-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(n)	Refunds. If a business, trade, profession or occupation ceases operation within the year for which an occupation tax has been paid, the business, trade, profession or occupation may file a final return within thirty (30) days of closing. When the occupation tax, based on a flat occupation tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus an additional occupation tax based on number of employees, if applicable, is calculated, any portion of the occupation tax paid which exceeds the actual occupation tax will be refunded. No occupation taxes paid under subsection (d) will be refunded. 
(o)	License inspector authorized to examine records; confidentiality of returns; penalty for making false return. 
(1)	The license inspector, or his designee, is authorized to examine the books and records of any owner or agent subject to the occupation tax and to secure any information as to the correct number of employees. The license inspector, or his designee, shall give the owner or agent written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the owner or agent at his address as it appears in the records of the license inspector. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. Thereafter, the license inspector may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect any deficiency, together with interest, court costs, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, or agent of the county, or any other person, to divulge or make known in any manner the number of employees or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return required by this article. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents of the county using such return for the purpose of this section. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the county shall be classed as employees and subject to the same standards of confidentiality. 
(3)	Any owner or agent knowingly filing a false return shall be guilty of an offense as defined by and punishable by sections 2-1-8 and 2-10-11 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(p)	Power and authority of license inspector. The license inspector shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article or other ordinances and resolutions of the county and laws of the state or the Constitution of this State or of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section and the collection of the license fees or occupation taxes. 
EXHIBIT "A" 
DOUGHERTY COUNTY BUSINESS LICENSE AND OCCUPATION TAX EXHIBIT "A"

 
(Code 1979, §§ 3-2-31, 3-2-39; Res. No. 79-161, § 1, 11-19-79; Res. No. 90-054, § 1, 8-20-90; Res. No. 92-035, § 1, 7-20-92; Res. No. 93-001, §§ 1—16, 1-4-93; Res. 94-041, § 1, 12-19-94; Res. No. 95-027, §§ 1—16, 12-18-95) 
Editor's note— Section 2-10-2 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Res. No. 93-001, adopted January 4, 1993, included as a new § 2-10-2 at the discretion of the editor. Former § 2-10-2 pertained to the tax levy and schedule of license fees. 
Sec. 2-10-2.1. - Insurer; fees and taxes. 
(a)	Insurers license fees. There is hereby levied for the year 1995, and for each year thereafter, an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within Dougherty County, Georgia, in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the county, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For purposes of this section, the term "insurer" shall mean a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. Section 33-3-5. 
(b)	License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, not operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of twenty-six dollars and twenty-five cents ($26.25) per location for the year 1995, and for each year thereafter. 
(c)	Insurers agency license fees: independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied for the year 1995, and for each year thereafter, an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) hereof in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each such location within Dougherty County, Georgia. 
(d)	Gross premium tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1995, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums, as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a). 
(e)	Gross premium tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1995, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. Section 33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums, as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Section 33-3-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a). 
(f)	Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsection (a) and (b) shall be due and payable on the fifteenth day of March, 1995, and on the same date of each subsequent year. 
(g)	Administrative provisions. The county clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this resolution to the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Georgia within forty-five (45) days of this enactment. 
(Res. No. 94-042, 12-19-94)
Sec. 2-10-3. - License year; registration of applicant; each place of business subject to license; registration and payment prerequisite to engaging in business. 
(a)	The license shall be issued or granted only for the current calendar year in which the same is to be exercised, and only after the applicant therefor has registered with the county administrator the following information: Applicant's name and the kind of business to be engaged in, and the address of each place of business, and paid the tax thereon; and if a business is conducted at different places in the county, each place shall be subject to the tax. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business within the area of the county as above set out without first registering and paying tax in the amounts hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-31; Res. No. 79-161, § 1, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2-10-4 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Res. No. 93-001, adopted January 4, 1993, included herein as § 2-10-2. Former § 2-10-4 pertained to due date and delinquency penalty and derived from Code 1979, § 3-2-31 and Res. No. 79-161, § 1, adopted November 19, 1979. 
Sec. 2-10-5. - Proration of license. 
In the event a new business is commenced during the calendar year but prior to July first the applicant shall pay the license tax provided for the entire year; but if said business is commenced on or after July first, the applicant shall pay one-half the license tax. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-31; Res. No. 79-161, § 1, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-6. - Transferability of license. 
The license shall not be transferable except by permission and consent of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-31; Res. No. 79-161, § 1, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-7. - Tax subject to subsequent legislation. 
The license taxes shall be subject to any ordinance or resolution hereafter passed by the board of commissioners providing for the public welfare, health and security of the people of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-32; Res. No. 79-161, § 2, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-8. - Rules and regulations. 
The license taxes are subject to the right of the board of commissioners to regulate and exercise police power over said businesses and the right of the board of commissioners to prescribe such rules and regulations as may be necessary in the exercise of said police power and for the protection, and promotion of the public health, safety and welfare; and to provide for a forfeiture of said licenses upon failure to comply with any of said rules and regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-33; Res. No. 79-161, § 3, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2-10-9 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Res. No. 93-001, adopted January 4, 1993, included herein as § 2-10-9. Former § 2-10-9 pertained to transient traders and canvassers and derived from Res. No. 79-161, § 4, adopted November 19, 1979. 
Sec. 2-10-10. - Collection of delinquent taxes, penalty, interest and execution fee. 
(a)	Whenever there is a default in the payment of a license tax for which provisions is herein made, it shall be the duty of the county administrator to issue an execution signed by such county administrator directed to the sheriff and all of the sheriff's lawful deputies of the county for the collection of the license tax, plus a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of said license, plus interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum from the date of said license tax was due, and a fee of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) as costs for the expense of issuing said execution. 
(b)	The execution shall be levied by the sheriff or the sheriff's deputies in the manner provided by law for the levy of execution issuing from the superior courts of this state, and all subsequent proceedings shall conform to and be governed by said rules of law. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-34; Res. No. 79-161, § 5, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-11. - Operation without license; violating rules or regulations. 
Any person who shall operate any of the businesses, as defined in section 2-10-1, for which a license fee is required by this article, whether same shall be an individual, enterprise, partnership or corporation, without having obtained the license required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be as provided in section 2-1-8. Any violation of any rules or regulations adopted by the board of commissioners pursuant to this article shall be punishable as in section 2-1-8. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-35; Res. No. 79-161, § 6, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-12. - Granting or revoking alcoholic beverage license. 
The granting or revoking of license to sell alcoholic beverages may be on the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 79-161, § 7, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-13. - Article supplemental of state law. 
All state laws in reference to the authority of a county to license specific businesses, or to revoke same, shall remain in full force and effect. This article supplements said laws. The rights given the board of commissioners to regulate and control business through license tax on specific businesses is cumulative, and the license taxes fixed by this article or any subsequent amendment shall be in addition to any license taxes fixed by state law that a county may impose unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2-37; Res. No. 79-161, § 8, 11-19-79)
State Law reference— Authority to levy business and occupation license taxes, Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 4, ¶1(b)(1); O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-10-14. - [Proper payment of sales tax.] 
Any person who performs any business, occupation or profession subject to an occupation tax or regulatory fee under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. is required to provide the county the following information when paying their occupation tax or regulatory fee: 
(1)	The legal name of the business;
(2)	Any associated trade names for the business;
(3)	The mailing address for the business;
(4)	The actual physical address of each location of the business, if it is different than the mailing address; 
(5)	NAICS—North American Industry Classification System Code; and
(6)	The sales and use tax identification number assigned to the business by the Georgia Department of Revenue, if the business is required by law to have such a number. 
The county will provide written notice to all persons subject to occupation tax or regulatory fees and that: 
(1)	This information will be turned over to the Georgia Department of Revenue; or
(2)	If the person refuses or fails to provide the required information, the county will notify the Georgia Department of Revenue of this fact. 
Within thirty (30) days after receiving the payment of occupation taxes or regulatory fees under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20, the county will electronically submit the information received from each business, to the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Res. No. 11-001, 1-24-11)
Editor's note— Res. No. 11-001, adopted Jan. 24, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-10-14 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-10-15—2-10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 2-10, Art. II, § 2-10-20 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Res. No. 93-001, adopted January 4, 1993 included as § 2-10-2. Former Ch. 2-10, Art. II, pertained to insurance businesses and derived from Res. No. 83-021, § 1, adopted August 15, 1983.

Secs. 2-10-20—2-10-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 2-10, Art. III, §§ 2-10-30—2-10-33 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Res. No. 93-001, included as § 2-10-2. Former Ch. 2-10, Art. III pertained to financial institutions and derived from Res. No. 83-038, §§ 1, 2, adopted November 21, 1983, §§ 1—5, adopted November 21, 1983.

Secs. 2-10-30—2-10-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLEA MARKETS; YARD SALES 

Sec. 2-10-40. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Commercial stall. A defined space in a flea market which is rented for the purpose of selling any new manufactured merchandise. 
Flea markets, outdoor merchandise sales and displays. The sale of new or used clothing or other used or new household items, new or used tools, new or used appliances, etc., or any other combination of new or used goods in a manner that no longer meets the standards of yard sale. These markets, sales and displays are those that occur continuously or frequently, and specifically more than two (2) times per year, normally at a fixed location where a proprietor, partnership, or corporation leases to vendors a booth, stall or a designated area from which the vendor markets such vendor's goods. Such sales and resales typically are conducted inside, outside or partially outside a building. 
Yard sale. The sale of clothing or other use or surplus household items normally reflecting items in surplus by a single household or a small group of households. Such sales will not occur more than three (3) times per year per location either at a residence or in a flea market setting. 
(Res. No. 86-034, § 1, 76-21-86)
Sec. 2-10-41. - Flea market license—Required; fee. 
Any person operating flea market whereby booths, stalls or designated areas are rented or leased to other parties is required to purchase a business license. The fee for said license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year plus three dollars ($3.00) for each separate commercial stall, booth or designated area contained in the market area. Any vendor offering any merchandise for sale at a flea market or other outdoor merchandise sale and display market must pay an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) if they operate more than two (2) consecutive weekends in any calendar year. 
(Res. No. 86-034, § 2, 7-21-86; Res. of 93-003, § 1, 1-19-93; Res. of 93-013, § 1, 5-3-93) 
Sec. 2-10-42. - Same—Application. 
Application for a flea market license shall be handled in the same manner as prescribed for all business licenses. Applicant shall certify the number of commercial stalls available for rent at the time a license is purchased. 
(Res. No. 86-034, § 3, 7-21-86)
Sec. 2-10-43. - Special operating requirements for flea markets. 
(a)	Flea markets meet all zoning regulations.
(b)	All buildings and premises of a flea market must pass building and fire codes.
(c)	Flea markets must not create a nuisance as defined by other sections of this Code.
(Res. No. 86-034, § 4, 7-21-86)
Sec. 2-10-44. - Penalties. 
Violators of this article are subject to revocation of licenses and/or penalties as provided by law. 
(Res. No. 86-034, § 5, 7-21-86)
Secs. 2-10-45—2-10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POOL TABLES, BILLIARD TABLES, GAME ROOMS 

Sec. 2-10-50. - Definition. 
Game rooms are defined as those establishments, the primary source of revenue of which is from coin-operated pool or billiard tables, or coin-operated game machines of assorted design, such as pinball or baseball. 
(Res. No. 79-162, § 3, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-51. - Permit required. 
No person shall operate or conduct for hire or profit in the county, any pool table, billiard table or game room without first having made written application for and obtained from the board of commissioners a permit to do so. 
(Res. No. 79-162, § 1, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-52. - Application for permit. 
Applications for permits to conduct a pool table, billiard table or game room shall be made in the name of the person desiring to engage in the business and, in case of firms or corporations, the individual names of those composing the firm and the managing officers of the corporation. The application shall specify: 
(1)	The year which the permit is to cover;
(2)	The location of the place of business;
(3)	The number and kind of tables to be operated;
(4)	The number and type of game machines to be operated;
(5)	If such business is to be operated in connection with any other kind of business, the nature of that business. 
(Res. No. 79-162, § 2, 11-19-79)
Sec. 2-10-53. - Expiration and renewal of permit. 
Any permit issued under this article shall be effective for twelve (12) months from the date of issuance and must be renewed in the same manner as an original application. 
(Res. No. 79-162, § 4, 11-19-79)
Secs. 2-10-54—2-10-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE DETECTIVES AND SECURITY SERVICES 

Sec. 2-10-60. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Private detective: A person who accepts employment for hire, fee or reward to furnish or supply information as to the personal character or actions or identity of any person or as to the character or kind of business or occupation of any person. The term shall not include a detective or officer belonging to the law enforcement agencies of the United States or of any state, county or city. 
Security services: Includes the guarding of private property for compensation against vandalism, theft, fire or other mishap, whether such operation is conducted by continuous presence on the premises, or by patrolling and routine and periodical observation of the property. 
(Code 1979, §§ 7-4-1, 7-5-1)
Sec. 2-10-61. - Private detective license—Required; qualifications; bond. 
(a)	Required. No person shall operate as a private detective in the county without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided. 
(b)	Conviction of crime. No person shall operate as a private detective if such person has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor other than traffic violations. 
(c)	Experience. No person shall operate as a private detective unless such person shall have had at least two (2) years of experience with a law enforcement agency or three (3) years' experience as an investigator with a private detective agency or other commercial concern or two (2) years' experience with a government agency. 
(d)	Bond. No license shall be issued hereunder, and no person shall operate as a private detective in the county, unless the applicant files with the county a surety bond executed by such applicant with two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties, or by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000), conditioned upon the careful, faithful and honest conduct of the services to be performed by the applicant, or applicant's employees. Such bond shall be approved by the county attorney as to form, execution and sufficiency of sureties. The bond or approved security required herein shall be taken in the name of the people of the county, and every person injured by the negligent, or willful, or malicious, or wrongful conduct of the principal, principal's agents, servants or employees, in the conduct of the business of private detective, may bring an action on the bond in such person's own name to recover damages for such negligent, or willful, or malicious, or wrongful act. 
(Code 1979, § 7-4-2)
Sec. 2-10-62. - Same—Application; investigation. 
(a)	Application. Application for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon forms made available by the board of commissioner's office and shall state: 
(1)	The full name, age, residence, present and previous occupations of the applicant;
(2)	A specific description of the location of the principal place of business of the applicant, including proof of ownership, lease or rental; 
(3)	The number of years of experience the applicant has had as a private detective or in the related fields; 
(4)	The length of time applicant has been a bona fide resident of the state and county immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
(5)	Three (3) character references and three (3) business references who have known the applicant for a period of at least three (3) years; 
(6)	A list of dates and places of employment for five (5) years prior to date of application; and 
(7)	A photograph and fingerprints made by the police department of the county.
(b)	Investigation. Within ten (10) days after receipt of an application as provided for herein, the police committee shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and applicant's proposed operation. 
(Code 1979, §§ 7-4-3, 7-4-4)
Sec. 2-10-63. - Same—Issuance; notice to agencies. 
(a)	Issuance. If upon investigation, the police committee shall find that the applicant is of good moral character and has never been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor other than for traffic violations, has met the residence requirements hereunder and has had adequate experience as required hereunder, a license shall be issued. 
(b)	Notice to interested agencies. If approved, applicant must file a notice with all law enforcement agencies of the license within fifteen (15) days after approval and to such other bureaus or civic organizations as designated by the police committee. 
(Code 1979, §§ 7-4-5, 7-4-7)
Sec. 2-10-64. - Same—Transferability; revocation; suspension. 
(a)	Transferability. Licenses issued hereunder shall not be transferable. 
(b)	Revocation and suspension. Licenses issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the police committee for violation of any of the provisions of this article, or of misconduct by the licensee or licensee's employees, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given the licensee. The police committee shall immediately notify any licensee, by personal service, of such suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1979, § 7-4-8)
Sec. 2-10-65. - Same—Regulations and standards applicable to employees. 
All employees of any person having or applying for a private detective license hereunder shall meet the standard set forth above and shall be subject to all applicable regulations of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 7-4-6)
Sec. 2-10-66. - Security services—Registration; fee. 
(a)	All persons performing security services in the unincorporated area of the county, whether as employer or employee, shall register with the police department of the county, furnishing their name, physical description, a photograph and fingerprints. The police department will furnish the fingerprinting and photographing services, and a fee of two dollars ($2.00) will be charged for each individual processed. 
(b)	Each person engaging in business in the unincorporated area of the county as an employer furnishing security services must register with the police department of the county and must furnish the following information: (1) the name and address of each employee working for said employer; and (2) the name and address of each location with respect to which such employer furnishes security services. 
(Code 1979, §§ 7-5-2, 7-5-3)
Sec. 2-10-67. - Same—Identification card. 
Every person while engaged in furnishing security services at any location in the unincorporated areas of the county, shall have and maintain an identification card signed by the authorized representative of such person's employer, containing such person's photograph and physical description on said card, which identification card must be worn so as to be visible at all times. 
(Code 1979, § 7-5-4)
Sec. 2-10-68. - Same—Bond. 
Every person furnishing security services as an employer or employee shall post with the clerk of the board of commissioners a bond with good and sufficient security in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) payable to the county for the use and benefit of the county and any member of the public, to secure and indemnify the county and public against any loss or damage occasioned by reason of such person's default, misfeasance, malfeasance or negligent conduct. 
(Code 1979, § 7-5-5)
Sec. 2-10-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CATV FRANCHISE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-10-70. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Auxiliary services: Any communications service in addition to regular subscriber services, including but not limited to pay TV, burglar alarm service, data transmission, facsimile service, home shopping service, etc. 
Cable television system or CATV system: Any facility that in whole or in part receives directly, or indirectly, over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one (1) or more television or radio stations and distributes such signals and/or auxiliary services by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such service. 
Channel: A band of frequencies six (6) megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum capable of carrying either one (1) audio-visual television signal and a few nonvideo signals or a large number of nonvideo signals. 
County: The unincorporated area of this county as presently constituted. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC: The present federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency created by the United States Congress. 
Franchise: An authorization granted by the county, which permits the construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable television system within the franchise area under the terms of this article. 
Franchise area: That portion of the county, for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this article. 
Grantee: The holder of a cable television franchise issued by the county. 
Gross subscriber revenues: Those revenues derived from the supplying of regular subscriber service within the county, including monthly service charges and fees for regular cable benefits including the transmission of broadcast signals and access and origination channels, if any; it also includes installation fees or reconnect charges, revenues derived from per program or per channel charges, leased channel revenues, advertising revenues, or any other income derived from the operation of auxiliary services within the county. 
Major stockholder: A beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of ten (10) percent or more of the issued and outstanding voting stock of any corporation. 
Public street: The surface of and the space above and below any public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, alley, right-of-way, public utility easement, and any other public ground or water within or belonging to the franchise entity. 
Regular subscriber service: That service regularly provided to all subscribers. It includes all broadcast signal carriage, FCC required access channel carriage, including origination programming. It does not include specialized programming for which a per program or per channel charge is made or other auxiliary services. 
Subscriber: Any person receiving any regular subscriber service and/or auxiliary services. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 1, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-71. - Franchise required. 
(a)	From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or carry on the business of distributing to any persons in the unincorporated part of Dougherty County, Georgia, any television signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise therefore has first been obtained from the county and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(b)	From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the county, or within any other public property of the county, or within any privately owned area within the county which has not yet become a public street, but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision approved by the county, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained from the county, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 2, 1-17-83; Res. No. 87-026, § 1(a), (b), 7-20-87)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 87-026, adopted July 20, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; therefore, inclusion of § 1(a), (b) thereof as amending § 2-10-71 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-10-72. - Term of franchise. 
(a)	Any franchise granted by the county shall be for a term not to exceed fifteen (15) years following the date such franchise is accepted by the grantee, and upon application of the grantee and review of the performance of the grantee in a public proceeding, the county may renew the franchise for successive periods, not to exceed fifteen (15) years, with such modification of terms as deemed appropriate by the county. 
(b)	The county may terminate any franchise in the event grantee shall refuse or neglect to comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this article. 
(c)	Should the county, in its sole discretion, determine that grantee is not in compliance with this article and any franchise issued hereunder, notice shall be given to grantee, and grantee shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of such notice, complete all matters necessary to comply with said article. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 3, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-73. - Limitations of franchise. 
(a)	Any franchise granted under this article shall be nonexclusive, and nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the county from granting identical or similar franchises to more than one (1) person, within all or a portion of the unincorporated area of the county. 
(b)	A grantee shall, at all times during the life of its franchise, be subject to the lawful exercise of the county's police power and such reasonable regulations as the county may subsequently promulgate thereunder. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to prohibit in any way the right of the county to levy nondiscriminatory occupation license taxes on any activity conducted by grantee. 
(c)	All privileges prescribed by such a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the public street, and the county reserves the right to reasonably designate where a grantee's facilities are to be placed within the public ways. 
(d)	(1)	A franchise shall be a privilege which is personal to the original grantee. It shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned, or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without prior written consent of the county, said written consent to be in the form of a resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed in said resolution. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by any instrument in writing, expressly providing that the transferee accepts all conditions and terms of the franchise. The county shall be furnished an executed copy of any such transfer within thirty (30) days of its execution. 
(2)	Consent of the county shall not be granted until the county, in its sole discretion, is satisfied that the proposed assignee is qualified to operate and maintain a cable television system in the unincorporated area of the county and has afforded all interested parties notice and an opportunity to be heard on the question. Consent of the county shall not be arbitrarily refused; provided that the proposed assignee in the sole discretion of the county possesses the requisite qualifications and agrees, in writing, to comply with all provisions of the franchise and the resolution. 
(3)	Transfer of twenty (20) percent or more of the voting securities of a corporate grantee to a person not presently a shareholder shall be deemed to be a transfer of control. 
(4)	No such consent shall be required for a transfer:
(i)	In trust, of system assets by mortgage or by other hypothecation, to secure an indebtedness;
(ii)	To a corporation the stock of which is held by the same shareholder as grantee;
(iii)	To a parent or subsidiary of a corporate grantee;
(iv)	Of less than twenty (20) percent of the voting securities of a corporate grantee unless such transfer also results in a transfer of voting control; 
(v)	Of stock from one (1) present stockholder to another present shareholder unless such transfer also results in a transfer of voting control. 
(e)	Nothing herein shall be deemed to in any way impair or affect the right of the county to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the power of eminent domain, at a price reflective of its fair market value as an ongoing concern, and nothing herein shall be construed to constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the county. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 4, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-74. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)	The grantee shall pay, and by its acceptance of a franchise specifically agrees to pay, all damages, costs and penalties which the county may be legally required to pay as a result of grantee's installation, operation, or maintenance of a franchise cable television system under this article, whether or not the acts or omissions complained of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the county. 
(b)	A grantee shall also pay all expenses incurred by the county with regard to all claims, damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (a) above, including but not limited to, out-of-pocket expenses, reasonable attorney's fees and the reasonable value of services rendered by any employee of the county. 
(c)	The grantee shall maintain, throughout the term of the franchise, liability insurance insuring the county and the grantee with regard to all claims, damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (a) above: 
(1)	Workers' compensation insurance as provided by the laws of the state;
(2)	Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury of death to any one (1) person, within the limit, however, of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death resulting from any one (1) accident; 
(3)	Two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. 
The insurance policies obtained by a grantee in compliance with this section shall be issued by a company or companies acceptable to the county, and a current certificate of insurance, along with written evidence of payment of all required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the county during the term of the franchise. Said polices shall name the county and the board of commissioners as additional insureds and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the county thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 5, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-75. - Technical requirements; channel capacity. 
The CATV system to be constructed by grantee shall be installed, maintained, and operated at all times in full compliance with the technical and channel capacity standards of the Federal Communications Commission. The results of annual performance tests conducted in accordance with section 76.601(c), FCC rules (or such other section of the rules as shall incorporate its substance) shall be retained for at least five (5) years and available for inspection by the county. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 6, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-76. - Safety requirements. 
Grantee shall at all times install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment including house connections, in accordance with the requirements of the county's building code, the provisions of the National Electric Safety Code, as amended, and such applicable ordinances and regulations of the county affecting electrical installations which may be presently affected, or changed by future resolutions. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 7, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-77. - Service standards; business office; resolution of complaints. 
Throughout the life of its franchise, grantee shall: 
(1)	Maintain all parts of its system in good condition and in accordance with standards generally observed by the cable television industry. Sufficient employees shall be retained to provide safe, adequate and prompt service for all of its facilities. 
(2)	Maintain a conveniently located business office and service center to which subscribers may telephone without incurring added message units or toll charges. This office shall be open during all usual business hours. 
(3)	Dispatch personnel to investigate all service complaints and equipment malfunctions within twenty-four (24) hours and make reasonable efforts to resolve such complaints as promptly as possible. Planned interruption of service shall be only for good cause. Insofar as possible planned service interruptions shall be preceded by notice, be of brief duration, and occur during minimum viewing hours. In the event that service to any subscriber is interrupted, there shall be a pro rata rebate of the monthly fee to affected subscribers. 
(4)	Maintain a complete list of all complaints received and the efforts taken to resolve them in form to be approved by the county. This list shall be available to the county upon request. 
(5)	Permit the county to inspect and test the system's technical equipment and facilities upon reasonable notice. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 8, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-78. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)	Grantee's transmission and distribution system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or the use of county streets, or to interfere with existing and/or new improvements the county may deem proper to make, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property of the county and its citizens. Grantee will at the request of the county move and relocate, if necessary, any of the grantee's installations, including removal of poles to avoid such interference all at the grantee's expense. The county is the sole judge as to what constitutes interference. Approval of all construction sites and routes must be secured from the county administrator prior to erection of any transmission of distribution facilities. Any change in the location of these facilities shall also be subject to prior approval by the county administrator. 
(b)	Grantee shall, on the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the county, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any building or other structure, and the actual expense of the same shall be paid by the party requesting the same. 
(c)	Installation and housedrop hardware shall be uniform throughout the county, except that the grantee shall be free to change its hardware and installation procedures as the state of the art progresses. This provision will not require grantee to modify any installation already made unless other changes in the system made by grantee cause inferior reception in the areas already installed. 
(d)	In those areas where telephone and electric service lines are underground, or where the grantee is unable to make arrangements for the use of existing utility poles, the grantee shall place its cables and service lines underground unless approval to place the cables and service lines on poles is secured from the county. 
(e)	In the construction, maintenance and operation of its transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys and other public places, and in the course of any new construction in addition to its facilities, the grantee shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the grantee in the course of its operations shall be made only after having obtained prior written permission to so do from the county administrator or such administrator's representative, and the proper state and/or federal official if a state and/or federal highway is involved. All such work shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by appropriate warning lights. 
(f)	all work in any way necessitated by the business of the grantee which may involve the opening, breaking up or tearing up of a portion of a street, sidewalk, or other part of any county-owned or county-controlled property, shall be done and repaired in a manner approved by the county administrator, and may be done by the county at the expense of the grantee, if mutually agreed upon by the county and the grantee or by the county and charged to the grantee if the grantee refuses to repair the streets, sidewalks, or county property promptly and/or fails to repair such in a satisfactory manner. 
(g)	Grantee shall have authority to trim the trees upon and overhanging the public streets so as to prevent the branches from coming in contact with the wires and cables of grantee, except that, at the option of the county, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. 
(h)	Nothing in this article or any franchise agreement shall grant to the grantee any right of property in county-owned property, nor shall the county be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than or in any fashion other than in the county's judgment its own business or needs may require. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 9, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-79. - Construction. 
(a)	Grantee shall submit a construction schedule upon the filing of its application which shall reflect the grantee's plans for the construction of the cable television system. The schedule shall include all times required for obtaining governmental licenses and permits. If construction is delayed through the fault of parties other than the grantee, including, but not limited to, the failure of any governmental agency to issue any permit or license within the time projected on the construction schedule, then the remainder of the schedule may be modified, with the county's consent, to reflect this delay. 
(b)	A grantee shall engage in progressive expansion of cable service to the franchise area by the installation of energized trunk lines, amplifiers and related equipment except to the extent that adverse terrain or other conditions render it impracticable. In the event of the failure of the grantee to render significant community cable television service (in this case, "significant community cable television service" shall mean fifty (50) percent of the franchise area receiving cable television service on a regular basis) to the county and the inhabitants thereof, as contemplated and provided for by this article, within a period of one (1) year after accepting its franchise, the county may on ninety (90) days' written notice to the grantee, declare the rights and franchise granted under this article and any franchise agreement or resolution enacted pursuant to this article forfeited, or require grantee to reduce monthly subscriber fees to an amount deemed appropriate by the county and/or to require the company to forfeit the security bond required by section 2-10-80 or by any franchise agreement. Failure to comply with these terms by reason of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of grantee which circumstances could not be anticipated at the time of the acceptance of its terms by grantee, such as an insufficient number of homes per street mile, shall not be sufficient grounds for the county to declare forfeiture. 
(c)	Following significant community cable television service during the first year after acceptance of its franchise, the grantee shall thereafter extend its energized trunk cable and other facilities to the remaining franchise area so that the entire franchise area is served as soon as practicable. 
(d)	Grantee shall be capable of providing service within not more than ten (10) days after receiving an application for service. 
(e)	In the event the operation of any part of the cable television system is discontinued for a continuous period of sixty (60) days, or in the event such system has been installed on any public street without complying with the requirements of the grantee's franchise, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given ten (10) days' written notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system. Any property which the grantee allows to remain in place sixty (60) days after having been notified by the county that it must be removed shall be considered permanently abandoned and shall become the property of the county subject to the provisions of any utility joint use attachment agreement. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 10, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-80. - Indemnity bond. 
(a)	Concurrently with the acceptance of its franchise a grantee shall file with the county a bond with an acceptable surety in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to indemnify and hold the county harmless from all losses it may suffer in the event the grantee fails to comply with one (1) or more of the provisions of its franchise. Said bond shall be obtained at the sole expense of the grantee and remain in effect for the full term of the franchise or any renewal thereof, plus an additional six (6) months thereafter. The grantee and its surety shall be jointly and severally liable under the terms of the bond for any damages or loss suffered by the county as a result of the grantee's nonperformance, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of renewal of any property of the grantee in the event of default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The bond shall provide for thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the county of any intention on the part of the grantee to cancel, fail to renew, or otherwise materially alter its terms. 
(b)	Neither the filing of an indemnity bond with the county, nor the receipt of any damages recovered by the county thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under the terms of its franchise for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 11, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-81. - Franchise payments. 
(a)	Each person awarded a franchise under this article shall pay to the county, each year during the life of the franchise, a franchise fee in the amount of three (3) percent of gross of all cable service revenues, including, but not limited to, subscriber revenues, advertising, pay cable, auxiliary services and lease channel revenues of the company derived from cable television operations within the franchise area. The company shall pay to the county the aforesaid franchise payments on a quarterly basis not later than the fifteenth day of March, June, September and December of each year. In the event the Federal Communications Commission regulations controlling franchise are deleted, or the permissible franchise fee provided in the FCC regulations is raised, the franchise fee percentage provided herein shall be increased to five (5) percent effective immediately upon the deletion or raising of permissible franchise percentages by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(b)	Grantee shall file with the agency within ninety (90) days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which its franchise is enforced, a financial statement certified by a responsible officer of the grantee, showing in detail the gross revenues, as defined herein, of the grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. 
(c)	The county shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records showing the gross revenues from which its franchise payments are computed and shall also have the right of audit and recomputation of any amounts paid under this resolution. No acceptance of payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the county may have for further or additional sums payable under this resolution or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder; however, an accounting rendered to the county and to which no exception is made within four (4) years after receipt by the county shall be deemed to be accurate and shall not thereafter be subject to question or made the basis of any claim by the county against the grantee. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 12, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-82. - Rates charged to subscribers. 
(a)	The franchise shall set forth the initial rates which grantee may charge its subscribers. Thereafter, these rates shall be changed only in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	The rates and charges made to subscribers hereunder shall be fair and reasonable and not higher than necessary to meet all costs of service (assuming efficient and economical management), including a fair return on the original cost, less depreciation, of the properties devoted to the rendering of such service (without regard to any subsequent sale or transfer price or cost of such properties). 
(c)	Should grantee desire to change any rate it shall notify each subscriber and the county in writing of the intended change, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date the change is to be effective. 
(d)	During the month following the acceptance of the franchise by the grantee, and each twenty-third month thereafter during the franchise period, the county may review the rates charged to subscribers by grantee and may institute the following regulatory procedures, which shall then be required prior to any rate increase becoming effective: The franchise of the grantee may not more often than once every twelve (12) months, petition the county for an increase in fees setting forth the proposed fee increase and the reasons therefor. The county shall, upon receipt of such petition, hold a full public hearing on said petition, said hearing to be held not more than ninety (90) days after the petition is filed. At such hearing, all interested parties may present evidence in support of or in opposition to the proposed fee increase. The grantee shall have the burden of proving a need for any increase in fees. The county shall then have ninety (90) days to either approve or disapprove said petition in whole or in part, and shall give its reasons therefor. The grantee will furnish all records considered necessary by the county to reach a decision in this matter. 
(e)	The grantee may require subscribers to pay for each month of basic and auxiliary service in advance of the beginning of each month. No other advance payment or deposit of any kind shall be required by grantee for subscriber service. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to prohibit charges or waiver of charges for initial installation or reconnection. 
(f)	Except as otherwise provided in this article, a grantee may make a charge to subscribers for the installation of service outlets and for the reconnection of service outlets. The initial rates for such connection or reconnection shall be contained in the franchise agreement. A procedure for seeking increases and installation, connection and reconnection charges shall be the same as that set forth in this article for increases in basic subscriber service. 
(g)	There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or outlet. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, the grantee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet; provided, however, that such disconnection shall not be effected until thirty (30) days after the due date of said delinquent fee or charge and shall include ten (10) days' written notice of the intent to disconnect, delivered to the subscriber in question. If a subscriber pays within the ten-day period, grantee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent charge, and the payment of a reconnection charge, grantee shall promptly reinstate a subscriber's cable service. 
(h)	Upon termination of service to any subscriber, grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon such subscriber's request. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 13, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-83. - Public service requirements. 
A grantee shall: 
(1)	Provide at least one (1) service outlet to all county facilities and public schools within its franchise area or within the corporate limits of the City of Albany area at no cost to the county or school involved, provided energized trunk lines are readily accessible, and shall charge only its time and material costs for any additional service outlets to such facilities. 
(2)	Make its facilities immediately available to the county upon request during the course of any emergency or disaster. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 14, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-84. - Amendment of article and franchise. 
The county may amend this article and any franchise agreement issued hereunder, upon its own motion or on the application of a grantee whenever amendment is necessary to enable a grantee to utilize new developments in television or radio signal transmission which would improve and update cable television service in the franchise area, to comply with any modifications in the rules of the FCC. No amendment shall be adopted except after notice and public hearing, and no amendment substantially amending the existing rights and obligations of the grantee shall be adopted without grantee's consent. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 15, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-85. - Application procedures. 
This article grants no authority to operate a cable television system to any person. Such grants are only made by the adoption of a separate resolution awarding a specific franchise to an applicant who has complied with the provisions of this article. Any person interested in obtaining a franchise to operate a cable television system in the franchise area shall submit a written application to the county together with nonrefundable application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name, address and form of business of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, it shall also state the names, addresses and occupations of its officers, directors and major shareholders, and the names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary companies. If applicant is a corporation controlled by another corporation, the names, addresses and occupations of the officers, directors and major shareholders of the controlling corporation shall also be stated. If the application is a partnership or other unincorporated association, the name and address of each member, whether active or inactive, shall be set forth, and if one (1) or more partners are corporations, the names, addresses and occupations of such corporation's officers, directors and major shareholders shall also be stated, and all other principals involved. 
(2)	A list of all other cable television systems, if any, in which the applicant (or any partner or major shareholder of applicant) has a substantial interest, stating the location, approximate number of homes served, and the name and address of the local franchising body. 
(3)	A thorough description of the proposed cable television system; the manner in which the applicant proposes to contract, install, maintain and operate the same; and the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of public utility companies will be used in the proposed service areas. 
(4)	A schedule of proposed rates and charges to all classes of subscribers for both installation and monthly service, and a copy of the proposed service agreement, between the applicant and its proposed subscribers. 
(5)	A copy of any contract which may exist between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of such utility's property, such as poles, lines or conduits. 
(6)	A statement setting forth all agreements and understanding, whether written, oral or implied, between the applicant and any other person with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed cable television operation. If a franchise should be granted to a person or entity posing as an agent or representative of another undisclosed person or entity, such franchise shall be deemed void ab initio and of no force and effect whatsoever. 
(7)	An estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant's proposed system and a financial statement prepared in form satisfactory to the county showing applicant's financial status and its financial ability to meet these proposed costs. 
(8)	A sworn statement and acknowledging the applicant's familiarity with and eligibility under the provisions of this article and the rules of the FCC and its intention to abide by the same. 
(9)	Any such supplementary information as the county shall at any time demand in order to reasonably determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 16, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-86. - Renewal procedures. 
(a)	A franchise may be renewed by the county for a period of up to fifteen (15) years upon the written request of the grantee without soliciting additional applications. Such a renewal request shall be filed at least six (6) months but not more than eight (8) months prior to the expiration of the franchise and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). A renewal request may proposed modifications in the terms of a grantee's franchise which shall be considered by the county, but in any case, the county may, within its sole discretion, modify the terms of a grantee's franchise subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (b) below. 
(b)	Upon receipt of a request for a renewal of a franchise, the county shall then render a written decision to renew or not to renew the grantee's franchise. Such written decision shall also provide for any modifications in the initial franchise agreement. A grantee shall deliver its written acceptance of a renewal franchise within thirty (30) days after it is offered by the county and upon failure to do so shall be conclusively presumed to have consented to the expiration of its franchise. 
(c)	In the event of the failure of the grantee to renew its franchise at the termination of the franchise period, or in the event that the franchise is forfeited due to the failure of the grantee to fully comply with all terms and conditions of this article and its agreement, or in the event that the county does not renew the franchise at the termination of the franchise period, or upon transfer or assignment of the franchise, the distribution system of the grantee shall be placed up for sale at fair market value and the county shall have first option or refusal on the purchase of the system. The fair market value shall be determined by the county in accordance with generally accepted appraisal and accounting principals. Under no circumstances shall any valuation be made for goodwill or any right or privilege granted by this article. Should a dispute arise between the parties as to the fair market value, it shall be determined by a three-member arbitration panel, one (1) member to be selected by the county, one by the grantee and the third member by the two (2) members first named. The parties shall divide the expenses of arbitration evenly among themselves. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 17, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-87. - Tampering; unauthorized connections. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this county for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, or sound. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this county for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of said system. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 18, 1-17-83; Res. No. 87-026, § 1(c)—(e), 7-20-87)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 87-026, adopted July 20, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; therefore, inclusion of § 1(c)—(e) thereof as amending § 2-1-87 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-10-88. - Continued use of individual antennas protected. 
It is not the county's intention to prohibit the erection or continued use of individual television antennas, and no one is or will be required to receive cable television service or connect with a cable television system. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 19, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-89. - Grantee may promulgate rules. 
Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its services under this article and the rules of the FCC, and to assure uninterrupted service to all of its subscribers. Such rules and regulations shall not be deemed to have the force of law. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 20, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-90. - Notices. 
Every direction, notice or order to be served upon a grantee shall be sent to the local office described in the franchise agreement. Every notice to be served upon the county shall be hand delivered to the county administrator, city-county governmental building, 225 Pine Avenue, Albany, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 21, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-91. - Rights and remedies cumulative. 
The rights and remedies reserved to the parties by this article are cumulative and shall not add to or subtract from any other rights or remedies which they may have with respect to the subject matter of this article, and a waiver thereof at any time shall not affect any other time. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 22, 1-17-83)
Sec. 2-10-92. - Right of the county to intervene. 
It is expressly agreed and understood that the county has the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this article. 
(Res. No. 83-005, § 23, 1-17-83)
Secs. 2-10-93—2-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Resolution No. 93-026, adopted September 8, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—21 as Ch. 2-10, Art. VIII, §§ 2-10-101—2-10-121 was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 2-10-101. - Findings; public purpose. 
The board of commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, (hereinafter, board of commissioners) finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to enact regulations to reduce the possible adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. However, the board of commissioners also finds that the outright prohibition of such establishments could improperly infringe upon protected forms of expression. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to establish a balance between the protection afforded by the First Amendment and the public health, safety and welfare of the citizenry of Dougherty County, Georgia, and reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments in a manner that serves the legitimate government interest of reducing criminal activity and protecting values without unreasonably infringing upon the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 1, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-102. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult entertainment means performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are characterized by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means a restaurant, nightclub, cabaret, or other establishment which features adult entertainment. Any commercial establishment which has, as its primary purpose or business, the offer for sale of any book, publication, or film which depicts nudity, or sexual conduct or engages in services such as bath houses, massage parlors, wrestling parlors or like activity including a restaurant, nightclub, cabaret, lounge or other establishment which features adult entertainment. 
Church means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Dougherty County means that area of Dougherty County, Georgia, lying outside the corporate city limits of the City of Albany, Georgia. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five (5) years. 
Licensed day care center means a day care center licensed by the State of Georgia and/or established in Dougherty County, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for children under fourteen (14) years of age where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
Mainstream performance house means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment, which regularly features live performances such as plays or concerts which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities and where such depiction, if any, is only incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Minor means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Operator means the manager, or other person, principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner(s) means if a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers directors and persons holding at least ten (10) percent of the outstanding shares. 
Residential means pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as homes, town houses, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein. 
School means a facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include, but not be limited to, public and private schools used for primary, secondary or post-secondary education. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 2, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-103. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within Dougherty County, an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment license to do so. The issuance of such license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone, or make legal any activity or conduct that is illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. The annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for an adult entertainment establishment shall be established and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 3, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-104. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during operating hours. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 4, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-105. - Employee permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed by an adult entertainment establishment without a permit issued under the terms of this article. For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" includes an "independent contractor." 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 5, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-106. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to allow a person younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at all times during the establishment's operating hours. It shall be the duty of the attendants to not allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)	A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or
(2)	A valid personal identification certificate issued by the Georgia Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 6, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-107. - Location; development standards. 
(a)	Adult entertainment establishments shall only be located within Commercial (C-3) zoning district, unless established prior to the enactment of this article. 
(b)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any of the following: 
(1)	Any parcel of land which is zoned for residential uses or purposes.
(2)	Any parcel of land upon which a church, school, licensed day care center, governmental building or space simultaneously owned, leased, or rented and occupied by a government entity, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located. 
(3)	Any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located.
(4)	Any parcel of land upon which an alcohol beverage licensee is located.
For purposes of this section, measurement of distances shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight line, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel (i.e. "as the crow flies"). The term "parcel of land" shall mean any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used, or to be used, as a unit, and duly recorded in any official record of Dougherty County, Georgia. 
Distances, required by this section, shall be established by a survey performed by a surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(c)	A minimum of one (1) parking space shall be provided for every one hundred (100) square feet of gross building area, or for every three (3) customer seats, whichever is greater. 
(d)	Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 7, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-108. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)	Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character, as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter be employed by any adult entertainment establishment licensed under this article for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term convicted shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The term "while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee" shall include all work done, or services performed, while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)	Before any person may be employed by an adult entertainment establishment, he or she shall file an application for an adult entertainment establishment employee permit with the county administrator and receive approval. An investigation fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany the application. Each applicant shall provide a signed and notarized consent on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of the applicant's criminal records to the Dougherty County Police Department. The county shall have thirty (30) days to investigate information contained in the application. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, make appeal to the board of commissioners. 
(c)	No patron, dancer, or other employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 16-6-8. For purposes of this section, the term "employee" shall include an "independent contractor". 
(d)	The employee permit of any employee who violates the laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or any provision of this article or any other resolutions or regulation of Dougherty County, Georgia, shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation. 
(e)	For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered employees and shall be permitted as such, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 8, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-109. - Application for license. 
(a)	Any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the treasurer/license inspector, or his designated representative. The application must be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment and include the names of the operator and each owner, as defined in this article. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), as amended from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners, to defray, in part, the investigation and report required by this article. 
(b)	The license application does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 9, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-110. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment shall contain the following information and documentation: 
(1)	The proposed establishment's name, street address (and mailing address, if different), and telephone number. 
(2)	The name and street address (and mailing address, if different) of the owner(s). The name, street address (and mailing address, if different), and Georgia driver's license number of the intended operator. 
(3)	A general description of services and entertainment to be provided.
(4)	The legal description of the parcel of land on which the establishment is to be located.
(5)	The business, occupation and employment history of each owner and operator for five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(6)	If any owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license, or similar type of license, denied, revoked or suspended, then the violation(s) that led to the denial, suspension or revocation as well as the date(s) and disposition of such, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether or not the terms of the disposition have been completed. 
(7)	If any owner or operator has been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five (5) years, a complete description of such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including fines or sentence imposed, and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)	If the establishment does, or proposes to do, business under a trade name, then a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. 
(9)	If the establishment is a Georgia corporation, then a certified copy of the articles of incorporation together with all amendments thereto and the most recent annual report. 
(10)	If the establishment is a foreign corporation, then a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the State of Georgia together with all amendments thereto and the most recent annual report. 
(11)	If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Georgia, then a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership together with all amendments thereto filed in the office of the inspector. 
(12)	If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents together with all amendments thereto. 
(13)	A plat by a registered engineer or surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia, certifying that the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 2-10-107 of this article respecting location and development standards. 
(14)	The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
a.	The person(s) signing the application have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; and 
b.	The person(s) signing the application have read the provisions of this article.
(15)	The application shall be signed by the operator and each owner.
(16)	The operator and each owner shall provide a signed and notarized consent on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center authorizing the release of their criminal records to the Dougherty County Police Department. 
(17)	The written consent of a registered agent as required by section 2-10-119(a) of this article. 
(18)	Items (8) through (12) above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that documents previously furnished with the original application, or previous renewals thereof, remain correct and current. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 10, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-111. - Owner and operator to appear. 
The operator and at least one (1) owner, as defined in this article, shall personally appear at the public hearing for consideration of the application, scheduled pursuant to section 2-10-112 of this article. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 11, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-112. - Application; investigation. 
(a)	Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the application, the inspector, or designee, shall review the application and send a copy to all affected departments of Dougherty County, Georgia, to determine compliance with state and county laws, resolutions and regulation, and to the Dougherty County Police Department to investigate the character and reputation of each owner and operator. Each notified department shall submit a report within fifteen (15) days to the inspector. If no report is received, it shall be concluded that there is no objection. 
(b)	The board of commissioners may approve the license upon finding that:
(1)	The required fee has been paid.
(2)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article.
(3)	No owner or operator knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application.
(4)	Each owner and operator has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application.
(5)	Each owner and operator is of good moral character as defined in this article.
(6)	No owner or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license, or other similar license or permit, denied, suspended or revoked for cause involving moral character by Dougherty County, Georgia or any other unit of government located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)	The building, structure, equipment or location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment will comply with all applicable Dougherty County, Georgia, zoning and development standards. 
(8)	Each owner and operator is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(9)	No owner or operator is a Dougherty County, Georgia employee, an elected or appointed county official, or a spouse of an elected or appointed county official. 
(10)	No owner or operator has, within five (5) years of the date of application, committed or knowingly allowed another to commit the crime of public indecency, as defined in O.C.G.A. section 16-6-8, upon the premises of an adult entertainment establishment or similar business. 
(11)	The location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is not inconsistent with the provisions of section 2-10-108 of this article respecting location and development standards. 
(12)	The approval of such license will not cause a violation of this or any other resolution or regulation of Dougherty County, Georgia, or the United States. 
(13)	The registered agent's written consent has been provided.
(c)	If the license is approved, it shall be issued jointly in the name of the establishment and each owner and operator. 
(d)	The issuance of an adult entertainment establishment license shall not authorize any other conduct or activity regulated by other Dougherty County, Georgia resolutions including, but not limited to, the Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 12, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-113. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article as appropriate for each individual establishment. The renewal fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for an adult entertainment establishment license may be amended from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15th of each year prior to January 1st of the year for which such permit is requested. The form for renewal applications shall be furnished by the inspector. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 13, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-114. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; providing and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license. In such case, upon notification to the county the license shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall not be deemed terminated and void unless fifty (50) percent or more of the outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 14, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-115. - Change of location or name. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), as may be amended by resolution of the board of commissioners, has been deposited with the county and approval has been obtained from the board of commissioners. Such approval shall not be given unless all applicable requirements and regulations have been met. 
(b)	No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than the name of the business, and his name as specified on the license. 
(c)	Any application for an exemption or expansion of a building, or other place of business, where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and compliance with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 15, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-116. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)	The inspector shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the inspector seeks to suspend or revoke a license, the inspector shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation(s). 
(b)	The inspector may suspend or revoke a license in the event of any of the following:
(1)	A licensee gave false or misleading information in the application or renewal process.
(2)	A licensee knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such occurrence(s). 
(3)	A licensee violated or knowingly allowed violation of this adult entertainment establishment ordinance, any other ordinance of the county or any criminal law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises, or the licensee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such occurrence(s). 
(4)	A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime by the State of Georgia or Dougherty County, Georgia, regarding any offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article. 
(5)	A licensee failed to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to Dougherty County, Georgia, under this article or any other resolution of Dougherty County, Georgia. 
(c)	In the event that the inspector determines that a license violation has occurred, such license shall be suspended for thirty (30) days for the first violation. For a second violation, the license shall be suspended for sixty (60) days. For a third and all subsequent violation(s), the license shall be suspended for ninety (90) days. Any license that has been suspended three (3) or more times in any consecutive twelve (12) month period shall be revoked. In addition, any licensee found to be in violation of sections 2-10-106(a) and 2-10-108(c) of this article shall be subject to immediate license revocation. Provided, however, that the licensee shall be allowed to continue business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (e) hereafter. No licensee or any other applicant may apply for a license for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. 
(d)	In the event of license suspension or revocation by the inspector, the licensee may appeal the decision of the inspector to the board of commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal with the inspector within ten (10) days from the effective date of written notice received by licensee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum, or other writing, setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The inspector may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the licensee upon appeal to the board of commissioners. The inspector's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the inspector's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. The inspector shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners occurring not less than five (5), nor more than thirty (30), days after receipt of the appeal. 
(e)	When an appeal is placed on the agenda of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners will appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The inspector shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the public hearing as may be required by law. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the action of the board of commissioners unless a continuance of such date is agreed upon by the licensee and the inspector. 
(f)	At any hearing, the hearing officer shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the appeal. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the hearing officer, which shall be consistent with rules applied in administrative proceedings, and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel. 
(g)	The hearing officer shall, within reasonable time not exceeding fifteen (15) days from the termination date of such hearing, submit a written report to the board of commissioners. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, and state the findings, conclusions and recommendations. The report shall recommend that the board of commissioners sustain, over-rule or modify the action of the inspector. The report shall be filed with the inspector and shall be considered public record. A copy of such report shall be forwarded, by certified mail, to the appellant on the same day it is filed with the inspector. An additional copy shall be furnished to the Dougherty County Police Department. The inspector shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners for their action as deemed appropriate. 
(h)	The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. The board of commissioners shall base its determination on the hearing officer's report and other evidence in the record. No additional evidence or arguments shall be permitted at the commission meeting. If the board of commissioners does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)	Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a de novo hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, and in either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; or 
(2)	Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer, with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 16, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-117. - Enforcement. 
Any person, firm or corporation operating an adult entertainment establishment within Dougherty County, without having obtained a license as provided in this article and, upon conviction thereof, shall be penalized with a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or sixty (60) days imprisonment, or both, except as otherwise provided by general law. Each day the adult entertainment establishment is operated without a license, it shall continue a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 17, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-118. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
(a)	Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Dougherty County, Georgia, may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence action(s) or proceeding(s) for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Any adult entertainment establishment, now or hereafter, licensed in Dougherty County, must be operated pursuant to, and in strict conformity, with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and in addition, in strict conformity with the following specific regulations, to wit: 
(1)	All nude, or partially nude, dancing, or other nude performances protected by the First Amendment, shall occur on a raised platform or stage intended for that purpose, said platform or stage to be at least one (1) foot above the level of the floor and no nude, or partially nude, dancing or entertainment or performance of any type or nature shall occur thereon in closer proximity than arm's length to any patron or any person, whether an employee or otherwise of the owner or operator; 
(2)	No patron, participant or employee of the owner or operator, or otherwise, shall touch, fondle, caress or have physical contact with a dancer at any time on the premises; 
(3)	No dancer shall solicit from or request any such payment, gratuity or extension from a patron, participant or employee; and 
(4)	All areas of the adult entertainment establishment shall be fully lighted at all times that patrons are present, entertainment is being provided, dancers are present in the premises or the premises are open for business. Full lighting, as used herein, shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths (3.5) candles per square foot within the premises. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 18, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-119. - Notices; registered agent; jurisdiction. 
(a)	All licensed establishments must have, and continuously maintain in Dougherty County, Georgia, a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law, or under this article to be served, may be served. This person shall act as registered agent for the operator and each owner collectively. This person must be a resident of Dougherty County, Georgia. The operator may be appointed as the registered agent, if he or she is a resident of Dougherty County, Georgia. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the inspector as part of the license application. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a license pursuant to the terms of this article, the licensee agrees that any legal action brought by the county against the adult entertainment establishment, or the licensee (which includes the operator or any owner), to enforce the provisions of the article may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in Dougherty County, Georgia. 
(b)	Any notice required or permitted to be given by the inspector, or any office, division, department or other agency, under this article to any licensee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment may be given by either: (1) personal delivery; or (2) by certified United States mail addressed to licensee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the agent's written consent form received by the inspector, or any notice of address change which has been received by the inspector. If personally delivered, the notice's effective date shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the notice's effective date shall be two (2) days after the notice is placed in the mail. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 19, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-120. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment approval. 
(a)	All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of Dougherty County, Georgia, and the State of Georgia. 
(b)	The Dougherty County Health Department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable health rules and regulations and report any violation to the inspector. 
(c)	The Dougherty County Fire Department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable fire regulations and report any violation the inspector. 
(d)	The building inspector, or designee, shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable building and other technical codes of the county. 
(e)	The Dougherty County Police Department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all provisions of this article or other applicable laws and report any violation to the inspector. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 20, 9-8-93)
Sec. 2-10-121. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)	Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise declared to be obscene or illegal by any applicable code, regulation, or statute which violates any jurisdictional prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This paragraph shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this article. 
(b)	No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or allow the consumption of or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(c)	It is hereby declared to be the intention of this article that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases are severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section hereof shall be declared unconstitutional by court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this article. 
(d)	This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. All articles or parts of articles, in conflict herewith are repealed. This article shall become part of the Code of Resolutions of Dougherty County, Georgia. 
(e)	Any adult entertainment establishment currently providing nude, or partially nude, dancing or entertainment in Dougherty County, will have a period of sixty (60) days after the effective date wherein to ensure compliance with all licensing and permitting provisions of this resolution, but any such performances rendered or given during such sixty (60) day period must be operated in strict compliance with the provisions of section 2-10-118, paragraph (b), subparagraph (1) through (4). It is not the intent of the board of commissioners and the county does not, by the adoption of this resolution, intend, and will not grandfather, any current adult entertainment establishments featuring nude, or partially nude, dancing or entertainment operations in Dougherty County, from any licensing or permitting provisions of this article. 
(f)	Nothing contained in this article shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house or museum. 
(Res. No. 93-026, § 21, 9-8-93)
Chapter 2-11 - PERSONNEL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— See § 1-2-20(9) for authority; deferred compensation plan, § 2-6-2; use of county vehicles and equipment, § 2-6-4; smoking in county facilities, § 2-8-7.

Sec. 2-11-1. - Adoption by reference of policies and procedures plan. 
A certain document known as the "Comprehensive Personnel Policies and Procedures Plan" is hereby approved and adopted by the board of commissioners of the county. A copy of the revised comprehensive personnel policies and procedures plan is filed in the office of the county commission and the personnel office and is incorporated by reference as fully as if set forth verbatim. 
(Res. No. 81-131, § 1, 9-28-81; Res. No. 88-048, § 1, 8-22-88)
Chapter 2-12 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - ALBANY-DOUGHERTY PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-12-1. - Established; members. 
(a)	Established; succeeding to duties, etc., of abolished commissioners. There is hereby established an Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission, hereinafter called planning commission, to succeed to the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Albany Metropolitan Planning Commission, the Albany Planning Commission, and the Dougherty County Planning Commission, the membership and the specific powers, responsibilities and duties of said commission to be as hereinafter more fully set forth. All acts, decisions and determinations heretofore made by any of said abolished commissions are hereby ratified and confirmed, and shall remain in force and effect until changed. Unfinished business of all of the abolished bodies, including any scheduled hearings or hearings in progress, shall have been assumed, continued and carried out by the planning commission. 
(b)	Membership. The planning commission shall consist of ten (10) members, five (5) to be appointed by the governing authority of the city, and five (5) to be appointed by the governing authority of the county. All of said members shall serve for terms of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed, except that initially two (2) of the members appointed by each of the respective bodies shall be appointed to serve for an original term of three (3) years, two (2) members shall be appointed to serve for an original term of two (2) years, and one (1) member shall be appointed to serve for an original term of one (1) year. 
(c)	Compensation of members. All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Res. No. 85-010, §§ 2—4, 6-3-85)
Sec. 2-12-2. - Organization; rules; staff, officers; finances. 
(a)	The planning commission shall elect from its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, each to serve for a term of one (1) year or until a successor is elected. 
(b)	The planning commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the chairman or a majority of the members of the planning commission shall determine. The planning commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings and the transaction of its business, and shall keep records of its resolutions, motions, transactions, findings, determinations, and recommendations, which records shall be public records. 
(c)	The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it deems necessary for its work, within the budget provided for its operation by the respective governing authorities, or other funds lawfully available to it. 
(d)	In the performance of its duties, the planning commission may cooperate with, contract with, and accept funds from federal, state, local, public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, and may expend such funds and carry out cooperative undertakings and contracts with any of same within its lawful powers. The planning commission is authorized to make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies, all, with the exception of gifts to the planning commission, or contract receipts, to be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing authorities of the local units of general government represented by appointees on the planning commission. 
(e)	The commission may designate an executive committee to be composed of the chairman, the vice-chairman, and one (1) member elected annually by the commission, and may delegate to said committee such powers as the commission shall see fit. Two (2) members of the executive committee shall constitute a quorum of the executive committee. 
(Res. No. 85-010, § 5, 6-3-85; Res. No. 86-029, § 1(2), 7-7-86)
Sec. 2-12-3. - Powers; duties; responsibilities. 
(a)	It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission, subject to the direction and control of the respective governing authorities, to make surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, general welfare, efficiency and economy in the development of the city and county. In particular, the planning commission shall have the power and duty, subject to the direction and control of the governing authorities, to: 
(1)	Prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city and county.
(2)	Prepare and recommend to the appropriate governing authorities for adoption amendments to or revisions of zoning ordinances and zoning maps for the city and county. 
(3)	Prepare and recommend to the respective governing authorities for adoption, regulations and amendments thereto for the subdivision of land within the political jurisdiction of the respective bodies, and to administer such regulations as may be adopted. 
(4)	Prepare and recommend to the respective governing authorities of the city and county for adoption, a plat or plats, or an official map, and amendments thereto, showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened, or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings and other structures within such lines, within the city or county or specified portions thereof. 
(b)	The function and responsibility of the planning commission shall be advisory only.
(c)	The planning commission shall have such additional duties and responsibilities and shall perform such additional functions and services as may be called for from time to time by the city and county, or either of them. 
(Res. No. 85-010, § 6, 6-3-85)
Sec. 2-12-4. - Execution of bank drafts. 
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof to the contrary, all checks or other orders of the planning commission for the withdrawal of money from banking institutions shall be signed by all three (3) of the following: The city manager, or the city manager's designated representative; the county administrator, or the county administrator's designated representative; and the director of the planning commission, or the director's designated representative; provided, however, that the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission may authorize the issuance of checks in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less upon only one (1) signature, to be designated by said planning commission. 
(Res. No. 85-010, § 7, 6-3-85; Res. No. 86-029, § 1(1), 7-7-86)
DIVISION 2. - DOUGHERTY COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-12-5. - Declaration of necessity; activated. 
(a)	There is hereby determined and declared a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 36, Chapter 62) to function in the county for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry and, in the furtherance of that purpose, to finance projects permitted thereby including projects for air and water pollution control facilities by industries. 
(b)	There is hereby activated in the county, the public body corporate and politic known as the Development Authority of Dougherty County which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5-27(a), (b))
Sec. 2-12-6. - Membership. 
(a)	There are elected as members of the board of directors seven (7) persons, each of whom shall be a taxpayer of the county and none of whom shall be an officer or employee of the county. Their terms shall be staggered, initially two (2) for two (2) years, two (2) for four (4) years, and three (3) for six (6) years; thereafter the terms shall be for six (6) years each. 
(b)	Commencing on May 21, 1973 each of the persons appointed as directors above shall have served in such capacity for the number of years set forth opposite each respective name, and if at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor thereto shall not have been elected, then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until a successor shall be so elected. 
(c)	The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5-27(c), (d), (e))
Sec. 2-12-7. - Effect on other organizations. 
The action taken by the board of commissioners in creating the authority as hereinbefore specified is not intended in any way to affect any public corporation, industrial development or payroll authority heretofore created by legislative act or constitutional amendment, including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5-27)
Cross reference— Albany-Dougherty Payroll Department Authority, § 1-4-30 et seq. 
DIVISION 3. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Resolution No. 96-023, adopted June 3, 1996 was not specifically amendatory of the Code. The editor has treated the similar provisions contained in §§ 2-12-8—2-12-11 as being superseded by the new provisions provided for by Res. No. 96-023 and as herein set out. Former §§ 2-12-8—2-12-11 derived from Res. No. 78-131, adopted May 15, 1978; and Res. No. 82-001, adopted Jan. 1, 1982.

Sec. 2-12-8. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Albany and Dougherty County, Georgia, is among their most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and in order to provide for the designation protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; the Albany City Commission and the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this division to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, cemeteries, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the division. 
(Res. No. 96-023, § I, 6-3-96)
Sec. 2-12-9. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the Albany City Commission or the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 2-12-11(b) of this division. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the property appreciation thereof designated by the Albany City Commission or the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 2-12-11(c) of this division. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
(1)	A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)	Demolition or relocation of a historic structure;
(3)	Commencement of excavation for construction purposes;
(4)	A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or
(5)	The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
(Res. No. 96-023, § II, 6-3-96)
Sec. 2-12-10. - Creation of an historic preservation commission. 
(a)	Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Albany-Dougherty Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "historic preservation commission"). 
(b)	Historic preservation commission position within the City of Albany and Dougherty County. This historic preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Albany and Dougherty County. 
(c)	Historic preservation commission members—Number, appointment, terms and compensation. The historic preservation commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the Albany City Commission and the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County. All members shall be residents of Dougherty County and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. The City of Albany shall appoint four (4) members residing within the corporate limits of the City of Albany and the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County shall appoint four (4) members from Dougherty County. Furthermore, the members of the historic preservation commission shall include the building inspector of Albany and Dougherty County. All members of the historic preservation commission shall serve a term of two (2) years. All members shall serve until their successors have been appointed. 
(d)	Statement of the historic preservation commission's powers. The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)	Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within Dougherty County having the potential for designation as an historic property; 
(2)	Recommend to the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by the resolution as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)	Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this division; 
(4)	Recommend to the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects, or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)	Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Albany or Dougherty County; 
(6)	Promote the acquisition by the City of Albany and Dougherty County of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976 (O.C.G.A. 44-10-1 through 5); 
(7)	Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within Dougherty County and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)	Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, the Albany City Commission, Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, or the historic preservation commission itself may from time to time, deem it necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)	Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, with the consent of the Albany City Commission and/or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, and make recommendations concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired to the Albany City Commission and/or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County. 
(10)	Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)	Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the City of Albany and Dougherty County historic preservation program; 
(12)	The Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission will serve as staff to the historic preservation commission. 
(13)	Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property with the consent of the Albany City Commission and/or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, and acquire and sell historic properties with the consent of the Albany City Commission and/or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County. 
(14)	Review and make comments to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the national register of historic places; and 
(15)	Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the Albany City Commission and Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)	Historic preservation commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business, and for consideration of applications for property designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The historic preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this resolution. The historic preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The historic preservation commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)	Conflict of interest. At any time the historic preservation commission reviews a project in which a member of the historic preservation commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(g)	Records of historic preservation commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Res. No. 96-023, § III, 6-3-96)
Sec. 2-12-11. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)	Preliminary research by historic preservation commission. 
(1)	Historic preservation commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources: The commission shall compile and collect information, and conduct surveys of historic resources within Dougherty County. 
(2)	Historic preservation commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the Albany City Commission and Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County for designation: The historic preservation commission shall present to the Albany City Commission and Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)	Historic preservation commission's documentation of proposed designation: Prior to the historic preservation commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the Albany City Commission and Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County for designation, the historic preservation commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
a.	A physical description;
b.	A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance;
c.	A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.	A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and
e.	Representative photographs.
(b)	Designation of a historic district. 
(1)	Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof, which: 
a.	Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest;
b.	Represent one (1) or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one (1) or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.	Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)	Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in this resolution and in separate resolutions designating such districts, and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Albany and Dougherty County. 
(3)	Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.	Historic (contributes to the district);
b.	Nonhistoric (does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in (b)(1)); and 
c.	Intrusive (detracts from the district as provided for in (b)(1)).
(c)	Designation of a historic property. 
(1)	Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, object, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the City of Albany, Dougherty County, State of Georgia, or local region, for one of the following reasons: 
a.	It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era;
b.	It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style;
c.	It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Albany, Dougherty County, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.	It is a site of natural aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state, or region. 
(2)	Boundary description. Boundaries shall be included in the separate resolutions designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Albany and Dougherty County. 
(d)	Designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)	Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the Albany City Commission, the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County the historic preservation commission, or: 
a.	For historic districts: A historical society, neighborhood association, or group of property owners may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
b.	For historic properties: A historical society, neighborhood association, or property owner may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
(2)	Required components of a designation resolution. Any resolution designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.	List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.	Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties;
c.	Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.	Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Albany and Dougherty County. 
(3)	Required public hearings. The historic preservation commission, and either the Albany City Commission or the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County shall hold a public hearing on any proposed resolution for the designation of any historic district or property within the appropriate jurisdiction. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three (3) consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the historic preservation commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the Dougherty County tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this resolution. 
(4)	Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed resolution for designation shall be made by the historic preservation commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County as appropriate. 
(5)	Albany City Commission and Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County action on historic preservation commission recommendations. Following receipt of the historic preservation commission's recommendation, the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County may adopt the resolution as proposed, may adopt the resolution with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the resolution. 
(6)	Notification of historic preservation section. No less than thirty (30) days prior to making a recommendation on any resolution designating a property or district as historic, the historic preservation commission must submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3), above, to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(7)	Notification of adoption of resolution for designation. Within thirty (30) days following the adoption of the resolution for designation by the Albany City Commission or the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the Dougherty County tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(8)	Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Albany and Dougherty County of the resolution for designation, including the local historical organization. 
(9)	Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while resolution for designation is pending. If a resolution for designation is being considered, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(10)	Previously established districts. The district designated in section IV, section 20-48 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia maintains its previous designation and all provisions of this resolution shall apply. The boundaries of the district are defined as follows: "That portion of the city described as being bound on the east by the west bank of the Flint River; on the south by the alley lying immediately south of Mercer Avenue; on the west by the alley lying immediately west of Davis Street; and on the north by the alley lying immediately north of Fourth Avenue, is hereby designated as the Albany Historic District. A plat showing the boundaries of such historic district is on file in the office of the city clerk and is incorporated in this article by reference as fully as if set forth verbatim." 
(Res. No. 96-023, § IV, 6-3-96)
Sec. 2-12-11.1. - Application to historic preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)	Approval of alterations or new construction in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by resolution of a historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to, and approved by, the historic preservation commission. 
(b)	Approval of new construction within designated districts. The historic preservation commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the historic preservation commission. 
(c)	Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the secretary of the interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" including the secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the historic preservation commission. 
(d)	Submission of plans for historic preservation commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the historic preservation commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
(e)	Acceptable historic preservation commission reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)	The historic preservation commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the historic preservation commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(2)	The historic preservation commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(f)	Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. At least seven (7) days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the historic preservation commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
(g)	Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(h)	Technical advice. The historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(i)	Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)	The historic preservation commission shall approve or reject an application or a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a structure, site, object, or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the historic preservation commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the historic preservation commission. 
(2)	Failure of the historic preservation commission to act within said forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(j)	Necessary actions to be taken by historic preservation commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)	In the event the historic preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transfer a record of such actions and reasons, in writing to the applicant. The historic preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)	In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(k)	Under hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this resolution would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this resolution. Undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(l)	Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)	All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the historic preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)	The Albany City Commission, Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County or the historic preservation commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provision of this resolution or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(m)	Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six (6) months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are renewable. 
(n)	Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(o)	Acquisition of property. The historic preservation commission may, where such action is authorized by the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(p)	Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County. Any such appeal must be filed with the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (i)(1) of this section or, in the case of a failure of the historic preservation commission to act, within fifteen (15) days of the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period allowed for historic preservation commission action, subsection (i)(1) of this section. The Albany City Commission or the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission, if the governing body finds that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decision of the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County may be taken to the superior court of Dougherty County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for City of Albany and Dougherty County ordinance violations. 
(Res. No. 96-023, § V, 6-3-96)
Sec. 2-12-11.2. - Demolition or relocation of a historic property or properties within a historic district. 
(a)	Applications for certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(b)	Public hearing. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(c)	Consideration of post-demolition or post-relocation plans. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(d)	Demolition/relocation criteria. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the historic preservation commission shall use the criteria described in section 2-12-11.1(e) of this division to determine whether to deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(Res. No. 96-023, § VI, 6-3-96)
Sec. 2-12-11.3. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)	Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)	Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The historic preservation commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)	The historic preservation commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)	In the event the historic preservation commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have thirty (30) days in which to do this. 
(3)	In the event that the condition is not remedied in thirty (30) days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 2-12-11.4 of this division and, at the direction of the Albany City Commission or Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County, the historic preservation commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the historic preservation commission. 
(c)	Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this resolution shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Res. No. 96-023, § VII, 6-3-96)
Sec. 2-12-11.4. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this division shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of other validly-enacted ordinances of the City of Albany and Dougherty County. 
(Res. No. 96-023, § VIII, 6-3-96)
DIVISION 4. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-12-12. - Created. 
There is hereby created an economic development commission. 
(Res. No. 86-042, 9-8-86)
Sec. 2-12-13. - Membership. 
The economic development commission shall be comprised of nine (9) persons appointed as follows: Three (3) appointed by the Dougherty County Board of Commissioners, one (1) of which shall be the county administrator; three (3) appointed by the Albany Board of Commissioners, one (1) of which shall be the city manager; three (3) appointed by the chamber of commerce by virtue of office held: vice-president for economic development, chairman of economic development team, and executive vice-president. 
(Res. No. 86-042, 9-8-86)
Sec. 2-12-14. - Staff. 
The economic development commission shall have the authority to employ whatever full-time staff it deems necessary to accomplish economic development. 
(Res. No. 86-042, 9-8-86)
Sec. 2-12-15. - Evaluation of commission work. 
The economic development commission shall be evaluated during the fourth quarter of 1991 by the county and city boards of commissioners to determine if the work of the commission is to be continued. 
(Res. No. 86-042, 9-8-86)
DIVISION 5. - LAND BANK AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-12-15.1. - Authority established. 
A land bank authority is hereby established by an interlocal cooperation agreement between the City of Albany and Dougherty County in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 4, Article 4. 
(Res. No. 98-004, § I, 1-21-98)
Sec. 2-12-15.2. - Powers. 
The authority shall be a public body corporate and politic with the power to sue and be sued, to accept and issue deeds in its name, and to institute quia timet actions and shall have any other powers necessary and incidental to carry out the powers granted by O.C.G.A. Title 49, Chapter 4, Article 4. 
(Res. No. 98-004, § II, 1-21-98)
Sec. 2-12-15.3. - Purpose. 
The authority shall be established to acquire the tax delinquent properties of the City of Albany and Dougherty County in order to foster the public purpose of returning land which is in a nonrevenue-generating, nontax-producing status to an effective utilization status in order to provide housing, new industry, and jobs for the citizens of the City of Albany and Dougherty County. 
(Res. No. 98-004, § III, 1-21-98)
Sec. 2-12-15.4. - Membership. 
The authority shall be governed by a board comprised of two (2) members appointed by the Mayor of the City of Albany and two (2) members appointed by the County Commission of Dougherty County, Georgia. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the respective appointing authority for a term of four (4) years and shall serve without compensation. The members shall be residents of Dougherty County and may be employees of the City of Albany or Dougherty County. The board of the authority shall meet from time to time as required, and the presence of three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. Approval by a majority of the membership then in office shall be necessary for any action to be taken by the authority. The authority may utilize employees of the City of Albany and Dougherty County and may not employ its own staff without the approval of the city and county. 
(Res. No. 98-004, § IV, 1-21-98)
Sec. 2-12-15.5. - Duties. 
The authority shall hold in its own name, for the benefit of the City of Albany and Dougherty County, all properties conveyed to it by the parties, all tax delinquent properties acquired by the authority, and all properties otherwise acquired. 
(Res. No. 98-004, § V, 1-21-98)
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 

Sec. 2-12-16. - Adopted. 
The 2005-2025 Albany-Dougherty County Comprehensive Plan, dated June 19, 2006, and prepared by HDR Engineering, Inc., a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as fully as set forth verbatim, is hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the plan is on file in the county administrator's office. 
(Res. No. 88-062, § 1, 11-8-88; Res. No. 90-058, § 1, 9-17-90; Res. No. 96-026, 6-17-96; Res. No. 06-023, § II, 6-28-06) 
Chapter 2-13 - ROADS AND STREETS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Authority to pave and assess costs, and procedure, § 1-7-30 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-13-1. - Street excavation. 
(a)	No county street or road shall be cut or excavated in any way except on written permission of the county administrator after written request has been made accurately describing the excavation to be done and its location. 
(b)	The county police department shall be notified before any excavation is begun.
(c)	Any road excavated hereunder shall be replaced and restored to reasonably the same condition as prior to the excavation, including the regressing of the easement if damaged thereby, within thirty (30) days of the completion of the excavation work for each area. 
(d)	Notice of the completion of the excavation restoration work required in (c) above shall be made to the public works department, and the superintendent, or a designee thereof shall inspect the restoration to insure its proper completion. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1-2)
Sec. 2-13-2. - Street lighting in residential developments; program. 
(a)	Required certification in new subdivisions. Subdivisions for which a final plat has not been approved pursuant to the county's subdivision regulations are required to contain certification that street lighting is provided for in such subdivisions. 
(b)	Providing lighting upon petition on existing streets. Existing residential and subdivision streets in the unincorporated areas of the county may be provided with street lighting upon a petition submitted to the county administrator containing the signatures of more than fifty (50) percent of the owners of the front footage of the area in question. No street lighting petition will be approved which requests less than five (5) lights unless the length or configuration of the street mandates fewer lights. Should the board of commissioners deem it necessary, a public hearing may be held to further determine the desires and objections of the citizens residing in areas requesting street lights. 
(c)	Payment of costs for installation and operation. Any and all costs of installation of the street lighting in existing residential and subdivision areas shall be the responsibility of the property owners of the area. The costs of such installation shall be assessed to the property involved on the basis of footage along the street in question and corner lots shall be assessed on the basis of the longest front footage of the lot, fronting the street being lighted. The cost of the operation of the street lights shall be paid by the county from any fund sources the board of commissioners deem appropriate except funds collected from persons residing in the corporate limits of the City of Albany. 
(d)	Administration of program. The administration of this program is to be done by the county administrator and the administrator is authorized to issue any regulations deemed necessary by the administrator to carry out this program and the administrator is further authorized to enter into such contracts and expend such sums of money as deemed necessary by the administrator to carry out this program. 
(Res. No. 90-053, §§ 1—4, 8-20-90)
Editor's note— Resolution No. 90-053, adopted Aug. 20, 1990, repealed Res. No. 81-138, adopted Dec. 7, 1981, from which former §§ 2-13-2—2-13-5 derived. Such sections pertained to a street lighting program. Sections 1—4 of Res. No. 90-053 were included as a new § 2-13-2 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-13-3—2-13-5. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-13-2. 
Sec. 2-13-6. - Street name committee. 
(a)	A committee composed of the chief of the Albany Fire Department, the chief of the Albany Police Department, the sheriff of the county, or the sheriff's nominee, the chief of the Dougherty County Police Department, the general manager of the water, gas and light commission or the manager's nominee, the chief of the joint city-county building inspection department, the United States postmaster for the City of Albany or the postmaster's nominee, the president of the Albany Board of Realtors or the president's nominee, a representative of the county tax department, the director of the county emergency medical services department, a representative of the joint planning commission, the city manager, and the county administrator is hereby appointed to review, rationalize and recommend to the board of commissioners of the county, the following: 
(1)	Changes in the names and designations of streets, avenues and other public ways in the unincorporated area of the county so as to avoid duplications and/or confusing similarities; 
(2)	Names or designations for streets, avenues, and other public ways within the unincorporated areas of the county, in and upon any subdivisions or other platted lands which may be proposed in the future. All such new developments shall be required to obtain the approval and recommendation of this committee before going to the planning commission. 
(b)	The committee shall designate all east-west ways as avenues; all north-south ways as streets; all four-lane ways as boulevards; all ways less than four (4) blocks in length as lanes; all ways that follow a diagonal as roads; all ways that wind as drives; and all ways less than one (1) block in length as courts. 
(c)	The members of the committee shall hold office at the will of the board of commissioners of the county and the board of commissioners of the City of Albany, acting jointly. 
(d)	The members of said committee shall serve without additional compensation from the county. 
(Res. No. 70-104, §§ 1—4, 3-2-70; Res. No. 82-033, § 1, 11-1-82)
Sec. 2-13-7. - Changing street name. 
No street name will be changed unless fifty-one (51) percent of the adjacent property owners on the street to be renamed affirmatively and in writing agree with the renaming of said street. The owners of each property abutting on each side of said street or way to be renamed will count as one property and the total number of properties abutting on each side of said street or way to be renamed will be the total number of properties from which the fifty-one (51) percent is to be derived. Each property and their owners will be entitled to agree or disagree in the renaming of said street or way. 
(Res. No. 02-006, § I, 1-23-2002)
Secs. 2-13-8—2-13-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Signs and advertising, Ch. 2-13.3.

Sec. 2-13-20. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs abutting or visible from the right-of-way of U.S. 82, U.S. 19 and State Route 300 in the county, outside of city limits. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 1(1), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-21. - Compliance with article. 
No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 1(2), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-22. - Compliance with state and federal requirements. 
(a)	All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the Cor "Z" right-of-way shall conform with Georgia Code Annotated section 32-6-70 et seq. (The Georgia Outdoor Advertising Code) and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under said code. 
(b)	In instances where the sign controls of this article are more strict, these regulations shall apply. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 1(4), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-23. - Durable materials; maintenance. 
Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 1(3), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-24. - Removal after business ceases. 
Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six (6) months of the discontinuance of said activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 1(5), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-25. - Home occupation signs. 
One (1) nonilluminated professional or business nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area is permitted incident to a home occupation. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 3(1), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-26. - Signs of work under construction. 
One (1) nonilluminated sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, the financial, selling and development agencies is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration or removal. Such sign shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days after the completion of the project. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 3(2), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-27. - Temporary subdivision signs. 
Temporary signs, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development, are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than three hundred (300) feet apart. They shall be removed when seventy-five (75) percent of the lots are conveyed. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 3(3), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-28. - Private directional signs. 
Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for or in process of development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder, or agent may be erected and maintained, provided: 
(1)	The size of any such sign is not in excess of six (6) square feet, and not in excess of four (4) feet in length; and 
(2)	Not more than one (1) such sign is erected on each five hundred (500) feet of right-of-way frontage. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 3(4), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-29. - Roof signs. 
Not more than one (1) roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one (1) building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than twenty-five (25) feet above the elevation of the roof. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 3(5), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-30. - Wall signs. 
Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Signs on the front surface of a building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the front surface of the building. 
(2)	Signs on the side and rear surface of a building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of a building shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building respectively. 
(3)	Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than twenty-four (24) inches from the wall. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 3, 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-31. - Illuminated signs. 
Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district, or the eyes of a vehicle driver. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 3(7), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-32. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any legally erected sign which would become nonconforming as a result of this article will be allowed to remain until purchased by the department of transportation or the county, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws and rules and regulations governing such signs. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 3(8), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-33. - Prohibited signs—Signs imitating traffic or warning signals or placed on street right-of-way. 
(a)	No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of the governmental traffic signs. 
(b)	No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 2(1), (2), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-34. - Same—Placing on natural features, etc. 
Signs painted or attached to natural features (such as trees or rocks), telephone poles, utility poles, or fence posts are prohibited. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 2(3), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-35. - Same—Fluttering ribbons and banners. 
Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 2(4), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-36. - Same—Animation and running lights. 
Animation and running lights are prohibited. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 2(5), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-37. - Same—In proximity to historical sites. 
Signs within three hundred (300) feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument, are prohibited. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 2(6), 7-23-84)
Sec. 2-13-38. - Same—Remote signs. 
All outdoor advertising signs which are not within one hundred (100) feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and located on the same property and for-sale or for-lease signs which are not on the property being advertised are specifically permitted. 
(Res. No. 84-030, § 2(7), 7-23-84)
Secs. 2-13-39—2-13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NUMBERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Resolution No. 89-008, adopted April 3, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—5 as Art. III, §§ 2-13-51—2-13-55, was at the discretion of the editor.
Cross reference— Mobile home parks and subdivisions, § 2-9-20 et seq.

Sec. 2-13-51. - Display required. 
Every house, mobile home, apartment, business or other building having a street number assigned to it under the system of numbering in the unincorporated county shall display such number in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Mobile home parks shall also be required to have each individual pad or lot number displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. The lot or pad numbers shall be in sequence unless directional signs are provided for numbers not in sequence. 
(Res. No. 89-008, § 1, 4-3-89)
Sec. 2-13-52. - Method of display. 
(a)	Assigned street numbers may be affixed to the house, apartment, business or other building itself, provided that such house, apartment, business or other building is not more than fifty (50) feet from the curbline, pavement edge, or edge of travel way of the street in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, and the number is readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. Street numbers may also be placed on mail boxes or signs located on the premises in front of the house, apartment, business or other building provided such signs are of a durable type, and are located not more than fifty (50) feet from the curbline, pavement, edge or edge of travel way of the street in front of the property, and provided that the numbers on such sign shall be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. 
(b)	If the house, apartment, business or other building to be numbered is more than fifty (50) feet from the curb, pavement, edge, or edge of travel way of the street in front of the property, or if for any reason a street number affixed to the building would not be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction, the street number shall not be displayed on the building, but must be displayed on a sign or mail box complying with the requirements of this section. 
(Res. No. 89-008, § 2, 4-3-89)
Sec. 2-13-53. - Size, condition of numbers. 
Street numbers affixed to buildings or signs shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height. Those affixed to mail boxes in the manner specified in this article shall be a minimum of two (2) inches in height. All such signs shall be of a color contrasting to the background so as to be clearly visible. Street numbers and signs to which they are affixed shall be maintained at all times in good condition. 
(Res. No. 89-008, § 3, 4-3-89)
Sec. 2-13-54. - Duty of owner; violations. 
The obligation of complying with the provisions of this article shall be upon the owner of the property. The property owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of adoption of this article to comply with the provisions herein. If any of the provisions of this article shall be found to have been violated, notice shall be given to the owner of the property, or his agent, specifying the manner in which the article is being violated, and giving the owner ten (10) days to bring the property into compliance. Each day a violation of this article continues after the expiration of the ten-day period shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as provided by law. 
(Res. No. 89-008, § 4, 4-3-89)
Sec. 2-13-55. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The responsibility for making the inspections provided for in this article, and for the enforcement of the provisions thereof, shall rest upon the joint city-county inspection department, and the agents and employees of such department are hereby authorized and empowered to make cases and issue summonses for violations. However, all public safety agencies providing services in the unincorporated county are authorized to write warnings to the property owner in violation of this article. Any such warnings issued shall be forwarded to the inspection department for the appropriate action. 
(Res. No. 89-008, § 5, 4-3-89)
Secs. 2-13-56—2-13-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET NAMING AND ADDRESS GUIDELINES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—At the county's instruction, Res. No. 09-006, adopted Feb. 16, 2009 which pertained to a system for road names and addresses be added as a new Art. IV. Should conflict exist with Art. III, §§ 2-13-51—2-13-55 it is presumed the most recent provisions will prevail.

DIVISION 1. - TITLE, PURPOSES, AND LEGAL CLAUSE 

Sec. 2-13-71. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the street naming and address guidelines for the City of Albany and Dougherty County, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(1.01), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-72. - Purpose. 
The planning and development services department shall develop a standard system by which addresses may be assigned and maintained from this time forward. This addressing system shall be used in designating addresses for new and existing parcels and/or structures and to resolve address problems which may confuse citizens or delay the response of emergency services and other service providers by: 
(1)	Creating a formal system with standards and regulations for assigning road names to be administered by the planning and development services department. 
(2)	Creating a formal system with standards and regulations for assigning addresses to be administered by: 
a.	Planning and development services department—For new parcels and/or structures.
b.	Planning and development services department—For existing parcels and/or structures.
(3)	Providing for notification of interested parties of assigned new road names and address numbers, and maintain a master record of addresses. 
(4)	Provide minimum standards and regulations for display of addresses and road signs that comply with Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), and local ordinance standards. 
(5)	Providing for the enforcement of these guidelines.
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(1.02), 2-16-09)
Secs. 2-13-73—2-13-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROAD NAMES 

Sec. 2-13-91. - Road names. 
The planning and development services department shall be the agency with exclusive authority to name roads in the City of Albany and Dougherty County. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(2.01), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-92. - Highway and route numbers. 
A road name shall not be given a highway number or county route number. Such highways and routes shall receive a road name to be used in conjunction with an address. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(2.02), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-93. - Naming roads. 
(a)	A road shall not be given a name which duplicates the name of any other road in the city or county. 
(b)	A road shall not be given a name which sounds like or approximates the name of any other road in the city or county. 
(c)	The proposed name of any new roads will be verified with the planning and development services department database to avoid duplication before any assigning will be completed. 
(d)	An official name shall be given to a private road and approved by the planning and development services department when: 
(1)	The private road services five (5) or more residences, or the location and/or length of the private road is such that for safety and emergency purposes, it is more appropriate to name the private road than to assign addresses from the main road. 
(e)	A committee composed of the city manager, Dougherty County Administrator, Chief of Albany Fire Department, Chief of Albany Police Department, Chief of Dougherty County Police Department, Sheriff of Dougherty County, general manager of water, gas, and light commission, U.S. Postmaster of Albany, director of planning and development services, Director of Dougherty County Tax Department, Director of Dougherty County Emergency Medical Services, Director of Albany Engineering Department, Director of Albany Public Works Department, Director of Dougherty County Public Works Department, the 911 Center Communication Center Manager, or their representative, is hereby appointed to review, rationalize, and recommend to the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County and/or the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, as appropriate, the following: 
(1)	Changes in the names or new names for streets and other public and non-dedicated ways of the City of Albany and Dougherty County, so as to avoid duplications and/or confusing similarities. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(2.03), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-94. - Changing existing road names. 
(a)	The existing road name, or the name applied to a right-of-way as shown on an approved preliminary plat or recorded plat, shall be changed when: 
(1)	Road construction has resulted in the extension of a road to another road so that both roads are joined in such a manner that both roads may be considered one road. 
a.	In the instance of changing a road name, one (1) of the two (2) existing road names shall be used. The planning and development services department shall determine which road name is used based upon: 
i.	The road name which results in the fewest number of address changes.
ii.	The road name which is the oldest.
(b)	Street name changes shall only be allowed when the name is a duplicate of another street within a designated postal area or within Dougherty County and interferes with the accurate dispatch of emergency vehicles or postal delivery. A road name may also be changed when one (1) road has two (2) commonly used names or where portions of what appears to be the same road have two (2) or more names. 
(c)	In the case of a street name change, the following procedure will be followed:
(1)	The reason for the street name change shall be documented with date and reporting party. 
(2)	A new numeric address shall be determined using the planning and development services department addressing standards. 
(3)	Upon approval of the new street name by the planning and development services department, confirmation of the new street name will be mailed to each property owner affected by the change. 
(4)	No street name will be changed upon recommendation of the street naming committee if fifty-one (51) percent of the adjacent property owners on the street to be renamed disagree with the renaming of said street. 
a.	The owners of each property abutting each side of said street to be renamed will count as one property and the total number of properties abutting on each side of said street to be renamed will be the total number of properties from which the fifty-one (51) percent is to be derived. 
b.	Each property and their owners will be entitled to agree or disagree in the renaming of said street. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(2.04), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-95. - Notification of road names. 
(a)	The planning and development services department shall notify interested persons whenever a road is named for the first time and whenever an existing road name is changed. 
(b)	In cases of naming roads for the first time, a written notice shall contain:
(1)	The new road name.
(2)	A structure's new address.
(3)	The extent of the road that the new road name is to be applied to.
(c)	Notification of any new street names will be sent to:
(1)	Property owners.
(2)	Fire department (911/EMA/EMS).
(3)	U.S. Postal Office.
(4)	City clerk.
(5)	Dougherty County School Board.
(6)	County clerk.
(7)	Engineering.
(8)	Dougherty County Public Works.
(9)	Water, gas and light commission, Sumter EMC, Mitchell EMC, and Georgia Power.
(10)	Dougherty County Tax Department.
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(2.05), 2-16-09)
Secs. 2-13-96—2-13-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMEMORATIVE STREET NAMING 

Sec. 2-13-121. - Definition. 
For the purposes of these guidelines, commemorative naming refers to the bestowing of an additional name to portions of streets or highways, commemorating persons or events, as a way to honor or memorialize the person or event in question. A commemorative street name does not change the official street name or address of any property along that stretch of street or highway. Commemorative street naming guidelines will only be effective in the unincorporated area of Dougherty County. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(3.01), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-122. - Guiding principles. 
(a)	A proposed name will only be considered for persons posthumously; a minimum of five (5) years must elapse from the date of death before a commemorative name proposal will be considered. 
(b)	For events, at least twenty-five (25) years must have elapsed since the occurrence of the event. 
(c)	A commemorative name will only be considered for subjects with a strong association with the area, or of outstanding significance to the cultural legacy or development of the area, the state, or the nation. 
(d)	A proposed name will be supported by the local community and reach beyond a single or special interest group. 
(e)	A commemorative name will not be used to commemorate victims or mark the location of accidents or tragedies. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(3.02), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-123. - Procedures. 
Before contemplating a proposal and undertaking the necessary research, proponents should contact planning and development services in order to obtain guidelines and procedures for establishing a commemorative name in the City of Albany and Dougherty County. In order for a portion of a street or highway to receive consideration for commemorative naming, the following items shall be submitted: 
(1)	Map delineating the length of the section of street or highway to be named.
(2)	Rationale for the proposal.
(3)	Evidence that the proposed name is not in use elsewhere in the City of Albany or Dougherty County and that the proposed name is acceptable and has broad community support. 
(4)	Brief biography and photograph of the person to be commemorated, including a description of his/her association with the area where the feature is located and an explanation of the unique contribution that would single him/her out for commemoration in this fashion. 
(5)	For events, a description of the event and its association with the feature in question.
(6)	Statement of the proponent's relationship to the person or event to be commemorated.
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(3.03), 2-16-09)
Secs. 2-13-124—2-13-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADDRESS NUMBERING 

Sec. 2-13-141. - Planning and development services department. 
(a)	The planning and development services department shall be the agency with exclusive overall administration and coordination responsibility to administer these guidelines following initial implementation. 
(b)	Street addresses shall be issued by the planning and development services department for all parcels and principle dwellings and buildings located on all officially mapped public and private roads. 
(c)	Addresses will be provided only on those roads that have been assigned a name in accordance with the guidelines set forth in this article. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(4.01), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-142. - Address numbering system. 
(a)	Address numbering structure. 
(1)	The addressing system is based on a baseline/meridian structure. Dougherty County is divided into four (4) quadrants based on the intersection of Broad Avenue and the Flint River. (See Appendix A) 
(2)	Block ranges are well established for Albany and Dougherty County and form a relatively evenly spaced grid. Where possible, one address number shall be established for each twenty (20) foot (+/-) interval. Addresses are assigned based on the driveway entrance, not the front of the structure. 
(3)	Even numbers shall be on the southerly side of roads and odd numbers shall be on the northerly sides of roads. 
(4)	Even numbers shall be on the easterly side of roads and odd numbers shall be on the westerly side of roads. 
(5)	Roads which are not traveling due north-south/east-west or meander shall be numbered as a north-south/east-west road if the major portion of the road within Dougherty County runs north-south/east-west. Once a north-south/east-west road has an address number assigned to structures then that road shall always be considered to be a north-south/east-west road. 
(6)	Address numbers south of the baseline shall be affixed with the prefix "south", and address numbers north of the baseline shall be affixed with the prefix "north" to avoid duplication of address numbers. The above also applies to east and west streets. 
(b)	Fractional, alphanumeric, hyphenated addresses. 
(1)	There shall be no use of fractional addresses, alphanumeric address numbers or hyphenated address numbers. This also applies to apartment numbers and suite numbers. 
(c)	Component order. 
(1)	Components of a street address shall always be in the following order: address number, directional prefix (if any), street name and street type, designation of apartment or suite, and apartment/suite number. 
(d)	Diagonal streets. 
(1)	Diagonal streets shall be treated as either north-south or east-west streets. Once orientation is established it shall be used throughout the entire length of the road. The orientation will not change even if the road changes direction. Within developments it is advisable to consider the direction of the beginning of the road. If it originates off a north-south road and begins by going east-west before meandering north-south, it is generally considered an east-west road. 
(e)	Circular streets. 
(1)	A circular street/road is one that returns to the same origin point or to the same originating road. Circular streets shall be numbered beginning at the low numbered intersection and continuing to the other end of the road. The outside of the circle is numbered first and the inside is then numbered mix and matched with the outside. This will result, in most cases, with fewer numbers on the inside of the circle and with larger spaces between inside numbers. Numbering sequence of the outside and inside of the circle shall be used throughout the entire length of the road. 
(f)	Cul-de-sacs. 
(1)	Cul-de-sacs shall be addressed using the system based on the baseline/meridian structure; odd/even numbers on the appropriate sides of the street and meeting at the midpoint, or the back of the cul-de-sac. 
(g)	Corner lots. 
(1)	It is preferable for corner lots to be addressed to the road that the driveway is accessed from. However, corner lots have the option of being addressed to the driveway or the front of the structure. Addresses based on the driveway shall require the mailbox to be placed at the driveway access. Addresses based on the front of the structure shall require the mailbox to be placed on the road at the front of that structure. Display of address numbers on the structure shall face the road to which the home is addressed. The assigned address will be determined by the site plan presented at the time a building permit is requested. 
(h)	Private drives/easements. 
(1)	Private drives/easements may be addressed to an existing adjoining road when they serve no more than two (2) lots or structures. A sign or post which clearly indicates the address numbers assigned to the structures shall be located at the entry point of the private drive/easement. Private drives and easements that serve more that two (2) lots or structures will be addressed to the private drive/easement. 
(i)	Single-family residences. 
(1)	A single-family residence shall receive its own individual address determined by the basic rules for distance and direction. 
(j)	Duplex residences. 
(1)	A duplex shall be addressed with each unit receiving its own individual address determined by the basic rules for distance and direction. 
(k)	Apartment residences. 
(1)	Apartments shall be numbered with the main building receiving one (1) address and each individual apartment being assigned apartment numbers as secondary location indicators. The apartment number assigned should indicate floor location (e.g. Apt 204 is the fourth apartment on the second floor). Alphanumerical numbers are not to be used. Apartment buildings with multiple entrances, where each entrance provides access to a limited number of apartments, shall require an address for each individual entrance as determined by the street allowing main access to the entrance and following the basic rules for distance and direction. 

(l)	Mobile home parks/manufactured home communities. 
(1)	Each individual mobile home or manufactured home shall be assigned its own individual address following the basic rules for distance and direction. This generally results in leaving four (4) to eight (8) numbers between adjacent sites. 
(m)	Townhouses. 
(1)	Townhouses that are individually owned and not part of an apartment complex shall be assigned an individual address for each unit as determined by the street allowing main access to the building and following basic rules for distance and direction. In cases where entry is not from the street on which the townhouse is addressed, for instance alleys or parking areas, address numbers shall be posted on both the front and rear of the structure. Townhouses that are under the apartment category will be addressed as apartments, with the main building receiving one (1) address and each individual townhouse being assigned apartment numbers as secondary locators. 
(n)	Condominiums. 
(1)	Condominiums shall be assigned an individual address for each unit as determined by the street allowing main access to the building and following the basic rules for distance and direction. In cases where entry is not from the street on which the townhouse is addressed, for instance alleys or parking areas, address numbers shall be posted on both the front and rear of the structure. 
(2)	An apartment building or townhouse complex that is converted to a condominium shall be required to be addressed with an individual address for each unit. 
(o)	Office buildings. 
(1)	Office buildings shall be numbered with the main building receiving one (1) address and each individual office being assigned suite numbers as secondary; location indicators. The suite number assigned should indicate the floor location (e.g. Suite 204 is the fourth office on the second floor). Alphanumerical numbers are not to be used. Office buildings with multiple entrances, where each entrance provides access to a limited number of offices, shall be assigned an address for each individual entrance as determined by the street allowing main access to the entrance and following the basic rules for distance and direction. 
(p)	Individual commercial buildings. 
(1)	Individual commercial buildings shall be given one (1) address to the road/street on which the driveway access is located as determined by the basic rules for distance and direction. When a business faces a main road, but is accessed from a secondary road, an address will be allowed to the main road if the primary entrance faces the main road. In addition to being posted on the side of the building facing the main road, this address shall be posted on the outside of the main building in a manner that is legible to the public as well as emergency responders from the point of access. 
(2)	An individual building, housing more than one (1) business, shall require a separate address for each unit. Suite numbers shall not be allowed. 
(3)	A large retail complex/superstore that houses one main retail business with additional smaller retail spaces within (i.e. Grocery store with cleaners, bank, hair salon, etc.) shall be assigned one (1) address for the use of all businesses located within the main structure. This address shall be posted on the outside of the main building in a manner that is legible to the public as well as emergency responders. 
(q)	Strip commercial buildings. 
(1)	Strip commercial buildings shall require an address to be reserved for each individual entry door. Careful planning shall be taken to reserve enough numbers for future divisions of businesses. Each business shall receive its own individual address. If a business is large enough to use space accessed by two (2) or more doors, the business shall be assigned the number that corresponds to its primary entrance. 
(r)	Miscellaneous structure. 
(1)	Outbuildings and/or utilities requiring metering that are required to have an address shall be given their own individual address, generally four (4) to six (6) numbers from the main residence. Outbuildings having their own access drive shall be assigned an address following the basic rules for distance and direction. 
(s)	Wireless tower. 
(1)	A wireless tower shall be assigned one (1) address determined by the basic rules for distance and direction. When additional carriers are added all carriers will be assigned a suite number with the address including the carrier. A sign or post which clearly indicates the address numbers assigned to the tower shall be located at the entry point of the road on which tower is located. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(4.02), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-143. - Changing address numbers. 
(a)	It shall be the policy of these guidelines to discourage the practice of changing existing addresses or address numbers which are already in use except: 
(1)	If the existing address number is not in sequence and does not run consecutively in the same direction as the county address system. 
(2)	If the existing address number is such that assignment of address numbers for new structures is not practical and in keeping with the requirements. 
(3)	When a new road is constructed, or recognized, which results in the most appropriate address for a structure to be on the new road rather than the original road such as where a structure is previously on land locked property and for example, then has a new road built to service it. 
(4)	If it is determined that an address needs to be changed for safety and emergency purposes.
(5)	When an address is duplicated or otherwise in violation of these guidelines.
(b)	Whenever an error in a numeric address or street number name comes to the attention of the planning and development services department, they shall initiate proceedings to correct the error. 
(c)	Address changes become effective within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of address correction. A resident who does not put a change of address in with their post office and who does not display the new correct address within the thirty-day period will be in violation of these guidelines and subject to penalty as provided by the guidelines. 
(d)	In the case of a numeric address change, the following procedure shall be followed:
(1)	The reason for the numeric change shall be documented with the date and reporting party. 
(2)	A new numeric address shall be determined using the planning and development services department addressing standards. 
(3)	The property owner or owners shall be contacted in written form using the governing assessor's information to identify ownership. 
(4)	Notification shall be sent to the following:
a.	Property owners.
b.	Fire department (911/EMA/EMS).
c.	U.S. Postal Office.
d.	City clerk.
e.	Dougherty County School Board.
f.	County clerk.
g.	Engineering.
h.	Dougherty County Public Works.
i.	Water, gas and light commission or any other utility offices providing service to the area. 
j.	Dougherty County Tax Department.
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(4.03), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-144. - Master address file. 
(a)	The GIS Division of Planning and Development Services Department shall maintain a geofile showing the location of each structure which has an address and the address number. The geofile shall be updated as addresses are added. For sub-divided parcels which do not have a structure an address shall be assigned to the parcel. 
(b)	The address geofile serves as a master address file for Albany and Dougherty County. All city/county departments can access the address geofile via City of Albany's network and will validate addresses against the address geofile. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(4.04), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-145. - Notification of address. 
The planning and development services department shall be the recipient of applications for new addresses. Addresses for subdivision lots should be assigned and noted on the final plat when recorded, not waiting until an application for a new address is received. 
(1)	Prior to the issuance of a construction permit the planning and development services department shall assign addresses and provide the person with a form containing: 
a.	The structures address number.
b.	Compass designation.
c.	Road name.
d.	Street suffix name.
(2)	The person shall make use of this form, or copies, to notify in turn utilities, post office, or other interested persons. 
(3)	The development services department shall not issue a construction permit until after an address number has been issued for the proposed structure except: 
(4)	The planning and development services department shall assign addresses in the original instance after adoption of these guidelines. 
(5)	In cases where an existing address number is changed, the planning and development services department shall send written notice to each resident, occupant, or person with an affected address on the road and to the owner, if different of structures with a change of address form within ten (10) days by mail or personal delivery. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(4.05), 2-16-09)
Secs. 2-13-146—2-13-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISPLAY OF ADDRESS AND STREET NAME SIGNS 

Sec. 2-13-161. - Regulation. 
The development service's department and Albany Fire Department shall be the agencies with exclusive overall administrative and coordination responsibility to administer the display of addresses and street name signs. All street name signs should be supplied and installed by the city/county sign shop after payment is received from the appropriate developer. The development services department has the authority to withhold or revoke any permits, including certificate of occupancy permits, if any portion of division 5 is not complied with, or if an individual intentionally removes an address or street name sign after a permit has been issued. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(5.01), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-162. - Display of address. 
It shall be the responsibility of each and every property owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each residence, apartment building, business or industry to post and maintain, at all times, address numbers as required under this policy. All addresses shall be displayed in such a way that they are unobstructed and legible from the traveled roadway. 
(1)	When a cluster box is used it will only be required for the address to be displayed on the structure. 
a.	Mobile homes or manufactured homes located within a development shall display the address number in numbers of at least four (4) inches in height and on the side of the home facing the access road. 
b.	Structures located within a subdivision, condominium or within a city or village that is within fifty (50) feet from the edge of the road right-of-way shall: 
1.	Display the assigned address number on the structure in such a way that is visible from the road. 
i.	The address shall be composed of numbers that are not less than four (4) inches in height and contrasting in color with the background on which they are affixed. 
2.	The address shall also be displayed on both sides of the mailbox.
i.	The address shall be composed of reflective numbers that are not less than two (2) inches in height. 
3.	The numbers shall be reflective numbers on a contrasting background.
4.	The address shall not be obstructed in any way by any form of landscape, other mailboxes or newspaper delivery boxes. 
i.	When the mailbox is obstructed, it will be required that an address sign be displayed at the road, following the standards listed for structures located more than fifty (50) feet from the road. 
c.	Structures located more than fifty (50) feet from the edge of the road right-of-way shall comply with the previous requirements listed for structures within fifty (50) feet of the edge of the right-of-way and in addition shall: 
1.	Display the assigned address number on a post, fence or wall or other permanent structure no farther than ten (10) feet back from the edge of the traveled roadway. 
2.	The address shall be composed of numbers that are not less than four (4) inches in height. 
3.	The sign shall be composed of reflective numbers on a contrasting background.
4.	The numbers shall be not less than four (4) feet and not more than seven (7) feet above the ground. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(5.02), 2-16-09)
Sec. 2-13-163. - Display of street name signs. 
New roads shall have permanent street name signs posted within thirty (30) days of the date of approval given by the planning and development services department, before any permits are issued by the City of Albany's Development Service's Department. Street name signs on public roads shall be installed and maintained by Albany Engineering/Traffic Division. Street name signs for private roads are the responsibility of the owners of properties on the private road. 
(1)	All road signs shall be MUTCD compliant for both public and private roads.
(2)	All street name signs, public and private, shall have a white legend on a green background.
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(5.03), 2-16-09)
Secs. 2-13-164—2-13-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-13-181. - Enforcement. 
A person violating any provision of this article, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), six (6) month imprisonment, or both. 
(Res. No. 09-006, § 1(6.01), 2-16-09)
Appendix A 

Chapter 2-13.3 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Signs, § 2-13-20 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-13.3-1—2-13.3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 2-13.3-21. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to establish a set of standards for the fabrication, erection, and use of signs, symbols, markings, or advertising devices within Dougherty County. These standards are designed to protect and promote the health and safety of persons within Dougherty County and to aid and assist in the promotion of business and industry and social interaction by providing regulations which allow and encourage creativity, effectiveness, and flexibility in the design and use of such devices, while avoiding an environment that encourages visual blight and creates traffic hazards. Therefore, it is hereby determined without a set of standards, the number, size and height of signs in Dougherty County would become excessive and unduly distracting to motorists and pedestrians, creating traffic hazards and reducing the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. It is also determined that the appearance of the county would be marred by an excessive number, size and height of signs. It is also determined that the number, size and height of distracting signs needs to be reduced and prohibited in order to minimize the aforementioned effects, and that signs of least importance in occupying limited public views within the County are those which convey commercial messages other than the advertisement of any product, service, event, person, institution or business located on the premises where the sign is located, or for the sale or rental of such premises. It is also determined that the regulations contained in this resolution are the minimum amount of regulations necessary to achieve its purpose. 
Nonconforming signs are hereby declared public nuisances and should be abated to enhance and protect the public interest and welfare. 
Any sign, display, or device allowed under this resolution may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product, commodities or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity, so long as said sign complies with the size, height, area, lighting, and other requirements of this resolution. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 1, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-22. - Jurisdiction. 
This article shall apply within the unincorporated area of Dougherty County, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 2, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-23. - Applicability of other code or regulatory requirements. 
(a)	Signs or other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with Dougherty County building and electrical codes and all other applicable regulations. 
(b)	If any provisions or requirements of this resolution are found to be in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this resolution or of any other applicable governmental law, resolution, rule or other governmental regulation of any kind, the regulation which establishes the more restrictive rule or higher standard shall govern. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 3, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-24. - Definitions. 
Advertise: To inform; to notify; to announce; to attract public attention by emphasizing desirable qualities in order to arouse a desire to purchase or invest. 
Animated sign: Any sign of which all or any part thereof visibly moves in any fashion whatsoever; and any sign which contains or uses for illumination any light, lights, or lighting device or devices which change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part thereof automatically. 
Arterial street: Unless otherwise specified by the Comprehensive Plan or Transportation Plan adopted by Dougherty County, arterial streets are those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
Automobile dealership: A commercial establishment whose principal business is the retail sale of new automobiles and trucks shipped from a major automobile manufacturing company and where the sale of used automobiles and trucks is only a secondary or ancillary function of the business. 
Banner: Any hanging sign possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. This classification shall not include plastic or fabric signs, which are permanently attached within a rigid frame which are intended to be used as a permanent sign. National flags, flags of political subdivisions and symbolic flags of any institution or business shall not be considered banners for the purpose of this resolution. 
Building official: The chief building inspector of Dougherty County, or his authorized representative. 
Bench sign: A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Canopy: See "Marquee." 
Changeable copy sign: Any poster board, bulletin board, neon sign, screen, surface or wall, with characters, letters or illustrations affixed thereto or thereon, by any method or means whatsoever, that can be changed, rearranged, or altered without changing the face of the poster board, bulletin board, neon sign, screen, surface or wall. 
Collector street: Unless otherwise specified by the Comprehensive Plan or Transportation Plan adopted by Dougherty County, collector streets are those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas. 
Construction sign: Any sign giving the name or names of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information included thereon. 
Copy: The wording or graphics on a sign surface in either permanent or removable form. 
Development sign: A sign, which, by symbol or name, identifies a development. It may also provide an index of uses (tenants) included in the development. 
Directional sign: A sign permanently or temporarily erected by or with approval of any authorized government agency to denote the route to any city, town, village, historic place, shrine, or hospital; signs directing and regulating traffic, notices of any railroad bridge, or other transportation activity necessary for the direction or safety of the public; signs, notices, or symbols for the information of aviators as to location, directions, and landings, and conditions affecting safety in aviation; signs, notices, or symbols as to the time and place of civic meetings; and signs or notices erected or maintained upon public property giving the name of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises or the street number thereof. 
Double-faced sign: A sign having two (2) display surfaces, not necessarily displaying the same copy. 
Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix and shall include the painting of wall signs. 
Establishment: A commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, office, business, or financial entity. 
Flashing sign: A sign designed to attract attention through the use of a flashing, changing, revolving or flickering light source, or a change of light intensity. 
Frontage: The length of the property line of any one premises along a street on which it borders. 
Frontage, building: The length of an outside building wall on a street. 
Gasoline station: Any establishment dispensing gasoline for retail sales. 
Ground sign: Any sign, which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. 
Identification sign: A sign, which depicts the name and/or address of a building or establishment on the premises where the sign is located as a means of identifying said building or establishment. 
Illuminated sign: A sign which contains a source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source including indirect lighting, neon, incandescent lights, back lighted, and reflectorized signs which depend upon automobile headlights for an image. 
Indirectly illuminated sign: A sign illuminated with a light directed primarily toward such sign, including back lighted signs, and so shielded that no direct rays from the light are visible. 
Internally illuminated sign: A light source, which is enclosed within the sign and viewed through a translucent panel. 
Mansard sign: A mansard sign shall mean any sign attached to or erected against a mansard of a building, with the face horizontally parallel to the building wall. Since said sign is to be mounted parallel to and within the limitations of the building wall on which same is to be mounted, the same is deemed to be a wall sign and not a roof sign. 
Marquee: A canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building when such canopy or covered structure extends beyond the building line or property line. 
Nonconforming sign: Any sign, legal at the time of its erection, which does not conform to the requirements of this resolution. 
Off-site sign: A sign relating its subject matter to premises other than the premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services or activities available on premises other than the premises on which the sign is located, including but not limited to billboards. 
On-site sign: A sign relating its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises. 
Painted wall sign: Any sign, which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
Permanent sign: A sign permanently affixed to a building or to the ground. 
Political sign: A sign identifying and urging voter support for or opposition to a particular issue, political party, or candidate for public office. 
Portable sign: Any sign whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols. Even though the wheels or supports of such sign should be removed and the sign rendered immobile, such sign shall retain its character as a portable sign based on its original design unless it is permanently attached to the property as an on-site sign. 
Premises: An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate. 
Projecting sign: Any sign other than a wall sign affixed to any building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such building or wall. 
Promotional sign: A sign designed and intended to promote the sale of unplatted land where more than one (1) lot and/or principal building is involved. Also, a sign designed and intended to advertise the grand opening of a business, special promotions or similar events. 
Public service sign: A sign designed to render a public service such as but not limited to "time and temperature" signs and "flashing news" signs. 
Real estate sign: A sign that advertises the sale, rental or development of the premises upon which it is located. 
Residential district: Includes all land zoned E-1, E-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4A, R-4B, R-5, and R-6. 
Revolving sign: Any sign so erected or constructed as to periodically change the direction toward which any plane containing the sign surface area is oriented. 
Roof sign: Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support on the roof structure. 
Sandwich sign: Any sign, double or single faced, which is portable and may readily be moved from place to place. 
Shopping center: A group of two (2) or more retail and service establishments of more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet gross floor area on the ground floor located on commonly owned property sharing the same parking facilities and connected together by common walls, interior aisles, or malls. 
Sign: Any writing, pictorial presentation, illustration, or decoration, flag, banner or pennant or other device which: 
(a)	Is used to announce, direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known; and 
(b)	Is designed to be visible from any street or adjoining property.
The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include the terms building or landscaping, or any architectural embellishment of a building not designed to communicate information. 
Sign face: The area of a sign on which the copy is placed. 
Sign height: The vertical distance from the finished grade at the base of the supporting structure to the top of the sign, or its frame or supporting structure, whichever is higher. 
Sign number: For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be construed to be a single display structure or device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a single unit. In cases where material is displayed in a random or unconnected manner, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the intended relationship of such components, each component or element shall be considered to be a single sign. A projecting sign or ground sign with sign surface on both sides of such sign shall be construed as a single sign, and the total area of such sign shall be the area computed on a single side. 
Sign structure: Any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
Sign surface area: The surface area of a sign shall be computed for the entire area within the periphery of a regular geometric form, or combination of regular geometric forms, comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed, but not including structural elements of the sign bearing no advertising matter. The surface area of a sign shall be measured from the outside edges of the sign or the sign frame, whichever is greater. 
Snipe sign: Any sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence post, or any other similar object located or situated on public or private property. Snipe signs shall not include "posted property" signs. 
Street: A public or private right-of-way for vehicular traffic, including highways, thoroughfares, lanes, roads, ways, boulevards, and other terms but not including alleyways between buildings and lots, parking lots and driveways. 
Subdivision sign: Any sign designed to identify a subdivision or neighborhood. 
Temporary sign: A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, plywood, or other light material and intended to be displayed for a short period of time. Included in this category are retailers' signs temporarily displayed for the purpose of informing the public of a sale or "special" offer and banner signs. 
Wall sign: A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building with the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building wall. 
Window sign: Any sign placed inside or upon a window facing the outside and which is intended to be seen from the exterior. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 4, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-25. - Permits, inspections, etc. 
(a)	Permit required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any sign in Dougherty County or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit from the building official. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for change of copy on any sign nor for the repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not modified or enlarged in any way. 
(b)	Application. In order to obtain a permit to erect, alter or relocate any sign under the provisions of this resolution, an applicant therefor shall submit to the building official a sign permit application which shall set forth in writing a complete description of the proposed sign including: 
(1)	The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector. 
(2)	The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the lot on which the sign is located if different from those designated above. 
(3)	The location by street address of the proposed sign structure.
(4)	Complete information as required on application forms provided by the building official, including a drawing of the proposed sign showing dimensions, (for identification purposes only), and such other data as are pertinent to the application. 
(5)	Where the sign construction requires an electrical connection, the electrical contractor shall obtain an electrical permit. 
The building official shall act upon an application for a permit with plans as filed, or as amended, within five (5) working days. 
(c)	Issuance of permit if application in order. It shall be the duty of the building official, upon receipt of a completed application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and, if the proposed structure is in compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable provisions of this article to issue, within five (5) working days from date of filing, to the applicant a written permit evidencing the applicant's compliance therewith. Issuance of the permit shall in no way prevent the building official from later declaring said sign to be nonconforming if the permit is obtained based on false information submitted by the applicant. 
(d)	Permit duration. A sign permit shall become null and void if the construction of the sign for which the permit was issued has not begun within a period of six (6) months after the date of issuance and completed within twelve (12) months after date of issuance. 
(e)	Work on illegal signs. No person shall erect or assist in the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, relocation, repair or painting of, or do any work upon any sign for which a permit has not been obtained. Any such sign shall be illegal and the building official shall order the owner to remove the same immediately. If the owner fails to remove the same within thirty (30) days, the building official shall proceed in accordance with sections 2-13.3-33 and 2-13.3-34 of this article. 
(f)	Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this article are subject to inspection by the building official. 
(g)	Revocation. The building official is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this section within thirty (30) days after notification in writing. 
(h)	Permit fees for on-site signs. Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this section, the applicant shall pay a fee as follows: 
(1)	For each permit for signs, illuminated or not, fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot on each face. 
(2)	For each permit for a painted wall sign, fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot on each face. 
(3)	Provided the minimum permit fee for any sign as described in (1) and (2) above shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(4)	Provided that no permit fee for on-site permanent signs shall be required or charged under this section when said sign has no electrical connection and the sign surface area on the premises is twenty-four (24) square feet or less. 
(5)	A double permit fee shall be paid in addition to any other penalties levied for violation of this section. 
(i)	Permit fees for temporary signs. Before any permit is issued under this section for temporary signs, the applicant shall pay a permit fee of thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(j)	Off-site signs. All persons owning one or more off-site signs within the unincorporated limits of Dougherty County shall, not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the adoption of this article, file with the Dougherty County Clerk a complete written inventory of such signs, giving the location, description, size, and date of erection of said sign. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 5, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-26. - Removal, alteration or maintenance of signs. 
(a)	The building official shall notify the owner to remove or conform any and all signs constructed or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this article. If such removal or conformance is not accomplished within thirty (30) days after the notice, the building official shall proceed in accordance with subsection (h) of this section. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this article, any on-site sign that is located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of six (6) months or more, or any on-site sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent on-site signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of twelve (12) months or more. An abandoned on-site sign is prohibited and is a violation of this article. 
(c)	All signs for which a permit is required by this article, including their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be maintained so as to present a neat, clean appearance. Painted areas and sign surfaces shall be kept in good condition, and illumination, if provided, shall be maintained in safe and good working order. 
(d)	Weeds and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath, and around the base of ground signs for a distance of ten (10) feet, and no rubbish or debris that would constitute a fire or health hazard shall be permitted under or near such signs. 
(e)	If the building official shall find that any sign regulated under this article is unsafe or unsecured, or is a menace to the public, he shall give written notice of such findings to the owner, agent or lessee thereof. If the owner, agent or lessee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within thirty (30) days after said notice, the building official shall compel compliance, as provided in subsection (h) of this section. 
(f)	When any sign constitutes an immediate peril to persons or property, the building official may require the condition to be remedied immediately, including removal of the sign if that be necessary to remedy the condition. 
(g)	For the purpose of this article, the word "remove" shall mean that the sign face and sign structure, including all posts, columns, or supports shall be taken down and removed from the property. Ground signs, unless bolted to a foundation, shall be removed three (3) inches below grade. 
(h)	The building official, in carrying out his duty and authority under section 2-13.3-26 of this article, or in enforcing any penalty provision hereof, or in carrying out his responsibility to remove any sign, shall utilize and follow the procedures set forth in sections 2-13.3-33 and 2-13.3-34 of this article. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 6, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-27. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	The following signs shall be removed or made to conform to this article within ninety (90) days from the effective date of this article. 
(1)	Nonconforming signs made of paper, cloth, or other nondurable material.
(2)	All temporary signs other than those permitted herein.
(3)	Any signs, except portable signs, that are not affixed to a building or the ground or that are located on public property or within a public right-of-way, unless otherwise permitted. 
(4)	Bench signs.
(b)	Except as provided in subsection (b)(7) hereof, the use of portable signs is prohibited after one (1) year from the effective date of this article. 
(c)	Any animated component of any portable sign shall be permanently discontinued within ninety (90) days from the effective date of this article. 
(d)	Nonconforming permanent on-site signs and off-site signs shall be made to conform or be removed according to the following schedule with all time periods beginning on the effective date of this article: 
(1)	Off-site signs—ten (10) years, subject to a future determination by Dougherty County of the necessity for determining just and adequate compensation under subsections (d)(5) and (i) of this section and section 2-13.3-28, hereof. 
(2)	All on-site nonconforming signs shall be removed or shall be altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter as follows: 
a.	When the nature of the business conducted on the premises changes and the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size, or legend; or 
b.	When the name of the business changes and the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size, or legend; or 
c.	Within ten (10) years from the effective date of this article; whichever event stated in a., b., or c. first occurs, provided, however, that no on-site nonconforming sign shall be removed due to the passage of time (ten (10) years) alone unless Dougherty County pays just and adequate compensation for said sign and initiates eminent domain proceedings as required under subsections (d)(5) and (i) of this section and section 2-13.3-28, hereof. 
(3)	A nonconforming permanent on-site sign or off-site sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that substitution or interchange of letters and face panels on nonconforming signs shall be permitted through the period of nonconformity established by this article. 
(4)	Not less than twelve (12) months before the expiration of a period of nonconformity, the building official shall give written notice that the nonconforming on-site sign or off-site sign shall be made to conform out. 
(5)	If any sign is not brought into compliance within the time specified, the building official is hereby authorized to initiate procedures for the removal of such sign and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner, agent, or lessee of said sign or of the property upon which the sign is located, subject, however, to the provisions of subsection (i) of this section and section 2-13.3-28 of this article. 
(e)	Nonconforming permanent on-site signs and nonconforming permanent off-site signs may be maintained and repaired but shall not be structurally or mechanically extended or altered to further the nonconformance. 
(f)	Nonconforming real estate signs shall be removed or made to conform within one (1) year of the effective date of this article. 
(g)	Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this section, no nonconforming sign is required to be removed solely by the passage of time if, to so require, is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(h)	Nonconforming signs are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(i)	Whenever the enforcement of this article against any sign, or against the owner of any interest in any sign, results in a taking of property which, under the Constitution of the United States or the State of Georgia, requires the payment of just compensation, this resolution shall not be enforced against such sign or such owner without complying with such requirement. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 7, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-28. - Pay for taking. 
Whenever the owner of any permanent sign is compelled to remove the same solely because of the passage of time, such owner shall be entitled to just compensation within the meaning of the Constitution of the United States and the State of Georgia, and removal shall not be required unless and until Dougherty County shall initiate proceedings under the eminent domain statutes of the State of Georgia to determine the amount of just compensation. Any such sign shall continue to remain in place until Dougherty County has complied with the foregoing provision. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 8, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-29. - Penalties. 
Each violation of this article shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in sections 2-13.3-33 and 2-13.3-34 of this article. This provision shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, all other provisions of this article establishing penalties or remedies for violations. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 9, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-30. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)	Variances. 
(1)	With respect to those regulations of the sign resolution pertaining to permanent on-site signs only, the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission (planning commission) shall be authorized to grant such variances from the terms of the sign resolution as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, due to special conditions surrounding such permanent on-site signs, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the sign resolution will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship so that the spirit of the sign resolution shall be observed, public safety, health and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the planning commission that: 
a.	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining the particular sign in question because of its cost, its location, and/or the needs of the business served by said sign; and 
b.	The application of the sign resolution to this particular sign would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
c.	Such conditions are peculiar to the particular sign involved; and
d.	Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the sign resolution. 
In exercising the foregoing powers, the planning commission may, in conformity with the provisions of the sign resolution, grant variances under the following circumstances, the specific instances hereafter enumerated not being intended to be exclusive and not in any way affecting the generality of the authority of the planning commission to grant hardship variances: 
a.	Grant extensions of time for bringing a nonconforming permanent on-site sign into conformity with the terms of the resolution, where the owner of the sign demonstrates to the satisfaction of the planning commission that because of special circumstances existing the literal enforcement of the time provisions of the resolution will result in economic loss and hardship to the owner disproportionate to that suffered by others. 
b.	Grant variances from the size, shape, height, form, and design requirements of this resolution where in the judgement of the planning commission the permanent on-site sign as designed and constructed is architecturally and aesthetically consistent with its surroundings, or where the owner establishes to the satisfaction of the planning commission a valid business need for the sign as designed and constructed. 
(2)	Requests for variances regarding any part of this article or the enforcement thereof shall be made in written form to the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission. Such variance request shall specifically include reasons why the application should be granted. 
(3)	Variance procedures shall apply both to signs, which are nonconforming on the effective date of this article, and to signs erected after the effective date of this article. 
(4)	Decisions of the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission shall be final; subject, however, to such legal remedy as any aggrieved party might have. 
(5)	All applications for variances shall be filed, processed and considered with the payment of a filing fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), and with the appropriate advertising. 
(b)	Appeals. Requests for appeals regarding any part of this article or the enforcement thereof shall be filed, processed and considered in accordance with the procedures established in the Albany-Dougherty Zoning Resolution or the equivalent provision of any subsequent zoning resolution or amendment, but appeals shall be considered and acted upon by the Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 10, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-31. - General regulations. 
(a)	Prohibited signs. 
(1)	On-site signs and off-site signs which are not designed, constructed, or maintained in accordance with these provisions, which are not compatible with the objectives of this article, or which do not meet the requirements of all applicable city, county, state and federal codes. 
(2)	Lights and signs that resemble any traffic control device, official traffic control signs, or emergency vehicle markings such as rotating beacons or strobe lights. 
(3)	Signs or other advertising matter as regulated by this resolution erected at the intersection of any streets or in any street right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; or which makes use of words "stop," "look," "drive-in," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicular traffic. 
(4)	Unshielded illuminated devices that produce glare or are a hazard or a nuisance to motorists or occupants of adjacent properties such as sealed beam, flood or spot lights. 
(5)	Banners or flying paraphernalia, except as permitted in section 2-13.3-32(b)(5) of this article as a temporary sign, or except as used by legally constituted governmental agencies and authorities. 
(6)	Animated signs. Any existing animated permanent sign is considered a nonconforming sign and will be governed under section 2-13.3-27(a) of this article. 
(7)	Signs that produce noise or sounds capable of being heard even though the sounds produced are not understandable sounds. 
(8)	Signs, which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor.
(9)	Signs with any lighting or control mechanism, which causes radio or television or other communication interference. 
(10)	Motion picture mechanisms used in such a manner as to permit or allow the images to be visible from any public street or sidewalk. 
(11)	Signs erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct, or be attached to any fire-fighting equipment, window, door, or opening used as a means of ingress or egress or for fire-fighting purposes, or placed so as to interfere with any opening required for proper light and ventilation. 
(12)	Signs erected on or over public property including public rights-of-way, other than signs erected by public authority for public purposes, except signs previously authorized by Dougherty County. 
(13)	Signs, except "posted property" signs which are erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features. 
(14)	Signs attached to or painted onto a vehicle parked on and visible from a street for the sole purpose of advertising onto said street, except signs advertising the vehicle for sale. 
(15)	Sandwich signs.
(16)	Snipe signs.
(17)	Window signs which identify or advertise activities, services, goods, or products available within the building, and which collectively cover more than ten (10) per cent of the window glass surface area, when the business or establishment has normal, regular or standard working hours extending beyond 11:00 p.m. 
(18)	Bench signs.
(19)	Flashing signs.
(20)	Tethered inflatable signs, either on-site or off-site, except as permitted in section 2-13.3-32(b)(5) of this article as a temporary sign. 
(21)	Portable signs, except as permitted in section 2-13.3-32(b)(7) of this article as a temporary sign. 
(22)	Off-site signs.
(23)	Roof signs.
(24)	Revolving signs.
(b)	Exempt signs. Except as otherwise provided, the following on-site signs are exempt from the provisions of this article and may be erected as follows after securing a no-charge permit, subject, however, to meeting all other applicable codes and regulations: 
(1)	One (1) professional nameplate for each premises. Each professional nameplate shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(2)	One (1) occupational sign for each premises, denoting only the name, street, number and business of an occupant in a commercial building or public institutional building. Each occupational sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(3)	One (1) bulletin board and identification sign per street frontage for public, charitable, educational or religious institutions located on the premises of said institutions and not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area, and fifteen (15) feet in height and not less than eight (8) feet to any property line where said institution is located in a residential district. 
(4)	Legal notices and official instruments.
(5)	Flags or insignia of a governmental, business, religious, charitable, or fraternal organization, provided only one (1) of each type flag or insignia shall be displayed from one (1) staff per legally occupied lot at a height not to exceed sixty (60) feet from the ground surface to which it is mounted, and not to exceed the over all height of the structure located on that lot by more that ten (10) feet. The flag or insignia shall not exceed in its longest dimension one-fourth (¼) the vertical height of the staff to which it is attached and in no case shall it exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. 
(6)	Decorative flags and bunting for a public wide celebration, conventions, and commemorations when specifically authorized by Dougherty County Commission for a prescribed period of time. 
(7)	Holiday lights and decorations.
(8)	Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings and structures.
(9)	Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and data of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials. 
(10)	Nonadvertising directional signs or symbols (e.g., entrance, exit, caution, slow, no trespassing) located on and pertaining to a parcel of private property, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(11)	Identification signs at the entrance drive of residences, estates, farms, ranches, and plantations, which do not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(12)	One (1) nonilluminated, double-faced, real estate sign per street frontage not exceeding in face area: 
a.	In all residential zoning districts:
1.	Four and one-half (4½) square feet where the property being advertised has a frontage of less than five hundred (500) lineal feet. 
2.	Sixteen (16) square feet where the property being advertised has a frontage of five hundred (500) lineal feet or more. 
b.	In all other districts, sixteen (16) square feet where the property or structure being advertised has a frontage of less than two hundred (200) lineal feet. 
c.	In all other districts, thirty-two (32) square feet where the property or structure being advertised has a frontage of two hundred (200) lineal feet or more. 
Multiple-listing strips and sold signs may be allowed when attached to a real estate sign. Signs shall be removed when ownership has changed or the property is no longer for sale, rent, or lease. Open for inspection signs not exceeding four and one-half (4½) square feet in area may be allowed on property that is open for inspection. 
(13)	One (1) construction sign per street frontage located on property where building is actually in progress under a current building permit. This shall be a ground sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and may include the names of persons and firms performing services or labor, or supplying materials to the premises. Such sign must be removed before a certificate of occupancy for any building or structure on the premises is issued. 
(14)	Political signs provided as follows:
a.	The sign shall not be displayed earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the primary election, general election or referendum it concerns. 
b.	The sign must be removed no later than seven (7) days following the date of the primary election, general election or referendum it concerns. The owner of the property on which the sign is located and the candidate will be responsible for removing the sign; provided, however, that a property owner shall have no responsibility where the sign has been placed on his property without his consent. 
c.	The sign shall not be lighted, either directly or indirectly.
d.	The sign shall be located entirely on private property. It shall not be located, in whole or in part, on any public lands or public right-of-way and shall not be located on any trees, rocks or like objects. 
e.	The number of signs displayed shall be restricted to one (1) sign per premises per candidate, or per referendum. 
f.	Political signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area in residential districts. In all other zoning districts, political signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
g.	The building official shall, without notice, immediately remove or cause to be removed any and all political signs in violation of paragraph d. of this subsection. The removal will be at the expense of the candidate. 
(15)	Window signs which identify or advertise activities, services, goods, or products available within the building, so long as the business or establishment has normal, regular or standard working hours not extending beyond 11:00 p.m. 
(16)	Signs incorporated on machinery or equipment at the manufacturer's or distributor's level, which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone booths, and gasoline pumps. 
(17)	One (1) sign per premises displaying only noncommercial messages shall be allowed in all districts, including residential, where a section 2-13.3-32, on-site sign is not located. Said signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, or five (5) feet in height. 
(c)	General requirements. 
(1)	Vertical clearance. Signs extending or hanging over any private sidewalk or pedestrian way shall not be less than nine (9) feet above the surface of such way. Signs extending or hanging over any private vehicular way shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface of such way. 
(2)	Obstruction to vision at street intersections. No sign shall be erected or maintained on any lot, which will obstruct the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection. In the case of corner lots, this shall also mean that there shall be provided an unobstructed triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the street lines. 
(3)	Distance from residential district. Signs on properties in commercial or industrial districts, which abut a residential district, shall not be erected closer than fifteen (15) feet to any residential district boundary line. 
(4)	Protection of residential properties from glare or reflection of light. Illuminated signs shall be defused or indirect to prevent direct rays of light from shining into adjoining residential districts. 
(d)	Signs located temporarily. The county administrator shall have authority to authorize on a temporary basis the utilization of off-site signs and on-site signs not otherwise authorized herein based on the following criteria: 
(1)	Such signs shall be of limited duration, the length of time not being in excess of the time reasonably needed to accomplish the purpose. 
(2)	The circumstances reasonably require the utilization of such sign in connection with an activity of temporary duration. 
(3)	The county administrator shall prescribe type of sign, and such terms and conditions as shall be necessary to protect the public health and safety, and to protect the environmental and aesthetical concerns of the community. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 11, 4-13-98; Res. No. 02-007, § I, 1-23-2002)
Sec. 2-13.3-32. - Sign standards for on-site signs. 
Unless otherwise specified, the following standards shall apply: 
(a)	Permanent signs: 
(1)	Ground signs, wall signs, mansard signs, marquee signs, canopy signs and projecting signs, except where otherwise provided, shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: 
a.	Zoning districts where allowed. Except where otherwise specifically provided, these signs shall be allowed only in zoning districts other than residential districts. (See section 2-13.3-31(b)(17) relating to certain signs in residential districts.) 
b.	Aggregate surface area of all signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet of area for each foot of building frontage occupied by the business displaying signs, or one (1) square foot of area for each foot of frontage of property occupied by the building whichever is greater. 
c.	Maximum aggregate surface area of all signs:
1.	Within the AG, C-4, C-5, and C-6 zoning district, on arterial streets, thirty-two (32) square feet and on collector streets and all other streets, ten (10) square feet. 
2.	Within the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-7 or C-8 zoning districts, one hundred (100) square feet.
3.	Within the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, two hundred (200) square feet.
d.	Signs in multiple-occupancy buildings. Where a single building or complex of buildings contains two (2) or more separate activities or establishments, the individual establishments located in such multiple-occupancy buildings shall be permitted wall signs and wall sign area as though each were located in an individual building with individual street frontage. Such multiple-occupancy buildings shall be permitted one (1) ground sign with surface area not to exceed one (1) square foot per foot of property frontage of the building or two (2) square feet per foot of building frontage, whichever is greater, with a maximum of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet. 
e.	Maximum number of signs. Only one (1) ground sign and one (1) wall, mansard, marquee, canopy, or projecting sign shall be allowed for each premises; except that on corner and double frontage lots fronting on either a collector or arterial street, two (2) ground signs and two (2) wall, mansard, marquee, or projecting signs are allowed provided that premises with more than one (1) street frontage may utilize up to the maximum sign surface area allowed for each frontage, but no transfers of allowable area may be made from one frontage to another. Where the property owner cannot use a ground sign, the property owner may have two (2) of any one (1) or combination of the other signs described. 
f.	Special maximum surface area requirements for wall signs and mansard signs: Where a wall sign or a mansard sign is the only type of sign used, the maximum surface area may be determined by the following table: 

 
Provided that the maximum surface area allowed by using this table shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet. 
g.	Ground signs, maximum height:
1.	Within the C-5 zoning district, fifteen (15) feet on arterial streets and eight (8) feet on collector and all other streets. 
2.	Arterial street location, twenty (20) feet.
3.	All other locations where allowed, fifteen (15) feet.
h.	Wall signs may not project more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall to which they are attached. 
i.	Mansard signs. Unless otherwise specified, the mansard roof portion of a structure may be used for the mounting of a sign, provided such sign shall not extend above the highest point of the mansard roof line upon which the sign is mounted. 
j.	Marquee signs and canopy signs. Signs or sign structures located on a marquee or canopy shall be affixed flat to the surface and shall not be greater than two (2) feet in vertical dimension above the marquee and shall not extend horizontally beyond the marquee or canopy. An identification sign may extend vertically below the marquee or canopy, but may not exceed the dimensions of one (1) foot by six (6) feet, nor exceed the width of the marquee or canopy, whichever is less. 
k.	Projecting signs. All projecting signs shall be subject to the following limitations:
1.	Projection limitations: Six (6) feet beyond the surface of the portion of the building to which it is attached or designed. 
2.	Surface area and height limitations:

 
(2)	Shopping center signs. For each shopping center, signs bearing the name and identification of the shopping center and of the establishments on the premises shall be allowed subject to the following requirements: 
a.	Signs for the identification of shopping centers and shopping center establishments:
1.	Maximum number of signs. One (1) ground sign for the first five hundred (500) lineal feet of frontage adjacent to a street and one (1) additional ground sign for each additional five hundred (500) lineal feet of frontage or major fraction thereof. 
2.	Maximum surface area for each shopping center ground sign shall be based on the gross leasable area (GLA) within the shopping center as follows: 
(i)	Neighborhood shopping center, at least twenty-five thousand (25,000) but less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet GLA: One hundred seventy-five (175) square feet. 
(ii)	Community shopping center, at least one hundred thousand (100,000) but less than three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet GLA: Two hundred (200) square feet. 
(iii)	Regional shopping center, at least three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet GLA or more: Three hundred (300) square feet. 
b.	Signs for establishments in the shopping center. Each establishment located within the shopping center shall be allowed one (1) sign not to exceed two and one-half (2½) square feet of surface area for each lineal foot of store frontage with a maximum surface area of two hundred (200) square feet; and one (1) hanging marquee sign not to exceed the dimensions of one (1) foot by six (6) feet not to exceed the width of the canopy, whichever is less. 
c.	Shopping center identification signs shall not be located on the rear or sides of a shopping center when such display would orient the sign to a residential neighborhood. 
(3)	Subdivision signs. One (1) permanent subdivision sign may be located at each entrance to a subdivision provided the following requirements are met: 
a.	Such sign shall contain only the name of the subdivision and motto, if any, and shall not contain promotional or sales material. 
b.	The sign shall not create a physical or visual hazard for motorists entering or leaving the subdivision. 
c.	An acceptable legal entity shall be provided to assure the maintenance of the subdivision sign. 
d.	The sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.
e.	The sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
(4)	Multiple-family residential development and mobile home park signs. One (1) wall or ground sign may be located on the site of a multiple-family residential development or mobile home park provided that it is not more than two (2) square feet in area for each unit up to sixteen (16) for maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. Such sign shall be not more than eight (8) feet in height. Where a multiple-family residential development or mobile home park is located on more than one (1) street, one (1) sign may be displayed on each street. 
(5)	Automobile dealership signs. The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to the following provisions: 
a.	Secondary ground signs shall be permitted only if used for preowned automobiles and/or if two (2) or more automotive product lines (automobile makes) are offered for sale on the premises. Not more than two (2) secondary ground signs shall be permitted; one (1) denoting the sale of used or preowned automobiles and one (1) denoting the sale of the second and additional automotive product lines (automotive makes). 
b.	Secondary ground signs shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the sign face of the conforming primary ground sign. 
(6)	Gasoline station signs. The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to the following provisions: 
a.	An additional thirty-two (32) square feet of sign surface area shall be permitted on the ground sign for the purpose of advertising gasoline prices. 
b.	An additional two (2) canopy signs shall be permitted, not to exceed (8) square feet each or ten (10) percent of the size of the canopy where located, whichever is less. 
(7)	Permanent wall signs and mansard signs. The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to the following provisions: 
a.	In addition to sign surface area allowed under subsection (a)(1)a., b. and c., the permanent wall or mansard sign is allowed an additional sign surface area not to exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the building wall to which it is to be affixed. 
b.	This section applies within the C-1, C-2, and C-3, zoning districts.
(8)	Upon obtaining a statement of necessity from Dougherty County Traffic Engineer's office, the building official may, for safety, reasons, permit the sign up to a height of twenty-five (25) feet on arterial street locations in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-8, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. 
(b)	Temporary signs. Unless otherwise specified, the following sign regulations shall apply generally throughout Dougherty County: 
(1)	Development signs. Signs designed and intended to advertise and promote the sale or rental or lease of lots and/or structures in any subdivision shall be permitted as follows: Provided one (1) sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area shall be permitted for the first twenty (20) building sites, plus one (1) additional sign for each additional fifty (50) building sites or parts thereof not to exceed one (1) such sign for each street entrance into the subject subdivision. Such signs shall be permitted only within the confines of the subdivision. Permits for such development signs shall be issued for a period of one (1) year only, subject to renewal on application. The building official may renew such permits only after determination that the promotion of the subdivision is active. 
(2)	Temporary subdivision signs. Temporary subdivision signs shall be allowed to identify subdivision where an active building and development program is underway. Such signs shall be on a non-illuminated wall or ground mounted and shall be allowed for a maximum legal effective period of not more than two (2) years. Such signs shall be removed when the permit becomes void, or when seventy-five (75) percent of the lots in the subdivision have been conveyed or had principal buildings erected on them. Subdivision development signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. Such signs shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from any side property line and shall be no greater than ten (10) feet in height. In such cases where the subdivision abuts more than one (1) street, one (1) such temporary subdivision sign may be erected on each street frontage. 
(3)	Temporary signs for public or semipublic events or functions. A nonilluminated temporary sign announcing any public, charitable, educational or religious event, issue or function any be allowed on the site of the sponsoring public, charitable, educational or religious institution and on the site of the event, issue or function itself. Signs shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area. Signs shall not be utilized for more than sixty (60) days. 
(4)	Temporary signs for new businesses. A new business, or a business in a new location with no permanent signs may obtain a permit for a temporary sign, of up to sixty-four (64) square feet in sign area or the maximum permitted sign area for any one (1) ground mounted permanent sign for such occupant, whichever is less, for a period of not more than sixty (60) days or until installation of permanent signs, whichever shall occur first. A temporary ground sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
(5)	Banners, flying paraphernalia, and inflatable signs. A permit may be granted for the use of on-site banners, flying paraphernalia, and tethered inflatable signs for no more than one (1) time every six (6) months for a period not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days. 
(6)	Miscellaneous temporary signs. Although the use of pennants, flags, banners, whirlers or similar devices are prohibited anywhere in Dougherty County, a singular exception to such prohibition shall be that such devices may be used in conjunction with the opening of a new place of business, provided that such devices shall not be installed prior to opening day nor shall remain longer than thirty (30) calendar days after opening day. 
(7)	Portable signs. A permit may be granted for the erection of one (1) portable sign on the premises provided that the portable sign shall: 
a.	Be allowed for not more than one (1) time every six (6) months for a period not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days; 
b.	Not exceed forty (40) square feet in sign surface area;
c.	Not utilize flashing illumination;
d.	Be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from a right-of-way line;
e.	Not be allowed to be placed in a parking space that is required to meet the minimum parking requirements of Dougherty County. 
(8)	Penalties. 
a.	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to utilize, and for the owner of or the person or entity in control of any premises to permit the use of any temporary sign upon such premises pursuant to the provisions of this resolution without first obtaining a permit from Dougherty County allowing such use and specifying the period during which such use is permitted. 
b.	Any person or entity utilizing, and any person or entity permitting the use on premises which it controls, of any temporary sign without having first obtained the permit required in this resolution or for a period not covered by such a permit, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in sections 2-13.3-33 and 2-13.3-34 of this article. Each day said violation continues shall be punishable as a separate offense. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 12, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-33. - Enforcement. 
(a)	This article shall be enforced under O.C.G.A. section 15-10-60 through section 15-10-66, as amended, said section being entitled "Violation of ordinances of counties and state authorities." 
(b)	The building official and his authorized inspectors, the members of the Dougherty County Police Department and the members of the Dougherty County Sheriff's Department are authorized to issue a citation against any person violating this article. 
(c)	Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations as provided in O.C.G.A. section 15-10-63, and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusation by the county attorney. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(d)	Nothing in this article shall prevent any enforcing officer from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive or any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanction, penalty or remedy by law. 
(e)	Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
(Res. No. 98-012, § 13, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-34. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this article or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 14, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-35. - Separability. 
In accordance with the following it is hereby declared that the several provisions of this article are separable: 
(a)	If any court of competent jurisdiction determines any provision of this article to be invalid, such determination shall not affect any other provision of this article, not specifically included in the court's judgement order. 
(b)	If any court of competent jurisdiction determines any provision of this article to be invalid as applied to any particular sign, such determination shall not affect the application of such provision to any other sign not specifically included in the court's judgement order. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 15, 4-13-98)
Sec. 2-13.3-36. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals and convenience, in accordance with this document's stated purpose. 
(Res. No. 98-012, § 16, 4-13-98)
Chapter 2-13.5 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Sections I—III of Res. No. 10-024, adopted June 21, 2010, repealed the former ch. 2-13.5, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, §§ 2-13.5-1—2.13.5-10, and enacted a new ch. 2-13.5, Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control. The former ch. 2-13.5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 04-018, § I, adopted April 5, 2004. Said Res. No. 10-024 has been incorporated by reference, and a copy may be found in the county administration office.

Chapter 2-14 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Authority, §§ 1-2-21, 1-2-30.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-14-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Collector: A person who, under formal agreement, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or hauling solid waste. 
Disposal area: A site, location, tract of land or facility, used or intended to be used for the final disposal of solid waste, garbage, putrescible waste, hazardous waste, or other waste, except that it shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling on which the owner, occupant or lessee of said land or facility resides. 
Garbage: Food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste: Solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; caustic wastes; toxic wastes; and other waste material so designated by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Industrial waste or industrial solid waste: The solid waste materials from factories, processing plants and manufacturing enterprises; the term includes food processing wastes, meat and poultry processing wastes, condemned food, ashes and cinders, agriculture products waste, land clearance waste, and similar waste. 
Owner: Any owner, public or private. 
Premises: Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored. 
Rubbish: A variety of combustible and noncombustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places of residence, commercial areas and institutions and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, tree and yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, minerals, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, bedding, rubber, discarded clothing and similar clothing, and similar materials. 
Scavenge: Uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Waste: Unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-2; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 2, 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-2. - Duties of county administrator. 
The board of commissioners, in order to protect the health and safety of the people in the county, authorizes and directs its county administrator, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of these regulations, to control the storage, collection and disposal of solid waste in the unincorporated areas of the county. The county administrator shall establish criteria for evaluation of private collection and disposal services, make recommendations to the board of commissioners regarding contract for solid waste collection and/or disposal, and shall regulate the establishment, maintenance and operation of public or private solid waste collection and/or disposal systems, methods and sites. 
(Res. No. 82-007-B, § 3(A), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-3. - Appeals to board of commissioners. 
Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or fee charged by, these regulations shall have the right to appeal to the board of commissioners, which may confirm, modify or revoke any such requirement or fee. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-3; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 3(B), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-4. - Littering. 
(a)	No person shall place any solid waste in any street, public place, roadway or private premises except it be in proper containers for collection. No person shall place any solid waste in a stream, lake or body of water. 
(b)	No person shall deposit or dispose of waste materials on or in public right-of-way of roadways, alleys, drainage structures, drainage canals or drainage ponds. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-4; Res. No. 82-007-B, §§ 4C, 6(B), 2-15-82)
Cross reference— Litter control, § 2-14-41 et seq. 
Sec. 2-14-5. - Proper storage required; creation of nuisance; failure to remove after notice. 
No person shall keep or store refuse outside of any residence or building within the unincorporated area of the county except it be in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared as set forth or under the express prior approval of the appropriate agency. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within such reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice of the board of commissioners shall be deemed in violation of these regulations and subject to penalties set forth in section 2-1-8, and each day's failure to remove such accumulation shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-4; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 4(A), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-6. - Number and specifications of containers. 
(a)	Containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number of accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodentproof and easily cleanable. They shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32) gallons, except that bulk containers of a type suitable for mechanical collection by equipment used for such collection by a licensed collector may be used. Containers failing to comply with these provisions or which have defects causing them to scatter waste upon the ground during collection or causing them to hamper or to injure the persons collecting waste shall be promptly replaced. 
(b)	Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection provided they are unbroken, sealed and loaded in such manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-4; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 4(B), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-7. - License to collect, transport or dispose of solid waste. 
No person shall contract for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste who does not possess a current license for such business operation in the county. Applications for licenses shall be written and shall be considered after evidence has been presented to show that the applicant has received a current permit, appropriate to the type of business concerned, as required under solid waste regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-5; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 5(A), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-8. - Collection vehicles; cleanliness, safety, covers, construction; identification. 
The vehicles to be used on streets and highways for solid waste collection, transportation or disposal shall be kept clean and shall be certified in regard to highway safety by the motor vehicle division of the state department of public safety. Such vehicle bodies shall be in good condition and repair, covered and constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. Vehicles normally engaged in the collection of limbs and tree trimmings may use nets for a covering or ropes to tie down the larger limbs. Vehicle bodies used for collection and hauling garbage will be of the standard type garbage packers available from the various manufacturers and in addition to the above requirements shall be of all metal construction capable of receiving garbage through a mechanical loading transfer unit and capable of discharging by means of a hydraulic operated ejector. Subject packers will be equipped with appropriate step platform and handrail for safety of crew riding thereon. The outside of the body shall be painted and identified by the name, telephone number and permit number of the collection business in letters and numbers not less than two (2) inches high and easily legible. Vehicles used by commercial collectors, owners and contractors to transport industrial waste and rubbish will be equipped with a mechanical means of ejecting or dumping their contents at the landfill. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-5; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 5(A), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-9. - Minimum contract service. 
Collectors who contract with home owners/occupiers for collection of solid waste will provide the following minimum service: 
(1)	Pick up garbage twice weekly on scheduled dates.
(2)	Pick up nominal amounts of rubbish such as leaves, lawn and shrubbery clippings, etc., providing it is properly packaged in plastic bags or other containers as specified in section 2-14-6. For the purpose of this section nominal means not to exceed one (1) bag per week average. If the home owner/occupier occasionally requests the collector to pick up larger amounts of rubbish, the collector is encouraged to do so and may charge an additional nominal fee. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-5; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 5(B), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-10. - Insurance of collectors. 
Collectors using the county landfill will carry minimum liability insurance of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)/three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00/fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and workers' compensation insurance, with limits as set by state law. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-5; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 5(C), 2-15-82)
State Law reference— Workers' compensation, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-14-11—2-14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDFILL 

Sec. 2-14-20. - Compliance with federal and state law. 
It is the intention of this chapter that the county disposal site be operated in accordance with the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. section 3152 et seq., as amended, The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. section 6901 et seq., The Solid Waste Management Act, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 12-8-20 et seq., and the Hazardous Waste Management Act, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 12-8-60 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 4-2-6; Res. No. 82-007-B, § 6(F), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-21. - Use of public site required; exception. 
All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated by the county and at no other place, unless a private disposal site has been approved and a disposal area permit obtained from the state department of natural resources. 
(Res. No. 82-007-B, § 6(A), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-22. - Entry of private sites by public agencies. 
Authorized representatives of appropriate governmental agencies shall be permitted to enter private disposal sites at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with these regulations. 
(Res. No. 82-007-B, § 6(A), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-23. - Nonliability of county for damages to users. 
Persons using solid waste disposal site operated for the county does so at own risk and absolves the county, its officers and employees, from responsibility for any accident to said contractors or their employees or to private citizens or for damage to trucks, vehicles or other property owned or operated by such contractors or employees or private citizens when such accident or damage occurs at the county-operated disposal site or on the grounds thereof. 
(Res. No. 82-007-B, § 6(C), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-24. - Entry during business hours. 
No person shall enter a disposal site except during the hours of operation; or on special arrangement with the director of public works. 
(Res. No. 82-007-B, § 6(C), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-25. - Materials become property of county. 
All materials delivered and deposited for disposal on the solid waste landfill site shall be the property of the county. 
(Res. No. 82-007-B, § 6(C), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-26. - Salvage. 
No person shall be permitted to salvage, scavenge or reclaim any solid waste which has been delivered to the county disposal site for disposal. 
(Res. No. 82-007-B, § 6(D), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-27. - Materials for which prior arrangement required. 
The following materials will not be accepted at the landfill for disposal except through prior arrangements with the county. 
(1)	Material collected outside of the county.
(2)	Trees or timbers over eight (8) feet in length.
(3)	Motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
(4)	Sludge from septic tanks or grease traps, and any sludge that has not been treated and tested by secondary treatment. 
(Res. No. 82-007-B, § 6(E), 2-15-82)
Sec. 2-14-28. - Hours site is open; placement of material as designated. 
(a)	The county solid waste disposal site will be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Sundays. The solid waste disposal site will be closed on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. Persons desiring to dispose of solid waste on holidays shall make special arrangements with the county director of public works at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance. 
(b)	Waste deposited at the landfill site shall be placed as designated by the attendant on duty. 
(Res. No. 80-149, § 6(B), 6-16-80)
Sec. 2-14-29. - Charges for use. 
(a)	Solid waste service charges for the purposes of financing and managing a solid waste management system shall be paid by all persons, firms or corporations engaged in the disposal of garbage and/or refuse at the Dougherty County Gaissert Road Landfill site. 
(b)	The following charges shall apply to and govern garbage and/or refuse from a commercial or residential site: 
(1)	Where truck scales are available: 
Municipal solid waste (putrescible) .....$25.00/ton 
Insert material: 
0—999 lbs. .....N/C 
1000 lbs. and greater .....$20.00/ton 
Special handling material (liquid, asbestos) .....$38.00/ton 
Vehicle load weight or cargo weight shall be used in determining disposal fee. 
(2)	Where truck scales not available. Should truck scales not be available, the following rates shall apply: 
Semitrailers, garbage packers, stake bodies or vans, roll-on roll-off containers, dump trucks with tandem axle and special handling waste requiring immediate disposal .....$95.00 
Garbage packers, stake bodies, flatbeds, vans and dump trucks with single axle 20,000 GVW and over .....46.00 
Stake bodies, flatbeds, vans and dump trucks under 20,000 GVW .....32.00 
Pickup trucks with added sides additional to factory body, standard pickup trucks, station wagons, utility trailers towed by vehicle, standard dumpster load .....15.00 
(3)	Waste tires. 
Passenger tires (cars and pickup trucks) .....$1.00/tire
(5 or less) $1.60/tire $180.00/ton (more than 5)
Truck tires (off-road), per tire .....4.00 
Farm tractor tires, per tire .....40.00 
Operating hours of the landfill are posted at the landfill site. 
(c)	The above charges shall not apply to home owners or home occupiers who haul garbage or refuse from their homes and deposit same at the county disposal site. 
(Res. No. 82-013, § 1, 5-24-82; Res. No. 90-039, § 1, 5-21-90; Res. No. 90-067, § 1, 9-17-90; Res. No. 92-025, § 1, 6-15-92; Res. No. 93-014, § 1, 5-17-93) 
Sec. 2-14-30. - Yard waste disposal. 
The county board of commissioners, in accordance with Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 12-8-40.2, prohibits the disposal of yard trimmings, as defined by the Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, at the county landfill, effective September 1, 1996. 
(Res. No. 96-036, 8-19-96)
Sec. 2-14-31. - Transportation of waste across county's boundaries. 
(a)	Any person, firm, corporation or employee of any municipality seeking permission from Dougherty County to transport, pursuant to a contract, whether oral or otherwise, garbage, trash, waste, or refuse collected within Dougherty County across Dougherty County's boundaries for the purpose of dumping the same at a publicly or privately owned dump shall submit a written request to the county administrator containing the following information: a description of the type of garbage, trash, waste or refuse for which such permission is sought; an estimate of the amount of garbage, trash, waste or refuse for which such permission is sought; and the time frame for which such permission is being requested. 
(b)	Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a written request containing the information described in subsection (a) above, the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County shall conduct a hearing in connection with said request. The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to make an oral presentation to the commissioners in support of its request and any members of the public shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard in connection with such request. 
(c)	Following the completion of the public hearing, the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County shall approve or deny the request based upon its determination as to whether the public benefits, if any, derived from the request exceed any potential adverse effect that the approval would have upon the efficient and economical operation of the county landfill. 
(Res. No. 04-046, §§ I—III, 12-20-04)
Secs. 2-14-32—2-14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Resolution No. 89-020, adopted July 7, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as Art. III, §§ 2-14-41—2-14-57, was at the discretion of the editor.
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 2-8; depositing solid waste or other materials on public or private property, streets, etc., § 2-14-4.

Sec. 2-14-41. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Litter Control Resolution of Dougherty County, Georgia." 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. III), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-42. - Statutory authority. 
The board of commissioners of the county, under authority of article 9, section 2, paragraph I, of the Constitution of Georgia (1983), hereby resolves and enacts into law the following article. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. II), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-43. - Purposes. 
The county board of commissioners, in furtherance of their responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of the county, and to protect and enhance the quality of the environment hereby establishes rules and regulations controlling the unsystematic, careless, and indiscriminate disposition of litter throughout the county. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. I), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-44. - Definitions. 
(a)	Generally. Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust or partnership. The use of the masculine gender includes the feminine, and the use of the feminine gender includes the masculine. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive and is not mandatory. The "board of commissioners" refers to the board of commissioners of the county. 
(b)	Specific definitions. When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
Building official means the chief building inspector of the county, or his authorized representative. 
County means the duly authorized governing body of the county or the geographical area of the county outside the corporate limits of any incorporated municipality therein. 
Dumpster means a bulk container used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash and litter. The use of this term is generic, and does not refer to a bulk container manufactured by a specific manufacturer. 
Garbage means the by-product of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semi-solids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Junked vehicles includes any wrecked or inoperable automobile, truck or other vehicle, or vehicle which does not bear a current license plate. 
Landfill means any facility where any treatment, utilization, processing, storage, or depositing of solid waste occurs. 
Litter means all discarded man-made materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, junked vehicles, or portions thereof, refuse, waste materials, sand gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road, street or highway; and any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuse, or conversation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
Refuse means any solid waste accumulations consisting of any combination of ashes, building material, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, and other waste or discarded materials of all kinds. 
Road or street shall be mutually inclusive and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Rubbish includes waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material and similar material. 
Scavenge or scavenging means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. IV), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-45. - Prohibited acts; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any road or street or any public or private property in the county, unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or county or by any of their agencies for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)	The litter is placed into a litter receptacle, container, or dumpster installed on such property and designated for the disposal of litter; or 
(3)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. V, § 1(1)), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-46. - Public streets and private property. 
No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except with the written consent thereof, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. V, § 1(2)), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-47. - Blockage of drainage. 
No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. V, § 1(3)), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-48. - Unauthorized storage declared nuisance. 
Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the board of commissioners or their designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. 
(Res. No. 890-020, § 1 (Art. V, § 1(4)), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-49. - Appliances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the lock or door. This section shall not apply to any appliances, refrigerators or containers which have been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which have been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. V, § 1(5)), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-50. - Use of streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any road or street to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. V, § 1(6)), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-51. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner thereof, shall disturb or interfere with any container or dumpster used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom or remove such container from its location. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. V, § 1(7)), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-52. - Enforcement generally. 
This article shall be enforced under Official Code of Georgia Annotated sections 5-10-60 through 15-10-66, as amended, sections being entitled "Violation of ordinances of counties and state authorities." 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. VI, § 1), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-53. - Investigations. 
The Albany-Dougherty Clean Community Commission, the building official or inspectors designated by him, the members of the county police department, the members of the county sheriff's department and the county department of public works shall report all complaints of violations of any of the provisions of this article to the building official. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. VI, § 2), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-54. - Enforcing officers. 
The building official and his authorized inspectors, the members of the county police department and the members of the county sheriff's department are authorized to issue a citation against any person violating this article. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. VI, § 3), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-55. - Court proceedings. 
(a)	Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations as provided in Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 15-10-63, and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusation by the county attorney. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)	Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county and shall be tried in accordance with the official Code of Georgia, sections 15-10-60 through 15-10-66. 
(c)	Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanction, penalty or remedy by law. 
(d)	Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. VI, § 4), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-56. - Prima facie case. 
(a)	Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)	Except as provided in subsection (a) above, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, and other writings, which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. VI, § 5), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-57. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person violating this article or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	By a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(2)	In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(3)	In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereof by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(4)	The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article.
(b)	No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(Res. No. 89-020, § 1 (Art. VI, § 6), 7-7-89)
Sec. 2-14-58. - Accumulation of litter. 
(a)	Generally. No owner or occupant of any property in the county shall allow litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, filth, carrion, and debris to accumulate thereon. 
(b)	Notice to abate. 
(1)	In the event of a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remedy said violations within seven (7) days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(2)	Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States Mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that deliver of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(c)	Abatement. 
(1)	Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified, the county, its agents or assigns, is authorized to enter upon the property and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. 
(2)	The building official of the county shall assess the cost for the work provided, including administrative costs and attorneys fees, and shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than forty-five (45) days after payment to the contractor. 
(3)	If payment shall not have been made on or before the date named, the building official shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property notifying such owner to show cause before him at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for its approved amount. 
(4)	If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required was given, that the work was performed and the costs assessed are accurate and that the county has not been reimbursed, then execution shall issue for such amount, and shall be executed in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(5)	If the owner of the property is unknown, or cannot be located, notice shall be published once a week for four (4) weeks in the legal organ for Dougherty County, Georgia, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern," shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved, a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the chief finance officer at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (4) will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
(Res. No. 92-051, 11-2-92)
Sec. 2-14-59. - Construction site. 
(a)	Litter prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of a construction site, or any contractor on a construction site, to cause, to permit, or allow the presence of litter or construction waste on such site outside of a proper receptacle or to cause, permit, or allow litter or construction waste to be spilled, discharged, or blown by wind or water. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent of the property and the primary contractor performing work on the site to keep the property free of litter. All litter and construction waste from construction activities or any related activities shall be picked up at the end of each workday and placed in containers, which will prevent litter and construction waste from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises. 
(b)	Receptacles required. The owner, agent, or primary contractor in charge of a construction site shall furnish on such site receptacles sufficient to contain worker's litter and receptacles sufficient to contain all construction waste. All receptacles shall be conveniently available and maintained and secured or covered so as to prevent litter and construction waste from being spilled, discharged, or blown by wind or water. The primary contractor should determine the number and capacity of receptacles to be present at each construction site. All receptacles shall be emptied as necessary, but not less frequently than weekly. All receptacles required under this subsection shall remain conveniently available on the site from the time construction activity commences until the construction activity ceases. 
(c)	Construction site stormwater runoff control. Per 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 122.34(b)(4)(ii)(C), incorporated into NPDES Permit No. GAG610000, the construction site operator(s) is required to control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse water quality impacts. 
(d)	Exclusion. The requirement for receptacles in this section shall not apply to any construction site on which only repair or renovation of the building is taking place and this work is being performed by the owner of the property, who is also a resident on the property, where work is being performed. This provision in no way eliminates any responsibility of any party regarding subsection (a) under this provision regarding keeping the property free of litter. 
(Res. No. 14-023, § I, 12-15-14)
Secs. 2-14-60—2-14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEGETATION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Res. No. 92-051, adopted Nov. 2, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as Ch. 2-14, Art. IV, §§ 2-14-71—2-14-75, was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 2-14-71. - Purposes. 
The Dougherty County Board of Commissioners, in furtherance of their responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of Dougherty County, Georgia, and to protect and enhance the quality of the environment hereby establishes rules and regulations providing for vegetation control throughout Dougherty County, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 92-051, § 1, 11-2-92)
Sec. 2-14-72. - Enactment clause. 
The board of commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia, under authority of Art. 9, Sec. 2, Par. I, of the Constitution of Georgia (1983) hereby resolves and enacts into law the following article. 
(Res. No. 92-051, § 1, 11-2-92)
Sec. 2-14-73. - Title. 
This regulation shall be known and may be cited as "The Vegetation Control Resolution of Dougherty County, Georgia" and is applicable in the geographical area of Dougherty County, Georgia lying outside the corporate limits of the City of Albany. 
(Res. No. 92-051, § 1, 11-2-92)
Sec. 2-14-74. - Vegetation control. 
(a)	Generally. 
(1)	Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the county, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, brushes, flowers or other ornamental plants growing to a height exceeding twelve (12) inches anywhere in the county are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
(2)	Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(3)	The provision of this article shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county and to other county lots, however divided, and having a size of five (5) acres or less. 
(b)	Height permitted. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of twelve (12) inches above the ground within fifty (50) feet of any building. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, upkeep or maintenance, to allow weeds, grass, or other vegetation to grow or accumulate to a height in excess of twelve (12) inches above the ground within twenty-five (25) feet of a public way or of the property of another. 
(c)	Notice to abate. 
(1)	In the event of a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven (7) days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(2)	Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States Mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that deliver of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(d)	Abatement. 
(1)	Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified, the county, its agents or assigns, is authorized to enter upon the property and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. 
(2)	The building official of the county shall assess the cost for the work provided, including administrative costs and attorneys fees, and shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment thereof on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than forty-five (45) days after payment to the contractor. 
(3)	If payment shall not have been made on or before the date named, the building official shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property notifying such owner to show cause before him at a time and place and on a date named therein why execution should not issue against the property for its approved amount. 
(4)	If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required was given, that the work was performed and the costs assessed are accurate and that the county has not been reimbursed, then execution shall issue for such amount, and shall be executed in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(5)	If the owner of the property is unknown, or cannot be located, notice shall be published once a week for four (4) weeks in the legal organ for Dougherty County, Georgia, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern," shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved, a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the chief finance officer at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (4) will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
(Res. No. 92-051, § 1, 11-2-92)
Sec. 2-14-75. - Additional enforcement and remedies. 
(a)	Generally. This article may also be enforced under Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 15-10-60 through Section 15-10-66, as amended, said section being entitled Violation of Ordinances of Counties and State Authorities. 
(b)	Investigations. The Albany-Dougherty Clean Community Commission, the building official or inspectors designated by him, the members of the Dougherty County Police Department, the members of the Dougherty County Sheriff's Department and the Dougherty County Department of Public Works, shall report all complaints of violations of any of the provisions of this resolution to the building official. 
(c)	Enforcing officers. The building official and his authorized inspectors, the members of the Dougherty County Police Department and the members of the Dougherty County Sheriff's Department, are authorized to issue a citation against any person violating this resolution. 
(d)	Court proceedings. 
(1)	Violations of this resolution may be tried upon citations as provided in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 15-10-63, and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusation by the county attorney. The county attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(2)	Violations of this resolution may be tried in the Magistrate Court of Dougherty County, Georgia, and if so tried, shall be tried in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, Chapter 15-10-60 through 15-10-66. 
(3)	Nothing in this article shall prevent the board of commissioners from bringing any civil action for injunction, mandamus or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this resolution. No sanction, penalty or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanction, penalty or remedy by law. 
(4)	Each violation of this resolution shall constitute a separate offense and punishment imposed for each violation shall be by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or sixty (60) days' imprisonment or both, except as otherwise provided by general law. 
(5)	The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this resolution.
(Res. No. 92-051, § 1, 11-2-92)
Secs. 2-14-76—2-14-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE AND SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS, 

Sec. 2-14-92. - Definitions. 
Commercial solid waste shall mean all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 (4.1). 
County shall mean all of the unincorporated area of Dougherty County, Georgia. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(8). 
Industrial solid waste shall mean waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, fertilizer agricultural chemicals, food and food related products and by products as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 (12.1). 
Inert waste shall mean wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above. 
Litter shall mean discarded materials of every kind as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
Municipal solid waste shall mean any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(18). 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment as defined in Section 391-3-4.01 (44) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Public or private property shall mean the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forest as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(2). 
Recovered materials shall mean those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 (25). 
Recovered materials processing facility shall mean a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(26). 
Scrap tire shall mean a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(31). 
Scrap tire generator shall mean any person who generates scrap tires as defined in Section 391-3-4.19 (2.i) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire carrier shall mean any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted under Section 391-3-4-.19 (5.g) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(32). 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution contract facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923) and as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(34). 
Tire retailer shall mean any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(39). 
(Res. No. 01-004, § II, 1-16-2001)
Sec. 2-14-93. - Waste disposal—General. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises in the county shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposing of all litter, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste located on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in the county including, and without limitations, any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County or its duly designated agent for the disposal of litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, scrap tires or recovered materials and the person is authorized to use such property; and 
(2)	The litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, recyclables or scrap tires is placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and not otherwise in violation of law; and 
(4)	The property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by EPD.
(c)	All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers and tire retailers shall be subject to rules as defined in Section 391-3-4.19 and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20, et seq. and the Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4 applicable to solid waste. 
(Res. No. 01-004, § III, 1-16-2001)
Sec. 2-14-94. - Transporting solid waste and litter. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in the county hauling municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste that leaks, flows freely or spills from said vehicle. 
(b)	Any litter or municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste hauled on a moving vehicle shall be covered or secured in such a manner that litter will not blow or escape from said vehicle while moving or parked on public or private property in the county. 
(Res. No. 01-004, § IV, 1-16-2001)
Sec. 2-14-95. - Regulation of all solid waste or litter containers and receptacles. 
(a)	All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(b)	Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)	No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County or their designee. 
(d)	No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle.
(e)	No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle.
(f)	No person shall deposit large noncompatible articles in containers or receptacles such as but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bed springs, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for that purpose only. 
(g)	No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(h)	No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle.
(i)	No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County. 
(j)	No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles except by written consent of the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County. 
(k)	No person shall deposit any solid waste at a county solid waste collection and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in a manner that it can be handled by the attendant and shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation. 
(l)	No person shall deposit solid waste, water or litter of any kind at any county solid waste collection and recycling center into county owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as a glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for said material. 
(Res. No. 01-004, § V, 1-16-2001)
Sec. 2-14-96. - Regulation of municipal solid waste landfills, inert landfills, construction and demolition landfills, and solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(a)	No landfill shall be operated in the county unless approved by the Board of Commissioners of Dougherty County under the Dougherty County Solid Waste Management Plan and permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)	No person shall deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(c)	No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(d)	No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate barrier, or sign at a solid waste collection recycling center. 
(e)	Price on solid waste brought to said center will be set to defray total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)	Hours of operation of said centers will be set to maximize convenience of residents of that area. 
(g)	All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge provided it is separated under current market specifications and likewise uncontaminated. 
(h)	Attendant on duty will have full authority of said center consistent with this article.
(i)	All rules listed above shall apply to all public and/or private property in the county, all waters and/or waterways of the county, and all Dougherty County Solid Waste Collection and Recycling Centers. 
(Res. No. 01-004, § VI, 1-16-2001)
Sec. 2-14-97. - Violation. 
(a)	Violations of this article shall be enforced by citations and/or accusations of Dougherty County, Georgia as provided in Dougherty County Resolution No. 89-030 and as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. being entitled "Violation of Ordinances of Counties and State Authorities." 
(b)	Any person violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	By a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(2)	In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(3)	In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right of way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(c)	The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating any provision of this article. 
(Res. No. 01-004, § VII, 1-16-2001)
Chapter 2-14.5 - STORMWATER CONTROL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-14.5-1. - General provisions. 
(a)	Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Dougherty County Stormwater Quality Management and Discharge Control Resolution." 
(b)	Statement of findings. The governing body of Dougherty County finds that: 
(1)	Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens public health and safety by causing increased runoff flows and velocities, which overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater. 
(2)	Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds and streambanks thereby elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge. 
(3)	These impacts happen mainly through a decrease in natural infiltration of stormwater.
(4)	A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of development and other activities causing loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of Dougherty County, their resources, and the environment. 
(5)	Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential component in successfully addressing stormwater. 
(6)	Federal and state regulations require certain counties to implement a program of stormwater controls. Dougherty County is required to obtain a federal permit for stormwater discharge under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). 
(7)	Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems can contribute to pollution of waters of the United States by the county. 
(c)	Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Dougherty County, and protect and enhance the water quality of water bodies, including without limitation, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater, in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) and applicable regulations, and 40 CFR 122.26 for stormwater discharges. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)	Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels, 
(2)	Minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality, 
(3)	Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff pollutants which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime concentrations to the maximum extent practicable, 
(4)	Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and non-point source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety, 
(5)	Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this statute, including the adoption of a system of fees for inspections, services and permits. 
(d)	Applicability. 
(1)	This chapter shall apply to all water entering the separate storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands lying within Dougherty County including any amendments or revisions thereto. 
(2)	Stormwater management activities are also regulated under existing state law and implementing regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law. 
(e)	Responsibility for administration. The Dougherty County Public Works Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the public works director may be delegated in writing by the public works director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employment of the county. 
(f)	Severability. The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(g)	Regulatory consistency. This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. 
(h)	Ultimate responsibility of discharger. The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused by said person. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or chapter. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Dougherty County, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(1), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and not discretionary. The words "may" and "should" are permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Applicant. A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an application for approval, including a project plan under subsection 2-14.5-3(d)(2), to engage in any land development involving earth disturbance of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater at a project site in the municipality. 
As built. Drawings depicting conditions as they were actually constructed. 
Best management practices. Activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best management practices (BMP) include, but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from stormwater; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of nonstormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the county determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. Please refer to the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia and Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as discussed further in section 2-14.5-41 herein, for specific requirements. 
Borrow area. A source of earth fill material used in the construction of embankments or other earth fill structures. 
Building permit. A permit or other approval issued by a municipality for construction and/or earth disturbance. 
Channel. A natural or artificial constructed watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically. 
Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Community water. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Dougherty County. 
Contaminant. Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
County. Dougherty County. 
Construction activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Detention pond. Means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
Discharge. Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Easement. An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in the land of another. 
Erosion. The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects. 
Erosion and sediment control plan. A written plan (including drawings or other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
Hotspot. An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
(1)	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
(2)	Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the county. 
Illegal discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 2-14.5-41 of this chapter. 
Impervious cover. Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc). 
Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in Title 40 CFR, Section 122.26. 
Land disturbing activity. Any activity on property that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation. 
Maintenance. Any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good working order so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall include complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. Maintenance shall also include the correction of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility. 
Maintenance agreement. A document recorded in the land records that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The conveyances owned or operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of stormwater, including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permits. General, group, and individual stormwater discharge permits, which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
Non-point-source pollution. Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Off-site facility. A structural BMP located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
On-site facility. A structural BMP located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Point source. Any discernible and confined conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel tunnel, conduit, well, container, rolling stocks, concentrated animal feeding operations, vessels, or floating craft which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include returns from irrigated agriculture. 
Pollutant. Anything, which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. 
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Recharge. The replenishment of underground water reserves. 
Retention pond. Retention ponds capture the diverted stormwater runoff from streets and gutters, providing pollutant removal through settling and biological uptake. 
Runoff. Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface. 
Sediment. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below sea level. 
Sedimentation. Soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in streambeds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream. 
Soils report. A study of soils on a subject property with the primary purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The soils report shall be prepared by qualified soils engineer, who shall be directly involved in the soil characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly supervising employees. 
Stabilization. Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent erosion from occurring. 
Stop work order. An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
Storm drain system. Publicly-owned facilities operated by the county or natural channel by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the county and are not part of a publicly-owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2. 
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from rainstorm events. 
Stormwater management. The use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
Stormwater management plan: The set of drawings and other documents that comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to predevelopment levels. 
Stormwater runoff. Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
Structural BMPs. Devices that are constructed to provide control of stormwater runoff. 
Surface water. Includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs. 
Watercourse. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Water quality volume (WQv). The storage needed to capture and treat ninety (90) percent of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQv) will vary as a function of long-term rainfall statistical data. 
Watershed. All the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point along a waterway. 
Waters of the United States. Surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR 122.2. including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(2), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-3. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)	Permit required. Every person will be required to obtain a land disturbance permit from the Dougherty County Public Works Department in the following cases: 
(1)	Land disturbing activity disturbs one (1) or more acres of land;
(2)	Land disturbing activity of less than one (1) acre of land if such activity is part of a larger common plan of development that affects one (1) or more acre of land; 
(3)	Land disturbing activity of less than one (1) acre of land, if in the discretion of the county public works department such activity poses a unique threat to water, or public health or safety; 
(4)	The creation and use of borrow pits.
(b)	Building permit. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a land disturbance permit where the same is required by this chapter. 
(c)	Application requirement. Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the county's public works department a permit application on a form provided by the public works department for that purpose. Unless otherwise excepted by this chapter, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application be considered: 
(1)	A sediment and erosion control plan,
(2)	A stormwater management concept plan, providing for stormwater management during the land disturbing activity, 
(3)	A maintenance agreement for after the activity has been completed, and
(4)	A nonrefundable permit review fee.
The stormwater management plan, sediment and erosion control plan, and the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 2-14.5-5 of this chapter. Permit fees shall be those established by the county public works department. 
(d)	Application review fees. The application review fee shall be established to defray review costs incurred by the county. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the county's public works department. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover: 
(1)	Administrative/clerical costs.
(2)	The review of the project plan by the county.
(3)	The site inspections including, but not limited to, pre-construction meetings, inspections during construction of stormwater BMPs, and final inspection upon completion of the stormwater BMPs. 
(4)	Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial actions. 
(e)	Application procedures. 
(1)	Applications for land disturbance activity permits must be filed with the county's public works department on any regular business day. 
(2)	Permit applications shall include the following: two (2) copies of the stormwater management concept plan, two copies of the maintenance agreement, and any required review fees. 
(3)	Within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all documents as required by this chapter, the county's public works department shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
a.	If the permit application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant may revise the stormwater management plan or agreement. If additional information is submitted, the county's public works department shall have five (5) business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
b.	If the permit application, final stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved by the county's public works department, all appropriate land disturbance activity permits shall be issued. 
(f)	Permit duration. Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within eighteen (18) months from the date of the commencement of construction. 
(g)	Notice of construction. The applicant must notify the Dougherty County Public Works Department five (5) working days in advance of the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the Dougherty County Public Works Department. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)	The date and location of the inspection;
(2)	Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
(3)	Variations from the approved construction specifications;
(4)	Any violations that exist.
(h)	Performance bonds. 
(1)	The Dougherty County Public Works Department may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a non-revocable letter of credit, performance security or performance bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security or performance bond shall be the total estimated construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any reasonably foreseeable additional related costs, e.g., for damages or enforcement. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with unit prices which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the county public works department. Alternatively the Dougherty County Public Works Department shall have the right to calculate the cost of construction cost estimates. 
(2)	The performance security or performance bond shall be released in full only upon submission of record or as built drawing plans and written certification by a registered professional engineer (PE) or land surveyor licensed to practice in Georgia that the structural BMP has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this chapter. The Dougherty County Public Works Department will make a final inspection of the structural BMP to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security or performance bond based on the completion of various development stages can be made at the discretion of the Dougherty County Public Works Department. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(3), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-4. - Waivers for providing stormwater management. 
(a)	Generally. Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the Dougherty County Public Works Department for approval. 
(b)	Conditions for waiver. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
(1)	It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter. 
(2)	Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the Dougherty County Public Works Department. 
(3)	Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility must be in place and designed to provide the level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and maintenance of the facility. 
(b)	Downstream damage, etc., prohibited. In order to receive a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Dougherty County Public Works Department that the waiver will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream: 
(1)	Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
(2)	Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
(3)	Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(4)	Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property.
(d)	Land disturbance permit not to be issued where waiver requested. No land disturbance permit shall be issued where a waiver has been requested until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be resubmitted with a stormwater management plan. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(4), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-5. - Stormwater system design and management standards. 
(a)	Stormwater design or BMP manual. Dougherty County adopts as its stormwater design and best management practices (BMP) manual the following publications, which are incorporated by reference in this chapter as is fully set out herein, the current editions of the: 
(1)	Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia,
(2)	Dougherty County Soil Erosion & Sedimentation Control chapter, and
(3)	Georgia Stormwater Management Manual.
The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia includes a list of acceptable BMPs including the maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with these BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(b)	General performance criteria for stormwater management. Unless granted a waiver or judged by the county public works department to be exempt, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)	All site designs shall control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with design storms specified in this chapter or in the BMP manual and reduce the generation of post-construction stormwater runoff to pre-construction levels. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)	To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the BMP manual. 
(3)	Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(4)	Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the application of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices. 
(5)	Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land disturbance permits shall consult with the county public works department to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(6)	The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the BMP manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater facilities. 
(7)	All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the county's public works department. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any more than allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers (ACE) or the DNR or EPD responsible for natural resources. 
(8)	Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained, by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural methods. At a minimum, annual recharge from the post-development site shall not exceed the annual recharge from pre-development site conditions. 
(9)	For new development, structural BMPs shall be designed to remove ninety (90) percent of the average annual post development total suspended solids load (TSS). It is presumed that a BMP complies with this performance standard if it is: 
a.	Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQv); 
The formula for determining WQv is: 
WQv=[(P)(Rv)(A)]/12], where 
P = Rainfall depth in inches, using the "90 percent storm" - the volume of rainfall for 90 percent of the storm events which produce runoff in the watershed annually (e.g., 1.0 inches) 
A = Project area in acres 
Rv = Volumetric runoff coefficient [0.05 + 0.009(I)], where I is the impervious surface percentage (impervious area ° total project area) × 100 percent 
b.	Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia manual; 
c.	Constructed properly; and
d.	Maintained regularly.
(c)	Minimum control requirements. 
(1)	All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, 10-year, 100-year) as identified in the current stormwater design manual are met, unless the county's public works department grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. 
(2)	In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the county's public works department reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(d)	Site design feasibility. 
(1)	Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered: 
a.	Topography;
b.	Maximum Drainage Area;
c.	Depth to Water Table;
d.	Soils;
e.	Slopes;
f.	Terrain;
g.	Head;
h.	Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas.
OR the stormwater management BMPs shall be selected according to the following order of preference: 
a.	Site planning for locating proposed buildings, impervious areas and grading which minimizes disruption of the natural site characteristics; 
b.	Minimization of impervious areas and promotion of retentive grading;
c.	Implementation of innovative nonstructural measures;
d.	Infiltration of runoff on-site;
e.	Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions;
f.	Stormwater detention/retention structures.
(2)	Applicants shall consult the Stormwater Design Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice. 
(e)	Conveyance issues. 
(1)	All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.	Maximizing of flowpaths from inflow points to outflow points;
b.	Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
c.	Elimination of erosive flow velocities;
d.	Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable.
(2)	The Stormwater Design Manual provides detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices. 
(f)	Pretreatment requirements. Every stormwater treatment practice shall have an acceptable form of water quality pretreatment, in accordance with the pretreatment requirements found in the current Stormwater Design Manual. Certain stormwater treatment practices, as specified in the Stormwater Design Manual, are prohibited even with pretreatment in the following circumstances: 
(1)	Stormwater is generated from highly contaminated source areas known as "hotspots."
(2)	Stormwater is carried in a conveyance system that also carries contaminated, nonstormwater discharges. 
(3)	Stormwater is being managed in a designated groundwater recharge area.
(4)	Certain geologic conditions exist (e.g., karst) that prohibit the proper pretreatment of stormwater. 
(g)	Treatment/geometry conditions. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the Stormwater Design Manual. These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an approved stormwater management practice. 
(h)	Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to allow the county public works department to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. To accomplish this goal, the stormwater management plan shall include the following: 
(1)	Topographic base map: A 1 inch = 100 feet topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of one hundred (100) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates: 
a.	Existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, sink holes, wetlands; and the type, size, elevation, etc., of nearest upstream and downstream drainage structures; 
b.	Current land use including all existing structures, locations of utilities, roads, and easements; 
c.	All other existing significant natural and artificial features;
d.	Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; 
e.	Proposed structural BMPs;
f.	A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
(2)	Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in the BMP manual. These calculations must show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the guidelines of the BMP manual. Such calculations shall include: 
a.	A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and intensity where applicable;
b.	Time of concentration;
c.	Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including assumed soil;
d.	Moisture conditions;
e.	Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area;
f.	Infiltration rates, where applicable;
g.	Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater conveyance capacities;
h.	Flow velocities;
i.	Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the BMP manual; and 
j.	Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results.
(3)	Soils information: If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(4)	Maintenance and repair plan: The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued performance. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. A permanent elevation benchmark shall be identified in the plans to assist in the periodic inspection of the facility. 
(5)	Landscaping plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. Where it is required by the BMP, this plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect licensed in Georgia. 
(6)	Maintenance easements: The applicant must ensure access to the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed. These easements must be binding on the current property owner and all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the land record. 
(7)	Maintenance agreement: 
a.	The owner of property to be served by an on-site stormwater management facility must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the current property owner and all subsequent property owners. 
b.	The maintenance agreement shall:
1.	Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is located and be recorded as such on the plat for the property by appropriate notation. 
2.	Provide for a periodic inspection by the property owner for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the purpose and requirements of this chapter. The property owner will arrange for this inspection to be conducted by a registered professional engineer (PE) licensed to practice in the State of Georgia who will submit a sealed report of the inspection to the county public works department. It shall also grant permission to the county to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained. 
3.	Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include, but are not limited to: the removal of silt, litter and other debris, the cutting of grass, grass cuttings and vegetation removal, and the replacement of landscape vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that the property owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the BMP manual. 
4.	Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the county public works department. 
5.	Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within the prescribed schedule, the county public works department shall perform the maintenance and repair at its expense, and bill the same to the property owner. The maintenance agreement shall also provide that the county public works department cost of performing the maintenance shall be a lien against the property. 
c.	The county shall have the discretion to accept the dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets the requirements of this chapter, and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient areas, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. Any stormwater facility accepted by the county must also meet the county's construction standards and any other standards and specifications that apply to the particular stormwater facility in question. 
(8)	Sediment and erosion control plans: The applicant must prepare a sediment and erosion control plan for all construction activities that complies with subsection (i) below. 
(i)	Erosion and sediment control plan requirements. The sediment and erosion control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off-site damage. The plan shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required permit, by this chapter, shall be available at the project site at all times. The plan shall also conform to the requirements found in the BMP manual, the Dougherty County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Resolution No. 01-032 [included in this volume as chapter 2-13.5], and shall include at least the following: 
(1)	Project description. Briefly describe the intended project and proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and structures to be constructed and infrastructure required. 
(2)	A topographic map with contour intervals of ten (10) feet or less showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing activity. 
(3)	All existing drainage ways, including intermittent and wet-weather. Include any designated floodways or flood plains. 
(4)	A general description of existing land cover. Individual trees and shrubs do not need to be identified. 
(5)	Stands of existing trees, as they are to be preserved upon project completion, specifying their general location on the property. Differentiation shall be made between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed and proposed planted trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the diameter of the area involved must also be identified on the plan and shown to scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed destruction of exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist. Complete landscape plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the sequence of implementation for tree protection measures. 
(6)	Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling.
(7)	Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the site.
(8)	A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from existing characteristics. 
(9)	Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation control improvements.
(10)	Proposed drainage network.
(11)	Proposed drain tile or waterway sizes.
(12)	Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating water runoff mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems. The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development: when water is concentrated, what is the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting stormwater off-site; and what measures, including infiltration, sheeting into buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and drainage areas off-site, etc. 
(13)	The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major items of construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other structural BMPs. 
(14)	Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation runoff. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used; stabilization measures including vegetation and non-vegetation measures, both temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan. 
(15)	Specific details for the construction of rock pads, wash down pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level acceptable to the county public works department. Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways must be removed by the end of the workday by machine, broom or shovel to the satisfaction of the county public works department. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or debris shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(16)	Proposed structures location (to the extent possible) and identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or development on the site. 
(17)	A description of on-site measures to be taken to recharge surface water into the groundwater system through infiltration. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(5), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-6. - Post construction. 
(a)	As built plans. All applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any structures located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be sealed by a registered professional engineer (PE) licensed to practice in Georgia. A final inspection by the county public works department is required before any performance security or performance bond will be released. The county public works department shall have the discretion to adopt provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security or performance bond on the completion of various stages of development. In addition, occupation permits shall not be granted until corrections to all BMPs have been made and accepted by the county public works department. 
(b)	Landscaping and stabilization requirements. Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared by development activities shall be revegetated according to a schedule approved by the Dougherty County Public Works Department. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts: 
(1)	Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over ninety (90) percent of the seeded area. 
(2)	Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
(3)	Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum seventy-five (75) percent survival for one (1) year is achieved. 
(4)	In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(c)	Inspection of stormwater management facilities. A set of design plans approved by the county shall be on file at the site throughout the duration of the development activity. Periodic inspections shall be made by the county or designee during development activities. 
(d)	Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at least three (3) years. These records shall be made available to the county public works department during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(e)	Failure to meet or maintain design or maintenance standards. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards required for stormwater facilities under this chapter, the county public works department, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the county public works department shall notify in writing the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the county public works department may take necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the county public works department under this section shall be charged to the responsible party. 
(f)	Certification of completion. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of the performance guarantee under subsection 2-14.5-3(h), the owner or his representatives shall: 
(1)	Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect, surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent facilities have been constructed according to the plans and specifications and approved revisions thereto. 
(2)	Provide a set of "as built" drawings.
After receipt of the certification by the county, a final inspection shall be conducted by Dougherty County Public Works to certify compliance with this chapter. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(6), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-7. - Existing locations and developments. 
(a)	Requirements for all existing locations and developments. The following requirements shall apply to all locations and development at which land disturbing activities have occurred previous to the enactment of this chapter: 
(1)	Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and guidelines specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the county public works department. 
(2)	Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/or retaining walls constructed. 
(3)	Drainage ways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with rip-rapp, channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion. 
(4)	Trash, junk, rubbish, etc. shall be cleared from drainage ways.
(5)	Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to prevent pollution of local waters. Such control measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.	Ponds:
1.	Detention pond;
2.	Extended detention pond;
3.	Wet pond;
4.	Alternative storage measures.
b.	Constructed wetlands.
c.	Infiltration systems:
1.	Infiltration/percolation trench;
2.	Infiltration basin;
3.	Porous pavement.
d.	Filtering systems:
1.	Catch basin inserts/media filter;
2.	Sand filter;
3.	Filter/absorption bed;
4.	Filter and buffer strips.
e.	Open channel:
1.	Swale.
(b)	Requirements for existing problem locations. Dougherty County Public Works Department shall in writing notify the owners of existing locations and developments of specific drainage, erosion or sediment problems affecting such locations and developments, and the specific actions required to correct those problems. The notice shall also specify a reasonable time for compliance. 
(c)	Inspection of existing facilities. Dougherty County Public Works Department may, to the extent authorized by state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify that all stormwater management facilities, including those built before as well as after the adoption of this chapter, are functioning within design limits. These inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the county's NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other BMPs. 
(d)	Corrections of problems subject to appeal. Corrective measures imposed by the Dougherty County Public Works under this section are subject to appeal under section 2-14.5-93 of this chapter. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(7), 1-18-06)
Secs. 2-14.5-8—2-14.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 2-14.5-21. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering Dougherty County's separate storm sewer system. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(8), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-22. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the county storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)	Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to waters of the U.S. when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Clean Water Act, or this chapter: potable water line flushing; uncontaminated pumped groundwater and other discharges from potable water sources; landscape irrigation and lawn watering; diverted stream flows; rising groundwater; groundwater infiltration to the storm drain system; uncontaminated foundation and footing drains; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; air conditioning condensation; uncontaminated non-industrial roof drains; springs; individual residential and occasional non-commercial car washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; street wash waters; and flows from fire fighting. 
(2)	The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the State of Georgia under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by Dougherty County for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(3)	Dougherty County may exempt in writing other nonstormwater discharges, which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system, nor waters of the U.S. 
(4)	Discharges specified in writing by the county public works department as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(5)	Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the county public works department has so specified in writing. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(8), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-23. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)	The following connections are prohibited:
(1)	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the separate storm sewer system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks; 
(2)	Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the county. 
(b)	This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(8), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-24. - Reduction of stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices (BMP). 
Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(8), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-25. - Roof drains. 
(a)	Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers or roadside ditches. 
(b)	When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be permitted on a case by case basis by county public works. 
(c)	Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(8), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-26. - Waste disposal prohibitions. 
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(8), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-27. - Alteration of BMPs. 
(a)	No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing stormwater BMP, unless part of an approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the county public works. 
(b)	No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the county public works. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(8), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-28. - Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Public Works Director prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(8), 1-18-06)
Secs. 2-14.5-29—2-14.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2-14.5-41. - Prevention, control, and reduction of stormwater pollutants. 
(a)	Authorization to adopt and impose best management practices. The county will adopt the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia requirements identifying best management practices (BMP) for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. Where best management practices requirements are promulgated by the county or any federal, State of Georgia, or regional agency for any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or waters of the U.S., every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. 
(b)	New development and redevelopment. The county may adopt requirements identifying appropriate best management practices to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The county shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this chapter. 
(c)	Responsibility to implement best management practices. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) above, any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. shall implement best management practices to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. Best management practices required by the county can be obtained from the public works department. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(9), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-42. - Elimination of illegal discharges. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of section 2-14.5-71 herein, the public works director may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinues the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(10), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-43. - Elimination of or securing of approval for illicit connections. 
(a)	The public works director may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of Resolution No. 06-001. 
(b)	If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person may request county approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person's expense. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(11), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-44. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(12), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-45. - Remediation requirements. 
Whenever the public works director finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., the public works director may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the county may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(13), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-46. - Monitoring and analysis. 
The public works director may require by written notice of requirement that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the U.S., to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to Dougherty County as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(14), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-47. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the county's public works department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 4:30 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the county's public works department within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(15), 1-18-06)
Secs. 2-14.5-48—1.14.5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING 

Sec. 2-14.5-71. - Authority to inspect. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the public works director, or his designees has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the director may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the county is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(16), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-72. - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
During any inspection as provided herein, the public works director may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(17), 1-18-06)
Secs. 2-14.5-73—2-14.5-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-14.5-91. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Enforcement authority. The director of the county public works department or his designees shall have the authority to issue notices of violation and citations, and to impose the civil penalties provided in this section. 
(b)	Notification of violation. 
(1)	Written notice. Whenever the director of the county public works department finds that any permittee or any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon such person written notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(2)	Consent orders. The director is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to paragraphs (4) and (5) below. 
(3)	Show cause hearing. The director may order any person who violates this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(4)	Compliance order. When the director finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specific time period, adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices. 
(5)	Cease and desist orders. When the director finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
a.	Comply forthwith; or
b.	Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
c.	Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This "stop work order" will be in effect until the County confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter. 
(6)	Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the county. 
(7)	Conflicting standards. Whenever there is a conflict between any standard contained in this chapter and in the BMP manual adopted by the municipality under this chapter, the strictest standard shall prevail. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(18), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-92. - Penalties. 
(a)	Violations. Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take corrective action by the Dougherty County Public Works Department, shall be guilty of a civil offense. 
(b)	Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be assessed a civil penalty by the Dougherty County Public Works Department of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each day of violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)	Measuring Civil Penalties. In assessing a civil penalty, the Director of the Dougherty County Public Works Department may consider: 
(1)	The harm done to the public health or the environment;
(2)	Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity; 
(3)	The economic benefit gained by the violator;
(4)	The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this violation;
(5)	Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the municipality;
(6)	The amount of penalty established by chapter or chapter for specific categories of violations; and 
(7)	Any equities of the situation, which outweigh the benefit of imposing any penalty or damage assessment. 
(d)	Recovery of damages and costs. In addition to the civil penalty in subsection (b) above, the county may recover: 
(1)	All damages proximately caused by the violator to the county, which may include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing compliance with, this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by the violation. 
(2)	The costs of the county's maintenance of stormwater facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this chapter. 
(e)	Other remedies. The county may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions. 
(f)	Remedies cumulative. The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one (1) or more of the remedies set forth herein, has been sought or granted. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(19), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-93. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-14.5-95 below, any person receiving a notice of violation under section 2-14.5-91 above may appeal the determination of the public works director to the county administrator. The notice of appeal must be received by the county administrator within five (5) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the county administrator or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of county's receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the county administrator or designee shall be final. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(20), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-94. - Abatement by county. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal under section 2-14.5-93, within ten (10) days of the decision of the county administrator upholding the decision of the public works director, then the county or a contractor designated by the public works director shall enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the county or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(21), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-95. - Charging cost of abatement/liens. 
(a)	Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the nuisance by the county, the public works director shall notify the owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the county administrator within fifteen (15) days. The decision of the county administrator shall be final. 
(b)	If the amount due is not paid within ten (10) days of the decision of the county administrator, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the county auditor so that the auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the parcel of land. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(22), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-96. - Urgency abatement. 
The public works director is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the public works director, Dougherty County is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the county shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the county from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(23), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-97. - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the public works director may impose upon violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(24), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-98. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the county at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the county. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(25), 1-18-06)
Sec. 2-14.5-99. - Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the federal Clean Water Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter, may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
(Res. No. 06-001, § I(26), 1-18-06)
Chapter 2-15 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Mobile home parks and subdivisions, Ch. 2-9; street lighting certification, § 2-13-4.

Sec. 2-15-1. - Regulations incorporated by reference. 
The platting or subdivision regulations, being Resolution adopted on June 7, 1993, and all amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this Code by reference as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Res. No. 93-016, § 1, 6-7-93)
Chapter 2-16 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Abolishing office of tax commissioner; merging of offices relating to return and assessment of property for taxation, § 1-2-31; investment by tax director, § 2-6-6.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—In order to maintain the Code format and at the editor's discretion, Art. I has been added.

Sec. 2-16-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise required or indicated by the context, the following terms used herein shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Board: The board of tax assessors herein created. 
County: This political subdivision of the state, or in appropriate cases the governing body thereof. 
Department: The operating tax department of the county under the supervision of the director of the tax department. 
Director: The head of the tax department. 
Taxpayer: The person who is or may be liable for taxes or who is or may be required hereby to take some action under the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-1)
Sec. 2-16-2. - Board of tax assessors. 
(a)	There is hereby created a board of tax assessors for the county, which board shall consist of five (5) residents of the county and who shall be freeholders of the county. No elected official shall be eligible to serve on the board. 
(b)	All persons appointed to the board shall serve a term of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, with the exception of the initial board, which shall be composed of five (5) members appointed in the following manner and for the following terms: 
(1)	The county shall appoint two (2) members for a term of one (1) year;
(2)	The county shall appoint two (2) members for a term of two (2) years; and
(3)	The county shall appoint one (1) member to serve a term of three (3) years.
(c)	A vacancy occurring on the board from any cause shall be filled for the unexpired term and until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(d)	The board shall perform all of the duties and be subject to all of the responsibilities now or hereafter prescribed by the laws of the state pertaining to county boards of tax assessors. 
(e)	Any assistance in the form of employees to the board shall be furnished by the tax department and shall be under the direction and control of the tax director. 
(f)	Compensation of the members of the board shall be established from time to time by the county. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-4)
Sec. 2-16-3. - Returns and assessments. 
(a)	Returns and assessments of property for taxation under the provisions hereof shall be made as presently or hereafter prescribed by the laws of the state, except that all returns for taxation shall be made upon forms prescribed by the tax department. 
(b)	All appraisals of property in the county shall be made by employees of the tax department, and such appraisals shall be made available to the board. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-3)
Sec. 2-16-4. - Payment, collection, etc., according to state law. 
The payment of taxes, the collection of taxes, the lien for taxes and the penalties for nonpayment of taxes, shall be the same as presently prescribed or hereinafter prescribed by the laws of the state, except as herein provided. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-5(a))
Sec. 2-16-5. - Delinquent tax interest rate. 
Past due taxes and tax executions shall bear interest at the rate of nine (9) percent per annum. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-5(b))
Sec. 2-16-6. - Proration of tax delinquency to state and county taxes. 
Any payment to the tax department in an amount less than the full amount of county taxes due at the time of such payment shall be credited pro rata to the state and county taxes due. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-5(c))
Sec. 2-16-7. - Execution fees. 
The issuance and enforcement of tax executions for county taxes, including levy and sale thereunder, shall proceed as provided by the laws of the state as the same shall from time to time exist, and as they apply generally throughout the state, except that the cost of issuance of executions shall be as follows: 

 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-5(d))
Sec. 2-16-8. - Payment to county or board of education by tax director. 
The tax director shall remit to the county depositories on or before the tenth of the month the taxes collected respectively for the county during the preceding calendar month. Taxes collected and required to be remitted to the county board of education shall be paid to the county board of education in like fashion. 
(Code 1979, § 3-1-5(e))
Sec. 2-16-9. - Special tax districts—Police. 
(a)	All areas of the county lying without the incorporated areas of the City of Albany are hereby designated as a special district for the purpose of providing police protection within such district. 
(b)	The board of commissioners is hereby authorized to exercise the power of taxation within such district for the purpose of providing police protection therein. 
(Code 1979, § 3-3-11)
Cross reference— Authority, §§ 1-4-36, 1-7-14 et seq. 
Sec. 2-16-10. - Same—Fire. 
(a)	The following special districts for the purpose of fire protection within such districts are hereby created: 
(1)	Fire District Number 1: Commence at the intersection of the Lee-Dougherty County line and the northeast corner of Land Lot 328, First Land District; thence run in a westerly direction along the Lee-Dougherty County line to the western right-of-way line of Winifred Drive; thence run in a southerly direction along the western right-of-way line of Winifred Drive to the south right-of-way of Old Dawson Road; thence run in an easterly direction along the south right-of-way line of Old Dawson Road to the west right-of-way line of Byron Plantation Road; thence run in a southerly direction along the western right-of-way line of Byron Plantation Road to the south right-of-way line of Gillionville Road; thence run in an easterly direction along the south right-of-way line of Gillionville Road to the centerline of the Cooleewahee Creek; thence run in a southerly and southwesterly direction along the centerline of Cooleewahee Creek to the east line of Land Lot 127, Second Land District; thence run in a southerly direction along the easterly line of Land Lots 127, 154 and 167 to the northwest corner of Land Lot 195; thence run in an easterly direction along the north line of Land Lots 195, 196, 197, 198 and 199 to the line of Land Lot 199; thence run in a southerly direction along the east line of Land Lots 199, 202 and 239 to the south right-of-way line of Lilly Pond Road; thence run in an easterly direction along the south right-of-way line of Lilly Pond Road to the centerline of the Flint River; thence run in a southerly direction along the centerline of the Flint River to the Mitchell-Dougherty County line; thence run in an easterly direction along the Mitchell-Dougherty County line to the east right-of-way line of Gravel Hill Road; thence run in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of Gravel Hill Road to the northerly right-of-way line of Moultrie Road (State Route 133) thence run in a northwesterly direction along the northerly line of Moultrie Road (Route 133) to the west line of Land Lot 108, first Land District; thence run in a northerly direction along the west line of Land Lots 108, 109, 110 and 111 to the north right-of-way line of Fleming Road; thence run in a westerly direction along the northerly right-of-way line of Fleming Road to the northerly right-of-way line of Fleming Road cutoff; thence run in a northwesterly direction along the northerly right-of-way line of Fleming Road cutoff to the east right-of-way line of Mock Road (State Route 257); thence run in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of Mock Road to the north property line of the U.S. Marine Corps Supply Center; thence run in a southeasterly direction along the northern property line of the U.S. Marine Corps Supply Center to the east line of Land Lot 8, First Land District; thence run in a northerly direction along the east line of Land Lots 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3 to the north line of Land Lot 3, First Land District; thence run in a westerly direction along the north line of Land Lots 3, 38, 43, 78, 83, 118, 122, First Land District, to the northeasterly property line of the former U.S. Naval Air Station; thence run in a northerly direction along the northeasterly property line of the former U.S. Naval Air Station property to the southern bank of the Flint River; thence run in a westerly direction along the southerly bank of the Flint River to the Kinchafoonee Creek; thence run in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Kinchafoonee Creek to the east line of Land Lot 327, First Land District; thence run in a northerly direction along the east line of Land Lots 327, 328 to the Lee-Dougherty County Line and the point of beginning, excluding all areas located within the corporate limits of the City of Albany. 
(2)	Fire District Number 2: All areas of Dougherty County located outside Fire District No. 1. 
(b)	The board of commissioners is hereby authorized to exercise the power of taxation within such districts for the purpose of providing fire protection therein. 
(Code 1979, §§ 3-3-1, 3-3-2)
Sec. 2-16-11. - Same—Recreation and parks. 
(a)	All areas of the county lying without the incorporated areas of the City of Albany are hereby designated as a special district for the purpose of providing recreation and parks within such district. 
(b)	The board of commissioners of Dougherty County is hereby authorized to exercise the power of taxation within such district for the purpose of providing recreation and parks therein. 
(Code 1979, § 3-3-21)
Sec. 2-16-12. - Correction of tax records. 
(a)	Tax accounts for items of personal property which have been found not to have been in existence on January 1 of the tax year in question shall be maintained on a separate list by the tax appraisal staff, the existence of such list shall serve as a verification of the nonexistence of such personal property by the Board of Tax Assessors. Upon the delivery of this list to the Tax Director, such bills or tax accounts shall be errored off the digest with the Tax Director thereafter reporting the adjustments in the digest to the respective taxing authorities. 
(b)	Uncollectible bills for taxes due on personal property that are no longer in existence, and where the taxpayer is no longer within the jurisdiction and subject to levy of garnishment, shall be added to the insolvency list by the Tax Director. This list shall be submitted to the governing authority annually to be approved by the governing authority and placed in its minutes so as to authorize the purging of such uncollectible accounts from the Tax Director's digest. 
(c)	After approval of the digest any and all adjustments, other than those specified hereinabove, shall be submitted by the Tax Assessors or the Tax Director to the governing authority of the county with the recommendations of such officers for the relief to be granted whether it is the forgiveness of tax, penalty, or interest or the refund of any of such items. Each such request shall be accompanied by a sufficient statement of circumstances so as to convey to the governing authority the reasons for the requested adjustment. 
(Res. No. 96-016, 5-6-96)
Secs. 2-16-13—2-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Res. No. 12-030, §§ 1—8, adopted Nov. 26, 2012, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as Art. II, §§ 2-16-21—2-16-28 was at the discretion of the editor.

Sec. 2-16-21. - Energy excise tax definitions. 
As used in this resolution, the terms: "dealer;" "energy;" "local sales and use tax;" and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Res. No. 12-030, § 1, 11-26-12)
Sec. 2-16-22. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2.3. 
(Res. No. 12-030, § 2, 11-26-12)
Sec. 2-16-23. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)	Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Dougherty County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)	For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)	For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)	For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to seventy-five (75) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)	On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)	(1)	Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Dougherty County shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two (2) percent. 
(2)	In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two (2) percent to one (1) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this resolution shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)	In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one (1) percent to two (2) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this resolution shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Res. No. 12-030, § 3, 11-26-12)
Sec. 2-16-24. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)	Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)	Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)	A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)	Remitted to the governing authority of Dougherty County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)	A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Res. No. 12-030, § 4, 11-26-12)
Sec. 2-16-25. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)	The governing authority of Dougherty County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 2-16-28 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)	An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. An energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed pursuant to this resolution if the purchaser has failed to submit such uniform exemption certificate to the energy provider. 
(Res. No. 12-030, § 5, 11-26-12)
Sec. 2-16-26. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this resolution shall become effective on January 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Dougherty County monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this resolution during the preceding calendar month. 
(Res. No. 12-030, § 6, 11-26-12)
Sec. 2-16-27. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of Dougherty County at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one (1) percent of such proceeds collected by Dougherty County shall be paid into the general fund of Dougherty County to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)	The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Dougherty County and the general fund of the City of Albany in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114 (c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)	If two (2) local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half (½) of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Dougherty County and the general fund of the City of Albany according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half (½) of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Dougherty County and the general fund of the City of Albany according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)	If only one (1) such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Dougherty County and the general fund of the City of Albany according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)	Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of Dougherty County may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Dougherty County. 
(Res. No. 12-030, § 7, 11-26-12)
Sec. 2-16-28. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)	The governing authority of Dougherty County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)	The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Res. No. 12-030, § 8, 11-26-12)
Chapter 2-17 - TRAFFIC 

Sec. 2-17-1. - Traffic engineering. 
The traffic engineering department shall direct or perform all traffic engineering studies which may be necessary for the safe and efficient operation of vehicles on, and the use by pedestrians of, the county road system. The department shall also maintain all traffic control signs, markings and devices in the county system established pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-1)
Sec. 2-17-2. - Adoption of state traffic laws. 
Pursuant to Official Code of Georgia Annotated, sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, section 40-1-1, Definitions, and Chapter 6 of Title 40, Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-2)
Sec. 2-17-3. - Authority to designate traffic, speed, parking and other zones, and install signs, signals, markings and devices. 
(a)	Upon approval of the board of commissioners, the director of public works or a designee thereof, is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic-control signs, signals, markings and devices: 
(1)	Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(2)	Other safety zones for pedestrians;
(3)	Traffic lanes;
(4)	Speed, parking or other traffic-control zones;
(5)	Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices; and
(6)	Any other sign, signal, marking or device or creating any zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the county. 
(b)	All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" adopted by the state department of transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic-control devices of the county. 
(c)	The county traffic engineer shall keep and maintain one (1) or more official maps or descriptions setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic-control devices. The maps and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners. An official copy thereof shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the county clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, or marking, sign or other traffic-control device. 
(d)	No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, or marking, sign, signal or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, signals, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)	Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign, signal or other traffic-control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-3)
State Law reference— Promulgation of regulations, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50. 
Sec. 2-17-4. - Establishing truck load limits. 
(a)	Under the provisions of the Code of Public Transportation, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 32-4-42(10), which provides that, in addition to the power specifically delegated to it in that title, a county shall have the authority to adopt and enforce rules and regulations or ordinances to require permits and to perform all other acts which are necessary, proper or incidental to the efficient operation and development of the county road System, and the provisions of that title are to be liberally construed to that end. Any power vested in or duty placed on a county, but not implemented by specific provisions for the exercise thereof, may be executed and carried out by a county in a reasonable manner, subject to such limitations as may be provided by law. 
(b)	The director of public works shall study the roads of the county, and in such official's discretion, without impeding the flow of necessary commercial traffic, make and determine proper load limits for those roads which are being damaged or destroyed by overweight traffic, and having determined a proper load limit, shall report the same to the board of commissioners for its approval, and recordation in the official minutes of the board, and shall post both ends of the road, with the standard state-designed sign, notifying the traveling public of the load limits, and after the signs have been placed for a period of one (1) week, the county police shall be instructed to enforce the same, under the provisions of section 32-1-10 of Official Code of Georgia, which makes it a misdemeanor to violate this title. 
(c)	In the event it is necessary for trucks carrying a greater weight to use the road for any purpose, the enforcement official shall have discretion upon application to permit the usage for the specific purpose requested, and on the terms and conditions which will protect the road, as determined by such official. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1-4)
Sec. 2-17-5. - Truck routes—Applicability. 
(a)	All motor vehicles having a gross weight in excess of thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds, including the load thereon, or having an overall length in excess of thirty (30) feet, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, are prohibited from using any public road within the county that is maintained by the county except those herein designated as truck routes, with the following two (2) exceptions: (1) Motor vehicles, the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters for which is not on a designated truck route shall have ingress to and egress from such places by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route; and (2) motor vehicles engaged in making a specific pickup or delivery on a public road not designated a truck route. 
(b)	If any designated truck route, or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the county. 
(Res. No. 82-040, §§ 1, 3, 12-20-82)
Sec. 2-17-6. - Same—Coordination with city. 
The county shall coordinate with the City of Albany in establishing truck routes that are reasonable, that provide for continuous vehicular passage in and out of the city, and that serve the interests of the general public. 
(Res. No. 82-040, § 5, 12-20-82)
Sec. 2-17-7. - Same—Presenting evidence of reason for presence on other streets. 
Any person driving or in charge or control of any of the restricted vehicles defined in section 2-17-5 when upon a public road other than those designated as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers such person's log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of such person's destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(Res. No. 82-040, § 2, 12-20-82)
Sec. 2-17-8. - Same—Schedule of streets. 
(a)	The following routes are hereby designated truck routes:
(1)	Nelms Road from Radium Springs Road to Moultrie Highway. 
(2)—(6)	Reserved. 
(7)	Gaissert Road from Fleming Road to Spring Flats Road. 
(8)	Fleming Road from Mock Road to Worth County line. 
(9)	Oakridge Drive from Slappey Drive to Lockett Station Road. 
(10)	Lockett Station Road from Oakridge Drive to Gillionville Road. 
(11)	Westover Road from Dawson Road to Old Pretoria Road. 
(12)	Oakhaven Drive from Old Pretoria Road to Newton Road. 
(13)	Holly Drive from Radium Springs Road to U.S. 19 (S.R. 300). 
(b)	A map entitled "Dougherty Country Truck Routes" clearly delineating all current truck routes shall be maintained in the office of the county clerk for inspection by the public. 
(Res. No. 82-040, § 6, 12-20-82; Res. No. 88-004, § 1, 1-19-88; Res. No. 88-046, § 1, 8-22-88; Res. No. 98-021, § I, 7-6-98) 
Sec. 2-17-9. - Restricted speed zones. 
The maximum speed limits are hereby established on the following segments of certain roads within Dougherty County: 
LIST OF ROADWAYS (LORs) for DOUGHERTY COUNTY  ON-SYSTEM 

 
DOUGHERTY COUNTY  OFF-SYSTEM 

 
SIGNS ARE TO BE INSTALLED BY THE CITY OF ALBANY. 
***SCHOOL ZONES HOURS ARE EFFECTIVE*** 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time— 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY Unless otherwise noted. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time— 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY Unless otherwise noted. 
(Res. No. 98-001, 1-5-98; Res. No. 02-003, 1-7-02; Res. No. 12-001, 1-23-12; Res. 12-009, 5-21-12; Res. No. 14-020, 11-17-14) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 98-001, adopted Jan. 5, 1998, amended § 2-17-9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2-17-9 derived from the following resolutions: 

 
Chapter 2-17.5 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Section I of Ord. No. 10-039, adopted Nov. 1, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as a new ch. 2-17.5, art. II, §§ 2-17.5-31, 2-17.5-32 was at the discretion of the editor.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-17.5-1—2-17.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR IRRIGATION OF LANDSCAPES 

Sec. 2-17.5-31. - Restriction on outdoor irrigation of landscapes. 
Outdoor irrigating for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area of Dougherty County may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3;
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local resolutions and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Irrigation of personal food gardens;
(6)	Irrigating new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(8)	Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(11)	Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(13)	Hydroseeding.
(Res. No. 10-039, § I, 11-1-09)
Sec. 2-17.5-32. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor irrigation use contained in this chapter. 
(b)	The Dougherty County Police Department shall be the enforcement authority for this chapter. The county administrator may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)	In addition to any other remedy available, these regulations may be enforced in the Magistrate Court of Dougherty County, Georgia as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 through § 15-10-66, as amended. 
(d)	Any person violating any provision of these regulations, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment or both, provided the judge shall probate no less than 120 days of any sentence imposed, except as otherwise provided by general law. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. 
(Res. No. 10-039, § I, 11-1-09)
Chapter 2-18 - ZONING; AIRPORT HAZARDS; FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-12-1 et seq.; outdoor advertising sign regulations, § 2-13-20 et seq.; mobile home "hardship" variance, § 2-9-7.

Sec. 2-18-1. - Zoning regulations incorporated by reference. 
The "Zoning Regulations of Dougherty County, Georgia," being Resolution No. 99-007 adopted on March 1, 1999, and all amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this Code as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Res. No. 99-007, 3-1-99)
Sec. 2-18-2. - Airport hazard regulations incorporated by reference. 
The Albany-Dougherty County Airport Navigational Hazard Ordinance adopted by the county on November 18, 1985, as Resolution No. 85-025, and all amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this Code as fully as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 2-18-3. - Floodplain regulations incorporated by reference. 
The county floodplain regulations, being Resolution No. 78-126, adopted on April 3, 1978, and all amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this Code as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Res. No. 09-018, § I, 5-11-09; Res. No. 09-027, § I, 8-17-09)
Sec. 2-18-4. - Zoning application policies, procedures and standards. 
(a)	Preliminary information. Dougherty County has adopted several regulations that set minimum standards for the development of land in unincorporated portions of the County. One of these is called zoning. The Albany-Dougherty County Development Regulations affects the use of property and your neighbor's property. The County is divided into many different zoning districts. The uses of land, the setbacks of buildings, the types of residences, businesses, and farm uses vary from one district to another. There are several things that the applicant should be aware of regarding application: 
(1)	If the zoning on property permits the type of land use requested, there are still other regulations that may affect the applicant. These include the Albany-Dougherty Subdivision Regulations, the Building Codes, the Business License Ordinance, County Health Department Regulations, and the Soil Erosion Control Regulations. 
(2)	The zoning of neighbor's property may allow development that the applicant is not aware of, or that might affect the plans for the applicant's property. It is wise to check the zoning of surrounding property as well as the applicant's. 
(3)	There may be private covenants or deed restrictions on property. These may be either more or less restrictive than zoning. Dougherty County does not have general authority to enforce private covenants or deed restrictions. These must be enforced by the property owners at their expense. 
(4)	Zoning is not static or fixed for all time; it changes. The zoning of land in the area may be changed, or the specifications in the regulations may be changed by a vote of the Dougherty County Board of Commissioners. Prior to any such change, there is a legal process that involves a public hearing and a public notice, which is published in the paper. It would be worthwhile to call the planning and development services department if one sees a legal notice, a newspaper article, or a public hearing sign posted that may affect one's property. 
(b)	County development regulations. The Albany-Dougherty County Development Regulations regulate the location and height of buildings and structures; the density of population; the size of yards and other open spaces; the use of land, buildings and structures for industry, commerce, agriculture, recreation; resident public activities and other purposes; create districts for said purposes and establish boundaries; define terms; methods for administration; amendment and enforcement as well as penalties for violating, and provides for zoning appeals. 
(c)	Policies and procedures for calling and conducting zoning hearings. 
(1)	The property owner, the planning commission, or county commission may petition for rezoning. An application is submitted to the planning and development services department, and appropriate fees are paid. 
(2)	A legal notice is placed in the newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days, but no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the required public hearings on the rezoning proposal. Also, a public notice sign is placed on the subject property. The notice will state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
(3)	The Albany-Dougherty Planning Commission holds its public hearing on the rezoning petition, and makes its recommendations to the county commission. 
(4)	The county commission holds its public hearing on the rezoning proposal, and makes the final decision on the request. 
(5)	If the county commission denies the zoning application, reapplication for the same rezoning may not be heard for twelve (12) months from the date of the initial denial. 
(d)	Hearings before the board of commissioners. 
(1)	All persons who wish to address the county commission at a hearing on the proposed zoning decision under consideration by the county commission shall first sign a form prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
(2)	The proposed zoning decision under consideration will be read, and the planning and development services department will review the case prior to receiving public input on said proposed zoning decision. Proposed zoning decisions shall be called in the order in which they were filed. 
(3)	Each person who has signed up to speak in reference to the zoning decision before the county commission shall be called in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except the applicant shall speak first. Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself/herself, and state his or her current address. Only those persons who signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearings shall be entitled to speak unless two-thirds of the members of the county commission present at the hearing allow the person to speak in reference to the zoning decision. 
(4)	Each speaker shall be allowed five (5) minutes to address the county commission concerning the zoning decision under consideration, unless the county commission by two-thirds vote, agree to allow additional time in which to address the county commission on said proposed zoning decision. However, each side shall have no less than ten (10) minutes on any case. In the case of only one speaker present to speak in reference to a case, that speaker may have ten (10) minutes allocated to them. In no case shall either side have less than ten (10) minutes. The speaker may initially use all of the time allocated to him to speak, or he may speak and reserve a portion of his allotted time for rebuttal. The secretary shall be designated as the timekeeper to record the time expended by each speaker. 
(5)	Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning decision under consideration, and shall address his remarks only to the members of the county commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker, or from discussing facts, or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning decision under consideration. The chair may limit, or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
(6)	Nothing contained herein shall be constructed as prohibiting the chair from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(e)	Guidelines for zoning decisions. Exercise of the zoning power of Dougherty County shall constitute an effort to balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morality or general welfare against the right of property owners to the unrestricted use of their property. The following factors are determined to be relevant in balancing these interests: 
(1)	Whether the proposed amendment would allow a use that is generally suitable for the site compared to other possible uses, and the uses and zoning of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(2)	Whether the proposed amendment would adversely affect the economic value, or the use of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(3)	Whether the property to be affected by the proposed amendment can be used as currently zoned. 
(4)	Whether the proposed amendment, if adopted, would result in a use which should or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, schools, sewers, water resources, police and fire protection, or other utilities. 
(5)	Whether the proposed amendment, if adopted, is in conformity with the policy and intent of the Albany-Dougherty Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
(Res. No. 98-013, 4-20-98)
Sec. 2-18-5. - Process for resolving annexation land disputes. 
(a)	Prior to initiating any formal annexation activities, the city will notify the county government of a proposed annexation and provide information on location of property, size of area, and proposed land use or zoning classification(s) (if applicable) of the property upon annexation. This applies only if the zoning of the properties proposed for annexation is proposed to change from its county designation. 
Within fifteen (15) working days following receipt of the above information, the county will forward to the city a statement either: 
(1)	Indicating that the county has no objection to the proposed land use for the property; or 
(2)	Describing its bona fide objection(s) to the city's proposed land use classification, providing supporting information, and listing any possible stipulations or conditions that would alleviate the county's objection(s). 
(b)	Should an application for rezoning be made and denied by the Dougherty County Commission on a parcel proposed for annexation within twelve (12) months of its annexation, it shall not be considered for rezoning by the city until after twelve (12) months after its denial by the Dougherty County Commission. 
(c)	If the county has no objection to the city's proposed land use or zoning classification, the city is free to proceed with the annexation. If the county fails to respond to the city's notice in writing within the deadline, the city is free to proceed with the annexation and the county loses its right to invoke the dispute resolution process, stop the annexation or object to land use changes after the annexation. 
(d)	If the county notifies the city that it has a bona fide land use classification objection(s), the city will respond to the county in writing within fifteen (15) working days of receiving the county's objection(s) by either: 
(1)	Agreeing to implement the county's stipulations and conditions and thereby resolving the county's objection(s); 
(2)	Agreeing with the county and stopping action on the proposed annexation;
(3)	Disagreeing that the county's objection(s) are bona fide and notifying the county that the city will seek a declaratory judgment in court; or 
(4)	Initiating a thirty-day (maximum) mediation process to discuss possible compromises.
(e)	If the city initiates mediation, the city and county will agree on a mediator, mediation schedule and determine participants in the mediation. The city and county agree to share equally any costs associated with the mediation. 
(f)	If no resolution of the county's bona fide land use classification objection(s) results from the mediation, the city will not proceed with the proposed annexation. 
(g)	If the city and county reach agreement as described in step 3(a) [subsection (d)(1)] or as a result of the mediation, they will draft an annexation agreement for execution by the city and county governments, and the property owner(s). 
Regardless of future changes in land use or zoning classification, any site-specific mitigation or enhancement measures or site-design stipulations included in the agreement will be binding on all parties for the duration of the annexation agreement. The agreement shall become final when signed by the city, the county, and the property owner(s). 
(h)	This section shall become effective July 1, 1998.
(i)	This annexation dispute resolution agreement shall remain in full force and effect until amended by agreement of each party or unless otherwise terminated by operation of law. 
(Res. No. 98-018, §§ I—IX, 6-23-98)
APPENDIX A - CITY-COUNTY AGREEMENT ON FUNCTIONS AND SERVICES[1] 
This Agreement made and entered into this 1st day of July, 1972, by and between the City of Albany, Georgia, a municipal corporation of said state and county, City, and Dougherty County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, County, 
WITNESSETH: 
The City and County did on the 14th day of December, 1971 enter into an agreement under the terms of which the City and County would conduct a joint study of services and functions performed or provided by the City and County and to delineate those services or functions which would best be performed or provided by one (1) or the other governmental unit and, as a result of such study, would combine those services or functions which in the interest of public service and economy should be combined, and the City and County having conducted such study and now being desirous of setting forth the functions to be performed by the City and County, agree as follows: 
1.	Hospital capital improvements, indigent support, physician, clinic and ambulance service: From and after July 1, 1972, County shall assume all local governmental responsibility for the funding of new hospital capital improvements at Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital, indigent support, physician, clinic and ambulance services. In this regard the County shall have all local governmental responsibility and duties in connection with the above. 
2.	Albany public library: The City shall continue to be the central agency of the Albany Public Library until July 1, 1974, at which time the Albany Public Library shall become a county-operated and solely supported function as pertains to the local governments. 
All appointments to the Board of Trustees of the Library shall be made on the following basis: January, 1973 appointments—two (2) appointments to be made by the County and one (1) by the City; January, 1974 appointments—three (3) appointments to be made by the County and one (1) by the City; thereafter, all appointments shall be made by the County. 
All employees within the library system as of July 1, 1972 shall continue to be paid in the same manner as presently paid and will suffer no loss of benefits, tenure or seniority and shall have the opportunity to elect whether they will be covered under County or City retirement programs. All employees beginning work after July 1, 1972 shall be covered under the benefits of the program selected by the County. 
For the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1972, the County shall pay forty (40) percent of the local operating cost of the library and for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1973, the County shall pay sixty (60) percent of the local cost for the operation of the library. Beginning July 1, 1974, the County shall pay one hundred (100) percent of the local operating cost of the library. The County shall have the right during the fiscal years beginning July 1, 1972 and July 1, 1973 to approve the operating budget of the library. 
3.	Recreation: There is hereby created a joint Albany-Dougherty County Recreation Department to be operated by the present City Recreation Department and to cover the entire County of Dougherty. The County will contribute funds to this joint department as mutually agreed between the City and County at the beginning of each fiscal year. 
4.	Collections: There is hereby created a joint Albany-Dougherty County Collection Department which shall operate under the direction of the City Manager and the County Administrator, with the operating costs of such department to be divided between the City and County as mutually agreed upon at the beginning of each fiscal year. 
5.	Request for funds from various independent organizations and agencies: The City will have the responsibility of considering requests for funds from various organizations or independent agencies pertaining to financial assistance in the recreation field and the County shall have the responsibility of considering requests from various organizations pertaining to health and welfare assistance or services. 
If either the City or County approves and agrees to provide assistance in the areas set forth above, the funding thereof shall be done by the body approving the same. 
6.	Water and sanitary sewerage systems: The City shall maintain and operate the water and sanitary sewerage systems within the City and in certain portions of the unincorporated areas of Dougherty County. 
There shall be adopted a plan of improvement for water system extensions and sanitary sewerage systems and extensions, and the City shall implement such plan of improvement, approve and set priorities for extensions and construction. 
Sanitary sewerage system extensions may be initiated as follows: 
(1)	By the County Commission on its own motion;
(2)	By the City Commission on its own motion; and
(3)	By a petition in writing signed by the parties owning fifty-one (51) percent of the total lineal footage of the property abutting the proposed sewer extension. Such petition shall be presented to the City for sewer extensions within the corporate limits of the City and such petition shall be presented to the County for sewer extensions outside the corporate limits of the City, and the appropriate governing authority shall have the right to approve or reject such petition. 
All petitions approved by County shall be forthwith transmitted to the City and the City shall thereupon follow its standard procedure relative to construction and tabulation of the costs of such extension. 
The County shall, by appropriate resolutions, provide for the construction, appraisal, apportionment and assessments of all sanitary sewerage extensions outside the corporate limits of the City and shall assess the costs thereof to the property owners and transmit all collections to the city by the tenth of each month. The County shall pay to the City, through assessments, the actual cost to the city of extension projects, plus interest thereon. 
Construction, operation and maintenance of water and sanitary sewerage systems shall be financed by user-pay fees and charges and the County shall use its credit and bonded indebtedness to obtain funds for extensions outside the corporate limits of the City. 
The City and County will cooperate in applications for state and federal funds for construction and extension of water and sanitary sewerage systems. 
7.	Airport: From and after July 1, 1972, the City will have the sole responsibility of operating and funding all airport operations. The City shall receive all revenues from airport operations. 
The County shall retain all interest it presently owns in airport land and improvements and for the purposes hereof, the airport property is described as that property presently being used in the operation of the airport and lying north of Oakhaven Drive, west of Newton Road, south of property now or formerly used for Herty Nursery, and east of the Rockwell Standard property. 
There is [are] presently outstanding funds due under federally-supported projects and upon the closeout or termination of such projects, the City and County shall each receive its proportionate part of such funds. 
Applications have been made to the federal government for financial assistance on land previously purchased for airport use and if such applications are approved, the City and County shall each receive its proportionate share of such assistance. 
8.	Solid waste disposal: Presently the City operates the only solid waste disposal area within Dougherty County. For the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1972, the County shall pay fifty (50) percent of the cost of such solid waste disposal operation and for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1973, the County shall be responsible for and shall operate all solid waste disposal operations and shall pay one hundred (100) percent of the cost thereof. 
9.	Inspection services: Presently the City and County operate separate inspection departments, and from and after July 1, 1972, all city and county inspection departments shall be combined into a joint city-county inspection department and all boards, such as gas, plumbing, electrical, etc., shall be combined. 
The operating cost of the joint departments and boards for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1972 shall be based on current funding procedures. For the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1973 and thereafter, the operating cost shall be as mutually agreed upon by the City and County. From and after July 1, 1972, all fees for permits issued for work to be performed within the corporate limits of the City of Albany shall be remitted to the City, and all fees for permits issued for work to be performed outside the corporate limits of the City of Albany shall be remitted to the County. The department head shall be appointed by the City Manager and the County Administrator. 
10.	Master plan—Highway and drainage rights-of-way: From and after July 1, 1972, all functions pertaining to the Master Plan, highway and drainage rights-of-way shall be performed by the County and the County shall pay all costs for highway and drainage right-of-way under the Master Plan. 
11.	Sanitary sewer and storm drainage engineering plan: The City and County will each pay fifty (50) percent of the cost of consulting engineers preparing sanitary and storm drainage engineering plans in four (4) areas as agreed upon by the City and County. The four (4) areas being, Coolewahee-Percosin Creek, Piney Woods Creek, Dry Creek and area presently served by existing location of City sewerage treatment facility. 
12.	Purchasing: There is hereby established a joint City-County purchasing department which shall be the present City purchasing department. The operating cost of such purchasing department shall be borne by the City and County as mutually agreed upon at the beginning of each fiscal year. 
This Agreement may be amended or modified at anytime by the mutual consent of the parties hereto. 
In Witness Whereof, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be executed by and through their duly authorized officers. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—The City-County Fire Protection Agreement, dated July 1, 1977, is not included herein, it having apparently expired in 1981.
Cross reference— Joint authority, § 1-7-1 et seq.

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within this Code of those resolutions adopted since the 1979 Code, which are included herein. Resolutions adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1979 Code. Resolutions not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1979 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1979 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1979 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
1983 Georgia Constitution 

 

 