THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LINCOLNTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 6, 2012  Effective: February 6, 2012 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LINCOLNTON, GEORGIA 
October 2012 
____________ 
Henry L. Brown 
Mayor 
____________ 
Charles M. Beggs, Jr. 
Kevin R. Beggs 
Alana G. Burke 
Larry Goolsby 
Kyle J. Reese 
City Council 
____________ 
Barry A. Fleming 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kay F. Remsen 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the city's Compiled Ordinances of 1998 and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Compiled Ordinances of 1998 and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Lisa Stevens, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Henry Brown, Mayor; Kay F. Remsen, City Clerk; Barry A. Fleming, City Attorney; and Wesley C. Turner, Assistant City Attorney; for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. 2011. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. ____________ 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF LINCOLNTON, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL; 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 48, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 6th, 2012, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 5. This ordinance shall become effective February 6th, 2012. 
Passed and adopted by the Lincolnton City Council this 6 day of February, 2012. 

ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City of Lincolnton, Georgia, was first established by 1817 Ga. Laws, p. 85. The city's Charter has been subsequently repealed, amended and re-enacted on numerous occasions. Printed herein is the most recent Charter for the city as adopted and set forth in 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 358), page 4829. Amendments to the 1984 Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original Charter. Affidavits and notices of intent that accompanied the act have been omitted. A uniform system of headings, catchlines, numbering, punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; creation, dissolution, merger, boundary changes, and deannexation of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-2; municipal annexations, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities and authority for amendment of local charter by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; requirement for filing and publication of charter, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-5; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; terms city, town, and municipality declared synonymous, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Section 1.[10.] - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the whole charter of the City of Lincolnton, repealing and replacing the charter provided by an Act of the General Assembly, approved March 4, 1953 (Ga. L. 1953, Jan.-Feb. Sess., p. 3117), and all amendments thereto. The City of Lincolnton, Georgia, in the County of Lincoln, and the inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of Lincolnton, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded in all the courts of law and equity and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by general state law. The current boundaries of the city, at all times, shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map or description. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description, certified by the city clerk, shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  The City of Lincolnton shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter, including all powers of self-government not specifically prohibited by general law or local Act of the General Assembly and including all powers enumerated in Section 1.14 of this charter. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be exercised as provided by this charter, by ordinance, or by pertinent laws of this state. 
Section 1.14. - Enumeration of powers. 
The corporate powers of this city may include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(3)  To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(5)  To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust, or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(6)  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(7)  To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or under applicable public Acts as are or may be enacted; 
(8)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, penalties, and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same; and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(9)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services not to exceed periods of 35 years; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, standards, and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Public Service Commission; 
(10)  To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, change the grade of, abandon, close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; 
(11)  To grant franchises and rights-of-way through the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; 
(12)  To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or other applicable public Acts, as are or may be enacted; 
(13)  To acquire real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)  To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas and heating and air-conditioning codes; to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license all building trades; and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(15)  To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(16)  To regulate or prohibit junk dealers and pawnshops; the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(17)  To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind whatever by taxation or otherwise; 
(18)  To license, tax, or regulate professional fortunetelling or palmistry; 
(19)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(20)  To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcements of such standards; 
(21)  To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(22)  To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict same; inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(23)  To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(24)  To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse; to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials; and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(25)  To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(26)  To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(27)  To charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees and to charge the same from time to time, such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(28)  To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city; and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(29)  To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(30)  To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(31)  To establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city; and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(32)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the recorder's [municipal] court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any appropriate county officials; 
(33)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city; to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein; and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within said city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, are deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(34)  To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl; to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, and humane destruction when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of any ordinance enacted hereunder; 
(35)  To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(36)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(37)  To levy and provide for collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(38)  To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(39)  To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(40)  To make, ordain, and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules, and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(41)  To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(42)  To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen; 
(43)  To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(44)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT 
DIVISION 1. - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Section 2.10. - City council creation; composition, number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter. 
Section 2.11. - Terms of and qualifications for office. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or council member unless such person shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the election of mayor or councilmembers; each shall continue to reside therein during said period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. The name of no candidate for either mayor or council member shall be placed on the ballot in elections for mayor and council member, unless such person shall file a written notice with the clerk of said city that his or her name be placed on said ballot as a candidate either for mayor or council member. No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or council member unless such person shall file the above-said notice within the time provided for in Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." No person shall be eligible to have his or her name placed on the ballot as a candidate for mayor or council member if such person shall have served three consecutive terms in such office. A person may again be eligible to offer for election as mayor or council member after a period of two years has elapsed from the date of expiration of the last term served or from the last date on which such person served. 
(1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 77), p. 3853) 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of this state. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in Article V. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor of the city shall be compensated in the amount of $4,000.00 per annum and the compensation for each city council member shall be $2,400.00 per annum for services rendered to the city, provided that any action to increase the compensation of members of the governing authority of the city shall be taken in accordance with the requirements of general state law. In addition, the mayor and councilmembers shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office in the manner provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2013) 
Section 2.14. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interest when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to his knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the consolidated government or any office, department or agency thereof; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any council member who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such government for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any council member shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he or she was elected. 
(f)  No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for election to any public office. 
(g)  (1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and upon conviction therefor shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his or her office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2013) 
Section 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department or office thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
DIVISION 2. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 

Section 2.20. - Organizational meeting. 
The city council shall meet for organization on the first Monday in January after the election of mayor and councilmembers, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members by an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly demean myself as mayor [faithfully execute the office of mayor] (or council member, as the case may be) of the City of Lincolnton for the ensuing term, and I will faithfully enforce the charter and ordinances of said city to the best of my skill and ability, without fear or favor; so help me God." 
Section 2.21. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular monthly meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special called meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made 24 hours prior to such meeting. 
Section 2.22. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Section 2.23. - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor or mayor pro tempore and three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances or resolutions shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present and voting shall be required for adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. The mayor or mayor pro tempore, if presiding, shall be entitled to vote in the case of a tie. The mayor shall have the veto power and may veto any ordinance or resolution, in which event the same shall not become a law unless subsequently passed over his veto by a vote of at least four councilmembers, duly recorded in the journal by the city clerk; but unless he shall file in writing with the clerk of said city his veto of any measure passed by that body, with the reasons for withholding his assent within three days from its passage, the same shall become a law just as if signed and approved by said mayor, but he may approve same and the measure go into effect immediately. 
Section 2.24. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. 
Section 2.25. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
In addition to other acts required by general state law or by specific provisions of this charter to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance. 
Section 2.26. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.27. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.28. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 2.28. - Signing, authenticating; codification; printing. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all offices and departments of the city and made available for inspection by the public at the city hall. Copies of the Code shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
DIVISION 3. - OFFICE OF MAYOR 

Section 2.30. - Election; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and shall serve for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. He or she shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of this city for twelve months immediately preceding the election of mayor. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during said period of service. He or she shall forfeit the office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Section 2.31. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter, except as otherwise specifically provided herein. The mayor shall have the authority to delegate any one or more executive or administrative powers to a person or persons employed by the city and qualified in management and administration. 
Section 2.32. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Appoint and remove, for cause, with confirmation of appointment or removal by the council, all officers, department heads, and in this charter; 
(3)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(5)  Submit to the council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and from time to time such other information as the city council may request; 
(6)  Preside over all meetings of the city council; 
(7)  Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in Section 2.21; 
(8)  Participate in the discussion of all matters brought before the city council and vote on such matters only in the case of a tie vote; 
(9)  Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he or she may deem expedient; 
(10)  Approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in Section 2.33; 
(11)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever he or she deems it expedient; 
(12)  Sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(13)  Perform such other duties as may be required by general state law, this Charter, or ordinance. 
Section 2.33. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented by the city clerk to the mayor within three days after its adoption. 
(b)  The mayor shall within ten days of receipt of an ordinance return it to the city clerk with or without his or her approval, or with his or her disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law on the fifteenth day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at its next meeting and should the city council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of the entire council [four councilmembers], it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided herein. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the city council as though disapproved and shall become law unless overridden by the council as in subsection (c) of this section. 
Section 2.34. - Mayor pro tempore; selection; duties. 
The city council shall elect by majority vote from among its members a mayor pro tempore who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's disability or absence. In the event of the mayor pro tempore's disability or absence, the councilmembers shall elect by majority vote from among its members a member who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or general state law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under his or her supervision but such shall not be effective for 14 calendar days following the mayor's giving written notice of such action and the reasons therefor to the director involved and the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council who, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by an affirmative vote of the entire council, or confirm such suspension or removal by a majority vote. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or general state law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or general state law. 
(e)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself or herself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of the office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(f)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by general state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman, one member as vice-chairman, and one member as secretary. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Section 3.12. - City attorney; duties. 
The mayor shall appoint, with confirmation of appointment by the city council, a city attorney whose compensation shall be established by the city council by ordinance. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the mayor, city council, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by ordinance or by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk/treasurer; duties. 
The mayor shall appoint, with confirmation of appointment by the city council, a city clerk/treasurer. The city clerk/treasurer shall be custodian of the official seal of the city; maintain city council records required by this charter; receive, keep, and disburse all money of the city upon orders; maintain accurate records thereof; and perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor or city council. 
Section 3.14. - Personnel administration; position classification and pay plan. 
The city council shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be adopted by ordinance. Said plans may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Section 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
Section 4.11. - Judge of municipal court. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge who shall be appointed by the city council and serve at the pleasure of the same. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years. 
(c)  The presiding municipal court judge for the city shall be paid an annual salary in the amount of $3,744.00 for services rendered to the City of Lincolnton. 
(d)  The judge of the municipal court may be removed for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(e)  Before entering the duties of office, the judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office of judge of the municipal court to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed the maximum amount allowed by law in regard to money and time spent in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment and fines for offenses within its jurisdiction including sentencing any offender upon conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public works for a period not exceeding 60 days. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of any person charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear, at the order of the judge, the cash shall be declared forfeited to the city, or the city shall have a lien against the property for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for the city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(h)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by general state law. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general state laws to mayor's, municipal, and police courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic offenses. 
Section 4.14. - Appeal. 
The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the Superior Court of Lincoln County from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court. Any person who fails to file an appeal within ten days of the date of his or her conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
Section 4.15. - Administration of court. 
The judge, with the approval of the city council, shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. 
Section 4.16. - Rules of practice. 
The rules of practice in the municipal court shall be the rules and regulations for procedure in the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. Said rules and regulations shall be on file at the city clerk's office for public inspection and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of general state law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Lincolnton shall consist of one election district with five numbered posts. All persons seeking election shall designate the posts for which they seek election. 
(b)  All general municipal elections to fill municipal offices shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in each odd-numbered year or as indicated by state law. 
(c)  The mayor and councilmen who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2011) 
Section 5.12. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the remainder of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. Any special election shall be held in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.13. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.14. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Section 5.15. - Election by plurality. 
The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 5.16. - Grounds for removal. 
The mayor, councilmembers, or other elected officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowing violation of any express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
Section 5.17. - Procedure for removal. 
Removal of an officer described above may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Lincoln County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Lincoln County as provided by general state law. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - TAXATION AND FEES 

Section 6.10. - Ad valorem tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government and providing governmental services; for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations; and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city ad valorem tax, a due date, and in what period of time such taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the due date. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy reasonable occupation or business taxes on both individuals and corporations doing business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations doing business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law so as to preclude regulation by the city. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. The city council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys and for the purposes of railroads, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, including whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises. However, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book to be kept by him. The city council may provide, by ordinance, for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees and charges for sewer, sanitary, and health services or any other services rendered inside and outside the corporate limits of the city which reflect the total cost to the city of providing such services. Unpaid fees and charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such special assessments shall be collected pursuant to the provisions in Section 6.18. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now and hereafter by state law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city pursuant to Sections 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for: the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes and fees imposed; allowing exceptions for hardship; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
DIVISION 2. - BONDED AND OTHER INDEBTEDNESS 

Section 6.20. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or general state law. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.21. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.22. - Short-term notes. 
The city must obtain and repay any short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year or as is otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
DIVISION 3. - ACCOUNTING AND BUDGETING 

Section 6.30. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
Section 6.31. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual budget and a capital improvements program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Section 6.32. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
Section 6.33. - City council action on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of March of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
Section 6.34. - Tax levies. 
Following the adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by said ordinances shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Section 6.35. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting, or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies or on a revised estimate of revenue. 
Section 6.36. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
DIVISION 4. - CONTRACTING PROCEDURES AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 

Section 6.40. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by him or her to indicate such drafting or reviews; and 
(3)  It is approved or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of minutes required under this Charter. 
Section 6.41. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner or owners. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Eminent domain. 
The city is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment plants, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof. For such purposes, property may be taken under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other state law applicable now or provided in the future. 
Section 7.11. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amount and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
Section 7.12. - Existing ordinances; resolutions, rules, and regulations. 
Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of this city not in conflict with this charter shall continue in force until repealed or amended by subsequent enactment of the city council. The city council shall review all such provisions and shall readopt, repeal, or amend each, so that a codification as provided by subsection (b) of Section 2.28 of this Charter is begun. 
Section 7.13. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect until the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. The mayor and council who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve for the remainder of the terms of office to which they were elected. 
Section 7.14. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel, or officers as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.15. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provisions of this charter, for which a penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Section 7.16. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is intended to be permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural and the masculine the feminine and vice versa. 
Section 7.17. - Severability. 
In the event any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Section 7.18. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Lincolnton in the County of Lincoln, approved March 4, 1953 (Ga. L. 1953, Jan.-Feb. Sess., p. 3117), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Section 7.19. - General repealer. 
All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
APPROVED: March 28, 1984. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; municipal corporation defined, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened form "Lincolnton Code". 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
As used in this Code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless otherwise specifically provided, and the following rules of construction shall be applied: 
City. The term "city" or "this city" means the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
City officials; city officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "city clerk", "chief of police", etc., it shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Council, city council. The term "council" or "city council" means the City Council of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Lincoln, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the county to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Department; city council; agency; commissions; boards. The name or title of any department, city council, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the words "of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia" were added thereto. 
Fee schedule or schedule of fees and charges. The term "fee schedule" or "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list of city fees and other charges adopted by the council that lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. A copy of the city fee schedule is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and neutral genders and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males and vice versa. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the city council of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
Incorporated limits or incorporated areas of the city. The term "incorporated limits" or "incorporated areas" means all areas of the city that are not situated within the territorial limits of an incorporated city or town. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any specific provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority of those persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
Limits or corporation. The term "limits" or "corporation," means the corporate limits (legal boundary) of the city. 
Mayor. Whenever the term "mayor" is used it shall mean the mayor of the City of Lincolnton. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Municipality. Wherever the term "municipality" appears in this Code, it shall mean the City of Lincolnton, Georgia. 
Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Lincolnton" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and any others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning. 
Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing and vice versa. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" means and extends to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any place including, but not limited to, buildings or conveyances to which the public has, or is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
Shall; may. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 1-3-3, as amended, or to whatever section is cited. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, public alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, that building or land, either alone or with others. 
Time. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 1-1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city clerk for examination by all persons. 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-5. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the city clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever as necessary and as directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 1-1-4) 
State Law reference— Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-12. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner except by ordinance or other official act of the mayor and council which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 1-1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the phrase "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  The phrase "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the city to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the city officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by general law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, or any combination thereof. 
(d)  All sentences must be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of the other punishment in the event the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. Further, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rules, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief. 
(h)  The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(i)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(j)  In the event community service is substituted for a fine, the monetary rate for hourly work shall be the federal minimum hourly wage. 
(k)  If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with the laws of Georgia, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 1-1-5) 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Sec. 1-14. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; general authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipalities, and other governmental entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations for acts or omissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; municipal acquisition and disposition of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to bind subsequent council, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; councilmembers incompetent to hold other municipal office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-4; effect of residence in annexed territory as qualification for office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-5; voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6; method of calling election in the event all seats in municipal governing authority are vacant, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-13; initial terms of office of members of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-19. - Members; authority. 
The city is governed by the city council, consisting of the mayor and five councilmembers who are vested with all corporate, legislative and other powers of the city as permitted by the city charter and by law. The council shall be the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members, also of the amount and manner of compensating them for their services, to the extent permitted by the city charter and state law. 
Sec. 2-20. - Election; term; vacancies. 
Election of the mayor and councilmembers shall be elected as provided in the city charter or by general law. Vacancies in office shall be filled as provided in the city charter or by general law. 
State Law reference— Term of municipal offices, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.1; general assembly authorized to enact local laws relation to municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.2; initial terms of office of member of municipal governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-9. 
Sec. 2-21. - Compensation; reimbursement of expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be compensated in an amount established as provided in the city charter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2-22. - Organizational meeting; election of mayor pro tem. 
At their first regular meeting in each year the mayor and council shall elect a mayor pro tem who shall have full authority to discharge all the duties of the mayor, whenever from sickness, absence from the city, or any other cause the mayor is unable to act. 
Sec. 2-23. - Oath of office. 
Each councilman, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, shall take an oath in the form prescribed by the city council. 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-24. - Duties of councilmembers. 
It shall be the duty of each councilmember to faithfully discharge his duties as chairperson or member of such committees as he shall be appointed on, and to perform such other and all duties as may be required of him by the city charter, state law, and this Code. 
Sec. 2-25. - Appointment of committees and chairpersons by the mayor and city council. 
All committees and committee chairpersons, and officers of the city council shall be recommended by the mayor and approved by the council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. Furthermore, the mayor and council shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Secs. 2-26—2-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AUTHORITY AND DUTIES 

Sec. 2-54. - General authority of council. 
The legislative authority of the city is vested by the city's charter and general law in the city council, and the council is authorized to exercise those powers by duly established ordinance. 
State Law reference— Powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; home rule powers of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-55. - Authority to organize and reorganize city administrative structure. 
The mayor and council may by ordinance establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, provide that the same person shall fill a number of offices and positions of employment, and transfer or change the functions and duties of various offices, positions of employment, and department and agencies of the city. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish municipal offices, agencies, and employments, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(1); authority to define, regulate, and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation, and tenure of municipal officers, agents, and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 
Secs. 2-56—2-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Open meetings and notice of meetings required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; meetings of governing bodies of counties and municipalities to be open, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1. 

Sec. 2-84. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council are held at the City Hall or at such other place as may be designated, on the first Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-1-11; Ord. of 10-7-2013) 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of city council; due notice requirement for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.; excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-85. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business set before the council, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-86. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Approval of minutes of last meeting; 
(2)  Reports of committees; 
(3)  Unfinished business; 
(4)  Reading by the clerk of any communications; and 
(5)  New business. 
(b)  If the mayor and council direct any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor and council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-1-13) 
Sec. 2-87. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedures of the mayor and council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-1-14) 
Sec. 2-88. - Previous questions. 
The previous questions may be called at any time by a majority of the members present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any member. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-1-15) 
Sec. 2-89. - Motions having precedence. 
(a)  When a question is under consideration no motion shall be received except as follows: 
(1)  To lay on the table; 
(2)  To postpone to a time certain; 
(3)  To postpone indefinitely; 
(4)  To refer to a committee; 
(5)  To amend; 
(6)  To strike out or insert; or 
(7)  To divide. 
(b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-1-16) 
Sec. 2-90. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-1-17) 
Secs. 2-91—2-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to provide for, regulate, etc., officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; liability of municipality for acts of officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; personal liability of municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; local government officers and employees not subject to liability for torts involving use of government vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-92-3; fixing of salaries of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; training of members of municipal governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-4; local referenda for abolishing local offices or shortening or lengthening term, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-11; authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-109. - Adoption of personnel policies. 
(a)  The mayor and council has adopted the City of Lincolnton, Georgia, Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual that provides rules, regulations, and policies consistent with the city's charter concerning the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; the administration of a position classification and pay plan, and methods of promotion and transfer within the classification plan; hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and rules governing layoffs or similar reductions in force; such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and such other personnel policies, regulations, provisions, or notices as were and may be necessary to provide for the adequate and systematic handling of personnel matters. A copy of the manual is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall be in addition to regulations provided in the adopted personnel manual. In the event of conflict between this chapter and the adopted manual, the more stringent provision shall prevail. 
Sec. 2-110. - Appointment and compensation. 
(a)  All officers and employees who are deemed necessary by the mayor and council and are not otherwise provided for by law or ordinance shall be appointed as provided by said mayor and council for such term and at such compensation as shall be provided thereby. 
(b)  The municipal court judge shall receive $300.00 per month as compensation. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide compensation and employee benefits to municipal officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Secs. 2-111—2-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-134. - Duties. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of the city and shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Presiding at meetings. To preside at all meetings of the city council, but the mayor shall not be allowed to vote at such meetings except in the case of a tie vote by the council on any question, and the mayor shall not have the privilege of debate except when the rules have been duly suspended for that purpose; 
(2)  Appointment of standing committees. To appoint at the first meeting each year, or as soon thereafter as expedient, standing committees for that year; but the mayor may at any time alter the committees and make such changes as the interest of the city may require; 
(3)  Appointment of officers and employees. To appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, all officers and employees of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for; 
(4)  Dismissal, suspension, and discipline of officers and employees. To dismiss, suspend, or discipline for cause, all officers and employees under his control; 
(5)  Executing legal documents. To sign and execute all contracts, deeds, and bonds of the city duly authorized by the mayor and council; and 
(6)  Other duties. To perform all duties assigned to the mayor in the city charter or as may be assigned from time to time by the city council. 
Sec. 2-135. - Powers of the mayor. 
The mayor shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Rule making. To prescribe such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority, and to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service by whomever prescribed; 
(2)  Investigation. To investigate and to examine or inquire into, either by himself or by any officer or person designated for the purpose by him, the affairs or operation of any department, including the power to employ consultants and professional counsel when so authorized by the council to aid in such investigations examinations, or inquiries; 
(3)  Overriding . To set aside any action taken by a department head and to supersede him in the functions of his office; 
(4)  Delegation. To direct any department to perform the work for another department, and to authorize any department head or office responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under such person; and 
(5)  Other powers . To exercise such other power and authority that may be conferred on the mayor by the city council, the city charter, or otherwise by law. 
Secs. 2-136—2-153. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Training for municipal clerks, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-20. 

Sec. 2-154. - Duties of clerk. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(2)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; 
(3)  Receive all money due the city, including taxes, licenses and fees, and pay out the same only upon orders of the mayor and council; and 
(4)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-1) 
Sec. 2-155. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The clerk shall receive such salary as the council may determine and fix for his services. 
Sec. 2-156. - Oath of office; bond. 
Before entering upon the discharge of his duties, the city clerk shall take and subscribe the oath required of officers and shall post bond in an amount established by the city council. 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq.; official bonds, O.C.G.A. § 45-4-1 et seq.; bond of municipal officers holding public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-3. 
Secs. 2-157—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-181. - Appointment; qualifications; oath; compensation. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the state bar and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by this Code for city officers. The city attorney shall receive compensation in the amount established from time to time by the city council. 
State Law reference— Oath of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-182. - Powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council; 
(2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts; and 
(3)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-2) 
Secs. 2-183—2-202. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-203. - Departmental organization. 
(a)  The following departments of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  Administrative department; 
(2)  Police; 
(3)  Fire; 
(4)  Public works; and 
(5)  Streets. 
(b)  In addition to the departments in subsection (a) of this section, the city has a municipal court as established by the city charter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-4-3) 
Sec. 2-204. - Responsibility of department heads. 
Every department head is immediately responsible to the mayor for the effective administration of his respective department. Each department head shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department. Subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, each such department head shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the mayor for the effective administration of his respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in his particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the mayor, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit annual reports of the activities of his respective department to the mayor; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the mayor; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the mayor, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in his respective departments. 
Sec. 2-205. - Intradepartmental cooperation. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the mayor, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
Secs. 2-206—2-233. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMITTEES 

Secs. 2-234—2-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND AGENCIES 

Sec. 2-260. - Establishment by council. 
The city council shall establish such boards, commissions, and authorities as it deems necessary or desirable from time to time to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function, upon such terms as are provided by the council by ordinance in accordance with the city's Charter. 
Sec. 2-261. - Rules, regulations and bylaws. 
Unless otherwise provided by the city council, each board, commission, and authority established by the city council may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the city's charter, this Code, or general law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs; provided, however, that copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Secs. 2-262—2-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; adoption of budget articles and resolutions, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1; municipal bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-38-1; standards for city and city audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8; officer responsible for political subdivision investments, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-4; public works bidding, O.C.G.A. § 26-91-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-286. - Fiscal year established. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-1) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required to be established by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-287. - Fee schedule; fees established by resolution. 
The city maintains a schedule of fees for permits, licenses, and other municipal charges. The amount of fees or charges imposed by the city including, but not limited to, those encompassed in the city's fee schedule, shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, as it deems necessary. A copy of the fee schedule is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-288. - Identity theft prevention program. 
For purposes of compliance with 16 CFR 681.1 et seq., the city has adopted an identity theft prevention (red flag) program, a copy of which is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-289. - Annual budget; appropriations. 
An annual budget and an appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the mayor and council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget and the appropriations ordinance are not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, this section automatically authorizes the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-2) 
State Law reference— Annual budget generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3 et seq. 
Sec. 2-290. - Purchasing; repairs. 
Each department head shall serve as purchasing agent for his department; provided that no such purchase or authorization for repair of city equipment shall be made without the prior approval of the mayor or the appropriate council committee. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-3) 
State Law reference— Authorization of purchase by municipal corporations of insurance covering injuries resulting from ownership of motor vehicles, waiver of governmental immunity; limitation of liabilities, O.C.G.A. § 33-24-51; immunity of municipality from liability for damages, waiver of immunity by purchase of liability insurance, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1; personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— For general business requirements, see Chapter 10. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; authority of local authorities to license and regulate alcoholic beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; prohibited acts on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; local regulation of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-160; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; local licensing requirements for sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.; requirements for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined herein, the definitions contained within O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., shall be applicable to this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Calendar year means the period of time from the date of issuance of a license to December 31 of the year of issuance of said license. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Election day means any general election, primary election, runoff election, special election, or referendum within the incorporated areas of the city. 
First public notice means the date of the posting of the sign required in this article on the premises. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Private club means a private club affiliated with a nationally chartered organization which has at least 50 regular dues-paying members and suitable kitchen and dining room space for the serving of meals to their members and guests. 
Restaurant means any establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and which derives at least 70 percent of its total annual gross income from the sale of prepared meals or food and which has a seating capacity of not less than 40 persons. 
Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
School means any state or county school or such other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. 
(1)  The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. 
(2)  The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(3)  A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-2; Res. of 8-6-2012, § 1; Res. of 7-7-2015) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-2. - Compliance with applicable law required. 
The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code and, if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter, then this chapter shall control. In addition, all licensees shall at all times comply with federal and state laws, municipal ordinances and the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, including licensing qualifications. 
Sec. 4-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this chapter for failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined the maximum allowable by law or imprisoned for not more than the maximum allowable by law, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in such case. As each such violation continues it shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition thereto and totally and separately distinct therefrom, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any and all licenses, regardless of the number of locations involved, and regardless of whether or not the holder of the license knew or contributed to such violation. It is the intent of this subsection without limiting the generality of the foregoing to grant to the council the right to suspend or revoke any or all licenses held by a licensee when any violation of this chapter occurs at any place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold pursuant, to a license issued hereunder. 
(c)  Any violation of state statute pertaining to alcoholic beverages shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-23) 
Secs. 4-4—4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Resolution of July 7, 2015, § 3, states: "the governing authority of the City of Lincolnton, Georgia shall extend existing alcohol licenses to Sunday for licensees rather than require a separate permit." 
State Law reference— Declaration of business of manufacturing, selling and other dealings in alcoholic beverages as privilege subject to regulatory requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1; powers of local authorities as to granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; allowing or permitting of breaking of packages or drinking of contents thereof on premises prohibited, exception for sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 

Sec. 4-25. - License declared privilege. 
Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, the distribution, sale, handling, and other dealing in or possession of alcoholic beverages in the city is a privilege and not a right, and the issuance of a license under this chapter shall not create any property rights in the license holder. Furthermore, such privilege shall not be exercised in the city except as licensed under the terms of this chapter. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1. 
Sec. 4-26. - Classification of licenses. 
The city shall issue five classes of alcoholic beverage licenses: 
(1)  Class A, permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption off the premises; 
(2)  Class B, permitting the sale and distribution of malt beverages and wine at wholesale; 
(3)  Class C, permitting the manufacture of malt beverages and wine; 
(4)  Class D, permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises of qualified restaurants; and 
(5)  Class E, permitting the sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits by the drink for consumption only on the premises. 
(Res. of 1-9-2018(1)) 
Sec. 4-27. - Required. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall offer for sale or sell any alcoholic beverage within the incorporated areas of the city without first obtaining the appropriate license herein required. 
(b)  The possession of more than one standard case of malt beverages of any kind by any person in a place of business operated by him, or on the premises used by him for business purposes shall be presumed to be a keeper of such beverage for the purpose of sale, and unless such person shall have complied with the terms of this chapter he shall be guilty of dealing in such beverages without a license and subject to the penalties as provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-3) 
State Law reference— Dealing in malt beverages at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40; county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-41; restriction on county licensing fees for the sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43; dealing in wine at wholesale and retail prohibited without local license, O.C.G.A. § 3-8-40. 
Sec. 4-28. - Separate license required for each business location. 
A separate alcoholic beverage license shall be required for each retail place of business licensed under this chapter. 
Sec. 4-29. - Payment of other taxes required for license issuance. 
No license shall be issued under this chapter unless the applicant has fully paid all license fees and taxes due under this chapter as well as all other business taxes and ad valorem taxes, and any utility billings due to the city for the business location. 
Sec. 4-30. - Qualifications for licensure. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any applicant, unless that applicant meets the following qualifications, in addition to all other requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  All applicants must be at least 21 years of age at the time of filing an application for license under this chapter. 
(2)  All applicants for retail licenses must provide with the application for license proof of financial responsibility. The city council may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with any application. 
(3)  The applicant must be a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, and a resident of the city for a period of one year preceding the date of filing the application, except as otherwise specifically stated in this section; provided, however, that residency requirements may, at the discretion of the city council, be waived if the applicant designates a resident of the city or county who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
(4)  No applicant who has a criminal record (except minor traffic offenses) shall be granted a license. The plea of nolo contendere and the forfeiture of bond or collateral shall be considered a conviction for the purposes of this subsection. Additionally, no applicant who has been convicted of violating any ordinance of the city or any law or regulation of the state or any political subdivision thereof, governing the sale of any alcoholic beverage shall be granted a license. 
(5)  No license shall be issued to an applicant who has previously had revoked, within five years next preceding his application, any license issued to him by any city or county in this or any other state to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind. 
Sec. 4-31. - Moral character of applicant and employees. 
(a)  All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses must be of good character, and all managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character or the application will not be considered. 
(b)  Ascertainable standards of the good moral character of the applicant that may be considered by the mayor and council in deciding if a license will be issued include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Present and prior compliance with city ordinances. 
(2)  Prior supervision over employees and customers. 
(3)  Truthfulness in submitted application. 
(4)  Criminal and civil court records. 
(5)  Employment history. 
(6)  Credit reports. 
Sec. 4-32. - Active involvement in business required. 
(a)  Applicants for license and licensees under this chapter shall be either the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the owner of a lease thereon, and a copy of any applicable premises lease shall be provided with the license application. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. 
(b)  The applicant for a license under this chapter must be active in and solely responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. 
Sec. 4-33. - Partnership applicants. 
If the applicant is a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license, one member of the partnership must be a resident of the county, and all members of the partnership must make sworn statements of those qualifications. 
Sec. 4-34. - Corporate applicants. 
A license may be granted to a corporation existing under the law of the state or to a foreign corporation authorized to do business in the state; provided, however, that any such corporation shall be required to designate a resident of the county as its local agent responsible for compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and authorize to accept all services of notice. 
Sec. 4-35. - Application; filing period; when and by whom granted. 
(a)  Each applicant shall apply to the clerk for a license by written application on forms approved by the council. All questions and information requested on the application form shall be filled in and subscribed to by all applicants under oath. 
(b)  All applications must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date considered by the council. 
(c)  Applications will be considered and license granted only at a regular meeting of the council. 
(d)  If the owner of the business is an individual, the application shall be made by such individual, unless he is not a citizen of this state. In such event, the application shall be made by a person who is a citizen of this state and who is actively engaged in the management of the business for which such license is sought. 
(e)  If the owner of the business for which a license is sought is a partnership or corporation, the application shall be made by one of the partners or an officer of the corporation who is actively engaged in the management of the business. In the event that no partner or officer is a citizen of this state, then the application shall be made by a designated agent of the business who is actively engaged in management of the business. 
(f)  In the event that a firm, partnership or corporation owns or operates more than one place of business in the city, all applications for licenses for each place of business made pursuant to this chapter shall be made by the same person. 
(g)  If the application is being made on behalf of a private club, the application shall be made by an officer of such private club. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-4; Ord. No. 2, § IV(2), 8-7-1989) 
Sec. 4-36. - Advertisement. 
(a)  Each licensee presenting an application for licensure shall publish in the legal gazette of the county a notice of the fact that application has been made by the licensee and that the matter will be heard by the council at its next regular scheduled meeting immediately following the notice. The notice shall be published once a week for three consecutive weeks. 
(b)  The applicant is required to show proof of three newspaper advertisements by affidavit of publisher or his designee and is responsible for expenses incurred for such advertising. 
(c)  No application will be considered until proof of full compliance with the requirements of this section has been provided to the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-5) 
Sec. 4-37. - Nonrefundable application fee. 
Every application, excluding renewals, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the established by the city council. Said fee shall be paid by certified check, cashier's cheek or money order made payable to the city and shall be credited toward the license fee if license is granted. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-6) 
Sec. 4-38. - Investigations; recommendations. 
The application shall be sworn to and directed to the clerk who shall inspect the application. The clerk or the designee of the clerk shall cause the character and reputation of the applicant and suitability of the location of the establishment for which the license is sought to be fully investigated. After all of the foregoing requirements have been fulfilled, applications for original licenses shall be presented to the council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-7) 
Sec. 4-39. - Hearing; consideration; and denial of license. 
All applications presented shall be noted as to the date and exact time of filing and, after filing, such applications shall be presented and considered by the council in the order of their filing at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the council, provided 30 days have elapsed after the date of filing. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-8) 
Sec. 4-40. - Factors considered in determining whether application should be granted. 
(a)  In determining whether any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, in addition to all the other provisions of this chapter, in the public interest and welfare, the following will be considered: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, mental, and physical capacity to conduct this business; 
(2)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell any alcoholic beverage, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(3)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell any alcoholic beverage, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to such business; and 
(4)  Whether the person has previously had an alcoholic beverage license suspended or revoked; 
(5)  No license shall be granted to any existing building or establishment having a history of or reputation for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing, or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; or other violations of the law. By history or reputation is meant within the 12 months next preceding the filing of said application and provided said business is now owned, operated, managed, or in any way connected to the person operating said business during the times these offenses occurred. 
(b)  No license shall be granted for the sale of malt beverages or wine at retail where the proposed location does not have a front entrance to the premises which is clearly visible from a public street, road, or highway, except as to a private club. 
(c)  No license shall be granted to a retailer under any provision or section of this chapter unless the front entrance to the building is clearly visible from a street, road, or highway, and the front of said building shall have a window of a standard size and no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article, or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of the building shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any building where retail sales are permitted. Each building shall be so lighted that the interior of the premises is visible day or night and all parking areas adjacent to or used in connection with said business shall be fully lighted and unobstructed. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-8) 
Sec. 4-41. - Location. 
No license shall be issued hereunder where the place of business is located within 200 yards of any school or within 100 yards of any church. All distances herein referred to shall be measured at the closest point between the entrance to such place of business and the property line of such school or church. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-42. - Annual license fees. 
Annual license fees for licenses issued under this chapter shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. When a license has been approved and granted, the fee for same shall be paid to the council by certified check, cashier's check, or money order in the full amount of the license fee. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-9) 
Sec. 4-43. - License period; lapse for nonuse. 
All licenses shall be issued for a calendar year. In case of the revocation or surrender of a license before the expiration of such calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive a refund whatsoever. All licenses must be obtained no later than 90 days from the date of the approval of the application, and, if not so obtained, said license shall be void. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-10) 
Sec. 4-44. - Renewal permitted; conditions. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses in this article may be renewed by payment of the fees set forth in the city fee schedule, provided that: 
(1)  Applications for renewal of existing licenses are made in person by the applicants at the office of the city clerk between December 1 through November 30 of each year for the succeeding year and the prescribed license fee paid at time of filing. 
(2)  The licensee presents with the application for renewal proof of publication placed in the legal gazette of the county a notice of the fact that application for renewal has been made by the licensee and that the matter will be heard by the council at its next regular scheduled meeting immediately following the notice. 
(3)  The licensee and location remain the same. 
(4)  The licensee's circumstances would enable him to qualify for a license if the renewal was a new application. 
(5)  The licensee is still in compliance with the requirements of state and municipal laws and regulations pertaining to the original issuance of the license and pertaining to the operation of the business under the license at the time of application for renewal. 
(6)  The city has received no complaints regarding the licensee's operation of the licensed premises. 
Sec. 4-45. - Effect of complaint on license renewal; complaint procedure. 
If a complaint is received as to the licensee's alleged violation of state or municipal law or regulation before November 30 of the licensed year or 30 days after the application for renewal is received, whichever date is later, the license shall not be renewed but shall be referred to the mayor and council for decision as to whether renewal shall be granted as follows: 
(1)  The mayor and council shall conduct a hearing after giving the licensee reasonable notice of the time and place of such hearing, as well as the purpose thereof. 
(2)  The licensee may remain open for business until a decision by the mayor and council is made and shall have a period of three days following that decision in which to pay the required fees if the decision of mayor and council is to permit renewal of the license. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-11) 
Sec. 4-46. - Sale of business. 
(a)  If an individual, corporation, firm or partnership sells the business at which a license issued hereunder authorizes the sale of malt beverages and wine, such license or licenses shall automatically terminate unless the new owner shall file an application for the continuance of the license or licenses within 30 days from the date of the purchase of said business and pay the processing fee established by the city council, which fee shall not be refundable. 
(b)  When an application for continuance has been filed and the processing fee has been paid, the council shall cause an investigation to be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and, if the application is approved by the mayor and council, the clerk is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit allowing such new owner to continue the sale of malt beverages and wine until the end of the license year for which the business is licensed. 
(c)  Any person who has been granted a temporary license to finish out the license as provided in this section shall make application for a license as a new applicant prior to the expiration of such temporary license, and all provisions of this chapter shall apply as if no license had ever been granted to the applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-12) 
Sec. 4-47. - Transfers. 
(a)  No license granted hereunder shall be transferable from one person to another. No license shall be transferred from one location to another. 
(b)  In the event that the holder of a license on behalf of a corporation or private club ceases to be an officer of such corporation or is no longer associated with such private club, such corporation or private club shall apply within 15 days after such event has occurred for a new license to be issued to the person holding the same office as the original applicant and pay a transfer fee in the amount established by the city council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-13) 
Sec. 4-48. - Investigations incident to disciplinary action. 
The city council shall have the right to make such inquiry or investigation as it may find to be reasonably necessary to determine the licensee's compliance or noncompliance with this chapter. Such investigation may consist of, among other actions, calling licensees for examination under oath, obtaining evidence under oath from other persons, the procurement of documents and records including records of the licensee, and inspection and examination of records and documents from whatever source obtainable. 
Sec. 4-49. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The council shall have the full power and authority to revoke, refuse to renew, suspend, or place on probation any license to sell malt beverages and wine for violation of this chapter or violation of any state or federal laws. 
(b)  Any untrue or misleading information contained or material omissions in the application for a license shall be cause for the denial thereof, and, if any license has been granted under such circumstances, the same shall be subject to revocation. 
(c)  Should any licensee be convicted or plead guilty or plead nolo contendere to any felony, such license shall be immediately and automatically revoked and cancelled. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-14) 
Sec. 4-50. - Display of license. 
The city license shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place within the building, and, if said license is not so posted, said business shall not be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages until same shall be posted. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 4-51. - Due process rights regarding denial, suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Under this chapter, the council has the discretionary powers within the guidelines of due process as hereinafter defined to grant, refuse, and to suspend or revoke any licenses in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  All decisions by the council denying, suspending, or revoking such licenses shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally within ten days from the date of the decision by the council. 
(c)  Upon application within ten days of the receipt of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation, the applicant shall be afforded a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-24) 
Secs. 4-52—4-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; imposition of excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60; imposition by municipalities of excise tax on distilled spirits package sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; imposition by municipalities of excess taxes on distilled spirits sold by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 

Sec. 4-74. - Levy; rate. 
There is imposed and levied a specific tax upon all retail dealers in malt beverages and wine within the city limits at the highest rate permitted by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-41) 
Sec. 4-75. - Collection. 
(a)  The excise taxes shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all malt beverages and wine sold within the incorporated areas of the city not later than the tenth day of each month, based upon the units of beer and wine sold during the previous calendar month by the wholesalers to retailers in the city. 
(b)  The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments and shall render a sworn statement of the same accompanying the monthly report to the city and the report shall show the exact quantities of malt beverages or wine, by size and type of container, and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to audit and to require production of records from each wholesaler supplying retailers in the incorporated areas of the city and also from each retailer so supplied. 
(d)  Failure to make a timely report and remittance of the aforesaid taxes shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due, in addition to the amount due; additionally, if the report is not filed or if the taxes are not remitted and paid within 30 days from the date that the same are due, the council shall have the right to suspend or revoke any wholesale license, and further to prohibit the wholesaler from making any deliveries of any type whatsoever within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the incorporated areas of the city any malt beverages or wine on which the tax required in this article has not been paid to the wholesaler or distributor or to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-42) 
Secs. 4-76—4-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS 

Sec. 4-95. - Posting of chapter regulations. 
At all times all retail licensees under this chapter must post a copy of this chapter in a conspicuous place within the place of business. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-16) 
Sec. 4-96. - Advertising signs. 
(a)  No signs or advertisement of alcoholic beverages shall be erected outside the place of business licensed under this chapter, except as expressly permitted by state law. 
(b)  No posters or signs, lighted or unlighted, shall be affixed to any window or so placed that they will be predominately seen from the outside of the premises, except that each establishment licensed herein shall be allowed to erect or affix one lighted sign or advertisement of alcoholic beverages on an interior wall of the establishment visible from the exterior of the building. The sign must be affixed or erected on the rear wall of the establishment or at a location more than ten feet from the nearest exterior window. This sign shall only be lighted during the legal hours of sale of alcoholic beverages as provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-17) 
Sec. 4-97. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Weekdays and Saturday. No retail dealers shall engage in the sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits on weekdays except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on Saturdays, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. All persons shall be off the premises of any package store by 2:00 a.m. on weekdays and by 12:00 midnight on Saturdays, at which time said package store shall close for business. Grocery or convenience stores where the principal business is the sale of groceries and other like items and the sale of malt beverages and wine is incidental thereto may remain open during other hours but shall not sell malt beverages or wine except during the times and hours specified herein, and, at all times when the sale of malt beverages or wine is prohibited, all malt beverages or wine shall be out of sight and under lock and key. 
(b)  Sundays. 
(1)  Package sales. No retail dealers shall engage in the sale of malt beverages or wine by the package on Sundays except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. All persons shall be off the premises of the package store by 11:30 p.m., at which time said package store shall close for business. Grocery or convenience stores where the principal business is the sale of groceries and other like items and the sale of malt beverages and wine is incidental thereto may remain open during other hours but shall not sell malt beverages or wine except during the times and hours specified herein, and, at all times when the sale of malt beverages or wine is prohibited, all malt beverages or wine shall be out of sight and under lock and key. 
(2)  Consumption on the premises. No retail dealers shall engage in the sale of malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises on Sundays except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishments which derives at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served. 
(c)  Christmas Day. Retail dealers shall not permit the sale of malt beverages or wine on Christmas Day or any other day on which state law prohibits the sale of malt beverages and wine. 
(d)  Election days. On any county, state, or national election day, unless prohibited by state law, retail dealers may engage in the sale of malt beverages and wine between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(e)  Wholesalers. The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be the same hours and days as retail dealers are allowed to engage in the sale of malt beverages and wine by the terms of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-18; Res. of 8-6-2012, § 1; Res. of 7-7-2015) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays and election days generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20; Sunday sales by farm wineries, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2; Sunday sales of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-2. 
Sec. 4-98. - Sale to minors, incompetents, and inebriates. 
(a)  No malt beverages or wine shall be sold to a minor under any conditions whatsoever. A minor for the purposes of this chapter shall be considered to be a person under the age of 21 years or as provided by state law. 
(b)  No malt beverages or wines shall be sold to any intoxicated person, nor shall any intoxicated person be allowed to remain upon the premises of any place of business selling malt beverages or wines. 
(c)  No employees of any business selling malt beverages or wines shall work in said place of business while intoxicated and no employees shall drink malt beverages or wine while working and employed in such business. 
(d)  No malt beverages or wines shall be sold to any person who is mentally incompetent. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-20) 
Sec. 4-99. - Display of price. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, or on an exposed sign prominently placed, the price of all malt beverages or wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-21) 
Sec. 4-100. - Compliance with health rules. 
All retail licensees under this chapter are hereby required to comply with all rules and regulations and requirements of the county board of health, state board of health and any and all other state, federal local public health authorities. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-22) 
Sec. 4-101. - Drinking in specified places prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to: 
(1)  Publicly engage in the drinking of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Engage in the drinking of alcoholic beverages upon any premises upon which an athletic contest is being conducted. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to drink alcoholic beverages on the premises of any retail, wholesale, or manufacturing alcoholic beverage business or business establishment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to possess an open container or to drink any alcoholic beverage on any street, highway, park, parking lot, alleyway, or public place not lawfully licensed to sell such beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard in any manner whatsoever containers of alcoholic beverages upon the street, road, highways, alleyway, parks, parking, lots, or other public places except in proper collection receptacles provided or upon any private property. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-3-25) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and registration of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; disposal of diseased, disabled, or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Abandon means releasing or leaving an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of deserting the animal. 
Adequate food and water means food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water. 
(1)  Adequate food means palatable, noncontaminated and nutritionally adequate food that is appropriate for the species. Adequate food does not include garbage. 
(2)  Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water. 
Adequate shelter means a structure having three sides, a top and bottom which is suitable for the animal's size to protect it from cold, wind and rain and other elements. During cold weather, sufficient bedding inside the shelter shall be present. 
Animal means any living thing not a plant, other than humans, rodents and insects. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the city or in conjunction with the city or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Animal warden or animal control officer means any person that may, from time to time, be designated or employed by the city as a law enforcement officer or agency for the purpose of administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The term "animal warden" or "animal control officer" includes any county animal control officer that is authorized to act on behalf of the city by ordinance or resolution of the city council or by agreement between the city and county governing bodies. 
Cat means any feline, regardless of age or sex. 
Cruel means causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering, or unjustifiable injury or death. 
Dog means any canine, regardless of age or sex. 
Inoculation against rabies means the injection subcutaneously or otherwise, of rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health, and administered under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian and a certificate of vaccination or inoculation issued by the veterinarian. 
Jurisdiction means, for the enforcement of this chapter, the corporate limits of the city. 
Leash means a cord, thong or chain not more than ten feet in length, by which an animal is controlled by the person accompanying the animal. A retractable lead may also be used by a responsible individual if the lead is of adequate strength to control the animal. Retractable leads shall only be used in open areas. 
Livestock means cattle, horses, donkeys, swine, sheep, goats, llamas, emus, ostriches, alpacas or farm-raised deer and other such animals susceptible to use for commercial purposes, including domesticated fowl, such as chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, guineas or other poultry. 
Owner means any person partnership or corporation owning, possessing, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for seven or more consecutive days. 
Public nuisance. An animal shall be deemed to be a public nuisance if the animal: 
(1)  Is habitually permitted to go upon the property of another person other than its owner or keeper without the express consent of such other property owner or occupant. 
(2)  Attacks or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways. 
(3)  Habitually barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion. 
(4)  Is repeatedly at large. 
(5)  Trespasses on school grounds. 
Restraint means any animal that is on a leash or at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets and roads of the city, or in a fenced area within the real property limits of the owner, or invisible fence systems maintained in good working order. The primary means of restraint of an animal may not be by means of a chain, cable, rope or other stakeout or tie-out device. 
Running at large means any animal that is off the property of its owner and not under the control of a competent person. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-3-2, 4-8-21, 4-8-41, 4-11-1, 4-11-12. 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalties. 
Any person violating this chapter may be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-14) 
Sec. 6-3. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city police department in conjunction with such city personnel as are designated by the city council or appointed from time to time by the police chief to assist the police department in its enforcement duties. City police and other city officers authorized to enforce this chapter are, for those purposes, also designated as "animal control officers" or "animal wardens" as those terms are defined in this article. 
(b)  In addition to enforcement of this chapter within the jurisdictional limits of the city, the city police department and all other persons properly appointed by the city to aid the police department in enforcement of this chapter may perform enforcement duties within Lincoln County, Georgia, to the extent authorized by, and subject to any limitation of, agreements that may be entered into from time to time by the city and county for coordinated animal control. 
Sec. 6-4. - Interference with animal control officer prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere, harass or otherwise obstruct the performance of any animal control officer in the official performance of his duties as provided for in this chapter. 
Secs. 6-5—6-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CARE AND CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to enact ordinances for the protection of animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-18. 

Sec. 6-27. - Applicability to dogs. 
This article applies to all animals, including dogs. However, with regard to dogs, the provisions of this article are supplemental and in addition to the regulations provided in article III of this chapter. 
Sec. 6-28. - Bird sanctuary; wildlife. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any wild bird or to rob any wild bird's nest; provided, however, if nuisance birds such as starlings are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the mayor and council, those birds may be destroyed as humanely as possible, under the supervision of the police department, in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the mayor and council. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any other wild game in the city except by order of the chief of police. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-1) 
Sec. 6-29. - Animals running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally or otherwise to permit any livestock, fowl, or other animal to go at large. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-2) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; disposal of impounded livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-7. 
Sec. 6-30. - Enclosures for animals and fowl. 
Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-3) 
Sec. 6-31. - Adequate shelter, food, water and medical care required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner, person in possession, or any person in charge of any animal, to fail, refuse or neglect to provide such animal with the adequate shelter, necessary food and water, and necessary medical treatment for such animal. 
Sec. 6-32. - Cruelty to animals prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, poison, cruelly treat, maim, tease, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance or medical attention, ill use, deprive of shade and shelter or in any manner whatsoever, torture, kill or abuse any animal. 
(b)  No person shall abandon any animal, on any property, public or private or keep an animal under unsanitary conditions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to transport any dog in an open bed truck except when safely confined in a portable/transport kennel or safely restrained by a harness or tether. 
State Law reference— Animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; performing cruel acts on, harming, maiming or killing dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1. 
Sec. 6-33. - Authority to remove abused or neglected animals. 
Animal control officers shall be authorized to remove or cause to have removed to a safe location any animal that appears to be abused or suffering undue pain from abuse or neglect as may be necessary to prevent further suffering. The owner or possessor of the animal may be charged according to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4 concerning cruelty to animals. 
Sec. 6-34. - Authority to remove animals from vehicles. 
The animal control officers may use any force reasonably necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle if the owner cannot be immediately located. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the city or its designees for this action. 
Sec. 6-35. - Motorist hitting domestic animals to make report. 
Any person who, while operating a motor vehicle, strikes or causes injury to any domestic animal shall notify the owner if known or ascertainable, as well as the police department, of the injury to and location of the animal. 
Sec. 6-36. - Nuisance animals prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly keep or harbor public nuisance animals as defined in this chapter. 
Sec. 6-37. - Duty of owner in case of animal bite. 
Every owner or person harboring or keeping a dog, who knows that such animal has bitten any person, shall immediately report such fact to the police department and shall keep the dog confined pursuant to the requirements this chapter. The owner or keeper of the dog shall surrender the animal to a law enforcement or humane officer, upon demand, for examination. 
Sec. 6-38. - Keeping of nondomestic, exotic, and wild animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, or permit at large any exotic animal within the areas of the city without the written permission of the chief of police, who may impose upon the owner reasonable conditions of confinement to ensure the protection and safety of the general public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to purchase, sell, own, possess, or harbor any skunk, fox, or prairie dog in the city. 
Sec. 6-39. - Owner responsible for damage to property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person's animal to cause damage to another person's property. The owners of such animals shall continue to be civilly liable for any damage occasioned by the actions of their animals. Property shall include, but not be limited to, pets, livestock, vehicles, etc. 
Sec. 6-40. - Vaccination of dogs and cats required. 
Any animal owner within the city shall have his animals over three months of age, including both dogs and cats, vaccinated for the prevention of rabies in a manner approved by a licensed veterinarian and consistent with state law. 
State Law reference— Responsibility for control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1. 
Sec. 6-41. - Report of rabies cases. 
(a)  Every veterinarian shall report promptly to the city police department and the county health department all cases of rabies in animals treated by the veterinarian, giving the name and address of the owner and a complete description and history of the animal. Every veterinarian shall also report the names and addresses of the owner of any animals bitten by the rabid animal, so far as known. 
(b)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid; or suspects an animal of having rabies; or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal shall promptly report the information, to the extent known, to the county health department and animal control. 
Secs. 6-42—6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dog control (Mercedes' Law), O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; duties of cities with regard to dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-71. - Vicious or diseased dogs. 
(a)  Any dog that has attacked and bitten a person or other animal without provocation or has attempted to bite a person or other animal without provocation shall be deemed a vicious dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for the presence of any vicious or diseased dog on the streets or public places of the city or allow the dog to run on the premises of another, at any time, unless and in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the dog shall be securely muzzled to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-12) 
State Law reference— Registration of dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25; muzzling and restraint, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26; confiscation and destruction, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
Sec. 6-72. - Confinement of female dogs in heat required. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, custodian or harborer of any female dog in heat within the city, when she is left unattended, to securely confine such dog inside a building or other enclosure to prevent such dog from coming into contact with another dog except for planned breeding. 
State Law reference— Permitting dogs in heat to run free prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 6-73. - Removal of dog feces from certain areas. 
The owner, keeper, walker or person in charge of any dog shall not permit solid fecal matter of such animal to deposit on any street, alley, or other public or private property, unless such matter is immediately removed therefrom by said owner or person in charge. This section shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped. 
Secs. 6-74—6-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 6-105. - Authority to impound dogs running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any dog to permit the dog to run at large at any time, and, if any such dog is found running at large in violation of this provision, it shall be taken up and impounded as provided in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-11(a)) 
Sec. 6-106. - Duty of police department and animal control officers; records. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this division, it shall be the duty of every police officer and every animal control officer, if any, appointed pursuant to this chapter, to seize all dogs running at large in violation of this section and to impound such animals in the city pound or other suitable place. Upon receiving any such animal, the city pound keeper shall enter upon the records of the pound, in a book to be kept by him for such purpose, the date of impounding, and a description of the animal impounded. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-11(b)) 
Sec. 6-107. - Notice to owner. 
Not later than five days after the impounding of any animal as hereinabove provided, the owner shall be notified, or, if the owner of the animal is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five days at two or more conspicuous places in the city, which notice shall describe the animal and indicate the place and time of taking. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-11(c)) 
Sec. 6-108. - Redemption. 
The owner of any animal impounded by the city pound keeper may redeem the same by paying all the costs, charges, and penalties assessed, if any, that have accrued up to the time of making the redemption, and when the same are paid to the pound keeper, it shall be his duty to release the animal from the pound and deliver it to the owner thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-11(d)) 
Sec. 6-109. - Disposition of unclaimed animals. 
When the owner of such animal or animals so impounded shall fail and refuse to pay the impounding fee and costs, the animal or animals may be sold at public auction and the proceeds of such sale applied to the cost of impounding such animal or animals under the provisions as hereinafter set forth. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-11(e)) 
State Law reference— Euthanasia of dogs and cats by animal shelters, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1; disposal of impounded animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.6. 
Sec. 6-110. - Fees. 
The owner of any animal or animals that are impounded under the provisions of this section shall pay such impounding fees and further fees for the keep of such animal or animals as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-11(f)) 
State Law reference— Duty to provide for care of impounded animals, lien for costs of care, and return of animals to owner, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.3; notice to owner of impoundment, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.4. 
Sec. 6-111. - Summons in lieu of impoundment. 
A city officer, at his discretion, may elect not to impound a dog or other animal found in violation of any section of this chapter, but to issue or cause to be issued a summons directed to the owner or possessor of the dog to appear before the municipal court on a certain day to stand trial for the violation of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-3-13) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; standards and requirements for construction, alteration, etc., of buildings and other structures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; enforcement of adopted codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; county building, electrical, and other codes, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq.; local government code enforcement boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city are as designated by map or legal description, duly adopted by the city council and as amended from time to time, available in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 8-2. - Administration by building department and building official. 
The person designated by the city council to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be the head of the city's building department and shall be known as the "building official". As the title is used in this chapter, the term "building official" includes the duly appointed department head and his designees, including, but not limited to the city building official. 
Sec. 8-3. - Encroachment on public property prohibited. 
Any person or corporation, contractor or builder who shall, in violation of this section, encroach upon the streets and alleys or other public property of the city, shall in addition to the penalties for violation of this section, be compelled at his own expense to remove the obstructions and to repair the streets or alleys or other public property as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-1-1(d)) 
Sec. 8-4. - Closing streets prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, contractor, builder or worker engaged in the building or repairing of any structure within the city, to close the streets of the city to the passage of persons or vehicles or in any way to endanger the life or limb of passersby. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-1-1(e)) 
Sec. 8-5. - Water and sewer connections to be supervised by city personnel. 
No connection shall be made to the city water or sewerage system except as provided in this section. Notice of the proposed connection shall be given to the city at least 48 hours in advance of the time the connection is to be made. The water superintendent shall supervise all connections to the city water system. Connections to the sewerage system shall be completed under the supervision of the wastewater superintendent. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-1-1(f)) 
Secs. 8-6—8-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 8-29. - State minimum standards and permissive codes adopted. 
(a)  The following state minimum standards codes and permissive codes, as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20 and 8-2-21, are adopted by the city as though fully set forth herein, as supplemented and amended by the state department of community affairs, and as may be amended by provisions of this chapter or of this Code generally: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2006 Edition. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2006 Edition. 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2006 Edition. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 Edition. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition. 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition. 
(10)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition. 
(b)  Subsequent editions or amendments to the adopted publications and state amendments and errata shall become effective 30 days after the city council receives notice that copies of such publications have been obtained, unless the council within such 30-day period disapproves the subsequent edition or amendment. 
(c)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk and kept on file in the office of the clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. 
Sec. 8-30. - Codes remedial in nature. 
The city's technical codes are remedial in nature, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
Sec. 8-31. - Quality control. 
Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
Sec. 8-32. - Liability of city. 
The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, that may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
Sec. 8-33. - Conflict of regulations. 
Where in any specific case sections of the technical codes, of this Code, and of state or federal law or regulation specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
Sec. 8-34. - Appendices to technical codes. 
Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
Sec. 8-35. - Referenced standards. 
Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
Sec. 8-36. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes shall be determined by the building official. 
Sec. 8-37. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
Sec. 8-38. - Required inspections. 
The following inspections are mandatory: 
(1)  Temporary service pole. 
(2)  Manufactured home stand/tie downs. 
(3)  Footing. 
(4)  Monolithic slab. 
(5)  Foundation wall. 
(6)  Manufactured home pier footing. 
(7)  Poured wall rebar. 
(8)  MH curtain wall. 
(9)  Retaining wall. 
(10)  Concrete slab rough-in. 
(11)  Framing rough-in. 
(12)  Electrical rough-in. 
(13)  Mechanical rough-in. 
(14)  Plumbing rough-in. 
(15)  Garage/porch slab base. 
(16)  Energy. 
(17)  Temporary power on. 
(18)  Main systems testing. 
(19)  Final inspection and certificate of occupancy for move in. 
Sec. 8-39. - Building permits; fees. 
Provisions regarding building permits are included in chapter 26, Land Use. Building permits and inspection fees shall be in the amount established by the city council and included in the city fee schedule. 
Secs. 8-40—8-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY NUMBERING 

Sec. 8-67. - Required; specifications; placement. 
All owners of dwelling houses or business buildings situated within the city shall place thereon numerals or numbers of sufficient size and legibility as to be easily read, the same to be placed in a conspicuous place on the front of the dwelling or business building. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-1-3(a)) 
Sec. 8-68. - Assignment of number by building official. 
The building official shall, upon application therefor by the owner, designate and assign a number to each dwelling house and business building in the city. After a number is assigned, the owner shall obtain suitable numbers or numerals to affix the same to his dwelling house or business establishment. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-1-3(b)) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— For alcoholic beverages establishment regulations and excise taxes, see Chapter 4. For hotel-motel excise taxes, see Chapter 44. 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to license self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1; certain persons required to provide proof of licensure state licensure before issuance of city or county business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; limitations regarding persons performing investigations related to city and county business licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; taxation of insurers, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq.; licensing and taxation of certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly; provided that this shall not include any business, trade, profession and the like licensed by the state unless city licensing is allowed by state law, nor shall it include any business operating solely under a franchise granted by the city. 
City clerk includes the city clerk and his designees and any alternates that may be designated from time to time by the city council to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Employee means any individual who, for compensation, exerts substantial effort within the state for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
Engaged in business. Any person shall be deemed to be engaged in business and thus subject to the requirements of this chapter when he performs any act of selling any goods or services or solicits business or offers goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator or agent in any business, trade, profession or occupation within this city. 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
Home repair service person means any individual engaged in plumbing, electrical, carpentry, repair or maintenance activities performed on single-family residential units located within the city; provided, however, the charges for such services, exclusive of materials, do not exceed $200.00 per residential unit per year. 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
Location or office means a fixed place located within the city from which a person conducts business, but does not include a work site located in the city for less than six consecutive months for the purpose of serving a single customer or project. 
Manufacturer means a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities, including all the activities of a commercial nature wherein labor or skill is applied by hand or machinery to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different, or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced, including the production or fabrication of specially or custom-made articles, and including the making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning and preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables and meats. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means a fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
Retailer means a person who sells tangible personal property to the consumer or any other person for any purpose other than for resale. 
Services means the accommodating or performing of a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
Wholesaler means a person who sells tangible personal property to jobbers or to another person other than the consumer. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, §§ 7-1-1, 2-5-21) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 10-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
This chapter is applicable not only to those business entities specifically mentioned herein, but also to businesses that are the topic of other chapters of this Code. The provisions of this chapter shall be supplemental to the provisions of those other chapters to the extent they are not in conflict therewith. 
Sec. 10-3. - Subsequent amendments; other fees. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess, levy and collect any of the license fees prescribed. The payment of any license fee herein provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessment, levy or collection of additional license or permit fees upon the same person, firm or corporation. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-21) 
Sec. 10-4. - Confidentiality. 
All information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter shall be kept in strict confidence by the city, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter and the city's business taxes. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-4(4)) 
State Law reference— Confidentiality of information and penalties for violation, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-15 and 33-8-10. 
Secs. 10-5—10-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-27. - Authority to administer chapter. 
The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the application for and issuance of business licenses under this chapter of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-5) 
Sec. 10-28. - Duties of city clerk. 
The city clerk, or an authorized representative, shall have, among others, the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the registration and application for a business license and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  To issue to each person a business license within a reasonable time after the payment of the license fee assessed and any business taxes, property or other city taxes levied in this Code; provided, however, where under other portions of this Code, permits, certifications and compliance with enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the city clerk shall not issue a business license until the applicant exhibits to the city clerk the obtained permits, certification and compliance. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-6) 
Sec. 10-29. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, whether based in the city or elsewhere, to transact any business of a type for which this chapter requires a license, or to carry on any business for which a license is required, however briefly or however transitorily, without first obtaining a license to do so, under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, whether based in the city or elsewhere, made liable for obtaining a business license under this chapter, to fail to show the license or a copy thereof to any police officer within a reasonable time after the making of a demand therefor by the police officer. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to pay the license fees required by this chapter by the date on which such payments are due. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-18) 
Sec. 10-30. - Late payment penalties. 
(a)  Should any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date of the tax or fees, the person liable for the tax or fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee. 
(b)  Any occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee which becomes delinquent shall bear interest from the date of delinquency on the unpaid amount at 1.5 percent per month or 18 percent per annum. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 301(B); Ord. of 2-6-2012) 
State Law reference— When payment due, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty and interest on default in payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 10-31. - Defense to prosecution. 
(a)  It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this chapter for failing to obtain a business license before engaging in business, that a license has in fact been issued in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  It shall be presumed that no license has been issued unless at his trial the accused produces in court his currently valid business license or a certified copy thereof. In no event shall the claim by the accused that he has been issued a currently valid business license which has been lost be sustained unless that person shall have first reported the alleged loss to the city clerk and made demand for the issuance of a new license. The report of loss or demand for issuance of a replacement license must have been made prior to the arrest for the violation for which the accused is charged. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-19) 
Sec. 10-32. - Owner and manager both punishable for violations. 
In the event that a business is being conducted without a license, both the person owning the business and the person in charge of the management of the business in the city may be held liable for the violation of the provisions of this chapter, and upon conviction, either or both may be punished as provided for in section 10-29. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-20) 
Secs. 10-33—10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-51. - Required. 
Every business in this city or person doing business or engaged in business within the city is hereby required to have a business license from the city for the privilege of engaging in a business, profession or occupation within the corporate limits, unless city licensing is prohibited under state law or the activity is exempted by this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-2) 
Sec. 10-52. - Separate businesses. 
In the case of a business conducted at more than one store, location or place, each store, location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this chapter, and a separate license shall be required for each. Should more than one business on which a business tax is levied by this Code be conducted in or in conjunction with one place or kind of business, each business shall be separately licensed under this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-3) 
Sec. 10-53. - Casual and isolated activity. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, nothing herein contained shall be interpreted so as to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, which involve personal assets only and activities and transactions are not the principal occupation of the individual, to obtain a business license and pay a fee therefor. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-8) 
Sec. 10-54. - License not issued to persons indebted to city. 
No license shall be issued to any applicant who has any outstanding indebtedness to the city, including but not limited to property taxes, business license fees, business taxes, utility bills and any other taxes or assessments. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-10(c)) 
Sec. 10-55. - Applicability to transient and temporary businesses. 
Transient and temporary businesses shall pay any fees or taxes provided for in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-4) 
Sec. 10-56. - Special daily business license. 
In lieu of obtaining a business license as provided in this chapter, a person not maintaining a fixed place of business in the city may obtain from the city clerk a special daily business license which shall expire at 12:00 midnight of the day for which it is issued. A new license shall be obtained for each day on which any type of business is to be conducted. Any person desiring to engage in a business licensed under this section shall obtain a license prior to engaging in business on the day for which the license is issued and pay all license fees and business taxes required under this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-9) 
Sec. 10-57. - Special provisions for disabled veterans. 
All disabled veterans desiring to enter business without paying city license fees or business taxes must present a state disability license to the city clerk whereupon a city license will be issued and marked "FREE" on the face of the same. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-17) 
Sec. 10-58. - Licensing does not confer right to engage in business. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in that business. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-10(g)) 
Secs. 10-59—10-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 10-90. - Time for application processing. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all license applications shall be approved or disapproved within ten days of filing with the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-10(f)) 
Sec. 10-91. - Application form; due date. 
(a)  Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this Code shall submit an application for the license to the city clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this Code. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted before the last day of April of each year or within ten days of opening a new business or reopening of a business under a new ownership. 
(b)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
(2)  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
(3)  Kind and class of business to be carried on; 
(4)  Names and home addresses of the partners if a partnership; 
(5)  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors if a corporation; 
(6)  Any information as may be required by the city clerk for the purpose of determining the amount of any business taxes to be collected under this Code; and 
(7)  Any additional information which the city clerk may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter of the Code, which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state or federal government other than minor traffic violations. 
(c)  Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-4(1)—(3)) 
Sec. 10-92. - Evidence or qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certifications of qualifications, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(c)  Each person or business operating within the city must show proof of a business license in the state prior to conducting business within the city. If proof is not shown, the city shall levy a fee of $100.00 for obtaining proof of said license. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 302) 
State Law reference— Municipal licensing and taxation of businesses, trades and professions licensed by state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-18. 
Sec. 10-93. - False statements grounds for revocation. 
False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license or denial of the application. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-4(5)) 
Sec. 10-94. - Fees. 
Any application, license and registration fees as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council or business taxes required under this Code shall accompany the application. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-4(6)) 
Sec. 10-95. - Denial by city clerk; appeal. 
(a)  The city clerk shall review the application to ensure that it is complete and meets all requirements provided in this and any other chapters. If the application is proper, the city clerk shall proceed as provided in this division. 
(b)  If, however, the city clerk determines that the application is not in order or any requirements for the license have not been met, then the city clerk shall deny the application and immediately provide written notice of the denial and the grounds therefor to the applicant. 
(c)  The applicant may appeal the denial to the mayor and council within ten days of the denial notice being issued. The mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within ten days of the appeal being filed with the city clerk. The mayor and council, within ten days of the hearing, may order the license granted with or without conditions or may affirm the denial of the application. The decision shall be based only upon a finding by the mayor and council that the city clerk was correct or erred in the interpretation of the regulations involved or the facts of the case. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-10(e)) 
Sec. 10-96. - Review by designated city officials. 
If any provision of this Code provides for the review of an application for a license by a city officer designated therein, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the application to that officer. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return the recommendation to the city clerk after receiving a copy of the application. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-10(a)) 
Sec. 10-97. - Submission to city council. 
Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer, or upon the receipt of the application, if no reviewing officer is designated, the city clerk shall forward the recommendation and application to the mayor and council for consideration and action at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, if approval by the mayor and council is required. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-10(b)) 
Sec. 10-98. - Issuance. 
Upon the express approval of the mayor and council, when so required, or otherwise upon a determination by the city clerk that the application is in order and all requirements have been met, the city clerk shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-10(d)) 
Sec. 10-99. - Display of licenses. 
All persons shall exhibit and display all licenses issued to them under this Code in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at which address the license was issued. Any transient or nonresident person, firm or corporation doing business within the city shall carry the license either upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-11) 
State Law reference— Duty to post license in place of business, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-23. 
Sec. 10-100. - Duration of license. 
Any license referred to in this chapter shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. Licenses issued to transient and temporary businesses shall be valid for a period of 180 days. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-7) 
Sec. 10-101. - Renewal of licenses. 
Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the city clerk no later than April 30 of each calendar year, which application may require substantially the same information as the initial application. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-12) 
Sec. 10-102. - Change of address. 
Any person licensed hereunder moving from one location to another shall notify the city clerk of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the city clerk no later than the day of moving. The same business license will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to other requirements of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-14) 
Sec. 10-103. - Transfer of licenses. 
(a)  Business licenses shall not be transferable except as provided in this section. In the event that the owner of a business holding a currently valid, paid-up business license should sell or transfer the business to another person, the purchaser of the business shall obtain free of charge a new license in his name for the balance of the current term of the seller's business license upon making application to the city clerk, and the purchaser shall be punishable for violation of this chapter if the transfer of the business license provided for in this section is not made before the transferee begins to engage in the business. 
(b)  At the date of renewal of the seller's business license, the buyer must obtain a new annual business license and pay all license fees and business taxes required by this Code and comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and all ordinances in the same manner as if he had been the original owner of the business. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-15) 
Sec. 10-104. - Issuance of replacement licenses. 
In the event that the city clerk is notified that the licensee has lost his copy of the license, he shall make a new copy upon showing by the licensee that the required fees have been paid. In addition, the licensee shall be charged a replacement fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. Replacement licenses shall be signed by the city clerk and shall indicate the time and date upon which issued. The possession of a replacement license shall not be a defense to any charge of violation of this chapter except a charge made after the time of the issuance of the replacement license. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-16) 
Sec. 10-105. - Revocation; suspension. 
(a)  Violations of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of a business registration. The provisions and requirements of this article shall be enforced by injunctions. 
(b)  The mayor and council after affording the licensee a five-day notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this Code to have been violated by the licensee, his agent, or employee in the operation of the business, revoke any and all city licenses in their entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation or place other conditions thereon as the mayor and council may deem necessary after a hearing thereon. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-13; Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 401(A)) 
Secs. 10-106—10-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8; limitations on imposition of regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 

Sec. 10-124. - Purpose. 
Regulatory fees paid by businesses or practitioners are to defray cost for investigations or inspections of such businesses or practitioners as a protection to the public health, safety, or welfare or in the course of enforcing, a state or local building, health, or safety code. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 206) 
Sec. 10-125. - Imposed. 
A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on the following businesses: 

 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 202(A)) 
Sec. 10-126. - Amendment. 
The regulatory fee schedule may be amended to add businesses or practitioners by resolution by the mayor and council as needed. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 202(B)) 
Secs. 10-127—10-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATION TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations in a county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6; taxes on businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7; prohibited practices in levying tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 

Sec. 10-152. - Purpose and scope. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 206) 
Sec. 10-153. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in tax. 
The mayor and council may in subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development. Such exemptions or reductions shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the council. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 402) 
Sec. 10-154. - Administration; director. 
The director appointed by the city council shall administer and enforce the levy, assessment, and collection of the occupational taxes imposed by this article. The city clerk and chief of police, or either of them, are designated as director for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 102) 
Sec. 10-155. - Tax levy based on number of employees. 
(a)  An occupational tax is levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the incorporated areas of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in this state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner, as follows: 

 
(b)  The number of employees shall include full-time and full-time equivalent working for the business. A "full-time" employee is an employee who works 40 or more hours per week. Each part-time employee shall count as one-half an employee for occupational tax purposes. The owner and other family members working for the businesses, whether paid or not, shall be included in this count. 
(c)  The number of employees shall be determined by the average number of employees of a business for the four previous quarters of operation of a business year. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 201) 
State Law reference— Taxation of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 10-156. - Tax levy based on business location. 
(a)  Wherever a business or occupation is conducted at more than one location or place within the city, each such location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  An occupation tax is hereby levied on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in this state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial effort within the jurisdiction of or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those real estate brokers, agents, or companies, whose offices are located outside the city and sell property in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 203) 
Sec. 10-157. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government exempted. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 205) 
Sec. 10-158. - Insurance companies. 
(a)  Generally. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $25.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) of this section, operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $25.00. 
(b)  Insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location for each year. 
(c)  Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies and brokers. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount of $20.00 for each such location within the city. 
(d)  Gross premiums tax on life insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Gross premiums tax upon all other insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
(f)  Due date. License fees imposed in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall be due and payable on February 1 of each year. The due date for gross premiums tax imposed in this section shall be as provided by state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-30) 
State Law reference— License fees of insurance companies generally, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-3; county and municipal corporation tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county and municipal corporation tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; municipal authority to impose license fee on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 38-8-8. 
Sec. 10-159. - Proration for new businesses. 
When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax and regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year will be 50 percent (or one-half) of the tax imposed for the entire year. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 301(C)) 
Sec. 10-160. - Due date. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, all occupation taxes and regulatory fees levied by this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1 and shall be delinquent if not paid by March 1. In the event that a person commences business on any date after January 1 in any year, the tax shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business for that part of the year remaining. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § 301(A)) 
State Law reference— When payment due, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty and interest on default in payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Secs. 10-161—10-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND CANVASSING 

Sec. 10-191. - Registration required. 
Any person peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the city shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-2-1) 
Sec. 10-192. - Registration fee; application for identification card. 
Any person desiring to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city shall pay to the city clerk or his designated representative a registration fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and shall make application with the chief of police for an identification card which shall show payment of the registration fee and the days that the registrant has registered to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-2-2) 
Sec. 10-193. - Exhibition of registration card. 
Each registrant shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the registration card and shall exhibit the same when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this registration card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-2-3) 
Sec. 10-194. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit after sundown within the fire zone of the city, without having registered with the city clerk in accordance with this article, or without having on his person and in his possession an identification card issued in accordance with this article. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-2-4) 
Chapter 12 - COURTS AND JAILS 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1; elections and primaries generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.; November election, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-9; registration of voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq.; selection and qualification of candidates, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-130; subversive persons not to be nominated or elected, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-7; persons convicted of certain crimes not to be eligible for nomination or election to public office or to serve as primary or election official, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-8; qualifications and oath of election officers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-214. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 14-19. - Election officials. 
The mayor and council shall by resolution as needed appoint a municipal election superintendent, election managers, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-2-1) 
State Law reference— Superintendents of elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70 et seq.; powers and duties of municipal superintendents, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70.1; poll officers, election managers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-90 et seq.; clerks, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-91; compensation of poll officers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-98. 
Sec. 14-20. - Polling place. 
The polling place shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-2-5) 
State Law reference— Selection of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265; public buildings to be used as polling places where practicable, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-266. 
Sec. 14-21. - Voter registration deadline. 
The deadline for registration of voters in city elections shall be at 5:00 p.m. on the day 15 days prior to the date of the election. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-2-2) 
State Law reference— Registration of voters generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq.; qualifications of electors, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-216; rules for determination of residency, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-217. 
Secs. 14-22—14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANDIDATES 

Sec. 14-46. - Notice of candidacy; filing dates. 
Notices of candidacy shall be filed by candidates for offices of the city council not sooner than 45 days prior to the election in the case of a general election and not sooner than 30 days prior to the election in the case of a special election. The deadline for filing the foregoing notices of candidacy shall be 22 days prior to the election in the case of a general election and 15 days prior to the election in the case of a special election. Notices of candidacy shall be filed in the office of the municipal election superintendent during normal business hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-2-3) 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
Sec. 14-47. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election for the office of mayor or city councilmember, shall be three percent of the annual compensation of the office sought, which fees shall be received by the municipal election superintendent at the time of filing the notice of candidacy and paid over to the city by the municipal election superintendent. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-2-4) 
State Law reference— Qualification fees, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-19; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; war on terrorism local assistance, O.C.G.A. § 36-75-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Doing business refers to any building contractor that: 
(1)  Has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the incorporated areas of the city, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the incorporated areas of the city expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  Performs the following activities or services in the incorporated areas of the city expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Essential officers and employees means and refers to the mayor, constitutional officers, the police chief, policemen, police and other dispatchers, emergency medical service providers, road department employees and code enforcement personnel. All other city personnel are nonessential employees. 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the city on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the city pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
Local emergency or emergency situation means an actual or potential condition during any emergency situation where there exist conditions of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of the city caused by natural disasters, riots, civil disturbances, or other situations presenting major law enforcement and other public safety problems, which conditions or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of either the city police department or the county sheriff's department to combat, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing that are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing were offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the state emergency management agency. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The term "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months from the date that the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the city council. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations a particular zoning district. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-3-1; Ord. of 5-5-2007, § 2; Ord. of 5-5-2008, § 2; Res. of 3-12-2009, § II; Ord. of 3-18-2009, § II) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 16-2. - Pre-disaster hazard mitigation plan. 
(a)  The county pre-disaster hazard mitigation plan is hereby adopted as the official plan of the city. The respective officials identified in the strategy of the plan are hereby assigned to implement the recommended actions assigned to them in the plan. These officials will report as directed in the plan on their activities. 
(b)  The county pre-disaster hazard mitigation planning committee will provide progress reports, as directed in the plan, to the city council, on the status of the implementation of the plan. 
(Res. of 5-5-2008) 
Secs. 16-3—16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 16-23. - Joint emergency management agency established; director nominated; duties. 
(a)  By agreement with the governing officials of the city and county, the city and county have established the Lincoln County Emergency Management Agency. 
(b)  The chairperson of the county board of commissioners shall nominate, with the advice and consent of the mayor, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a local emergency management director. 
(c)  Upon appointment, the local emergency management director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, a county emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the city and county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activities, etc.). 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operations center staff during periods of emergency under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Res. of 3-12-2009, § III; Ord. of 3-18-2009, § III) 
Sec. 16-24. - Personnel and department affiliations. 
(a)  The joint county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions and department and agency assignments, approved by city and county officials, are as follows: 

 
*(P) indicates Primary; 
(S) indicates Secondary; 
PIO indicates Public Information Officer. 
(b)  Heads of city departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures to the emergency operations plan for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes or standard operating procedures will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local emergency operations. 
(Res. of 3-12-2009, § IV; Ord. of 3-18-2009, § IV) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of emergency management personnel, oath, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-34. 
Sec. 16-25. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency, the chairperson of the county board of commissioners with the mayor, or, in their absence, their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the county or city, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims, and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
(Res. of 3-12-2009, § V; Ord. of 3-18-2009, § V) 
State Law reference— Powers of local governments regarding emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 16-26. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to the joint emergency operations plan, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Res. of 3-12-2009, § VI; Ord. of 3-18-2009, § VI) 
State Law reference— Immunity of emergency management personnel, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-35; rights, privileges, and immunities of emergency aid workers, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-30. 
Secs. 16-27—16-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-56. - Continuity of city operations; essential and nonessential employees. 
To promote civil stability and to provide basic services to the city in the case of emergencies or hazardous inclement weather it is essential that the city be able to maintain an adequate workforce. Toward that end, the following rules shall apply during any state of emergency declared by authorized federal, state, county, or city officials: 
(1)  Essential employees shall be required to report to work at their regular shift unless called in early by their immediate supervisor or the mayor. 
(2)  The mayor, in consultation as necessary with city department heads and county emergency management officials, shall decide whether to open the city hall and other city work facilities. It shall be their responsibility to notify city officers if city hall is to be closed. If city hall is open, all employees in all offices are expected to report for their assigned shift. If city hall is not opened for business at the regular opening hour, all employees are required to check in periodically for updates. Employees will not be paid for regular hours that city hall is not in operation. 
(3)  Any employee not able to report for their assigned shift may take annual leave for those hours. If an employee reports for work and is then sent home by the closing of the courthouse the employee will be paid for the remainder of the day. 
Sec. 16-57. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. 
(2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of the city, or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of the city. 
(3)  To wear, carry or display, without authority, any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
State Law reference— Authority for local rules and regulations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 
Sec. 16-58. - Meetings of city council. 
Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. The presiding officer or any two members of the council may call such meetings without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2008, § 1(1)) 
State Law reference— Operation of local governing authority during emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 16-59. - Suspension of public bid requirement for purchasing and public works contracts. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the appropriate federal, state, or county official, or upon the determination by the city council or its designee of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2008, § 1(2)) 
Sec. 16-60. - Suspension of Code enforcement. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the appropriate federal, state, or county official, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2008, § 1(3)) 
Sec. 16-61. - Reduction or suspension of fees. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2008, § 1(4)) 
Sec. 16-62. - Temporary dwelling structures permitted. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the city planning and zoning department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2008, § 1(5)) 
Secs. 16-63—16-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS OR SERVICES 

Sec. 16-83. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the city has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the city. 
Sec. 16-84. - Presumption of overcharging. 
The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
Secs. 16-85—16-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CURFEW 

Sec. 16-112. - Institution of curfew. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the appropriate federal, county, or state official or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor, may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the city. The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
Sec. 16-113. - Applicability of curfew. 
All of the territory of the incorporated city limits shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
Sec. 16-114. - Compliance with curfew required. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of incorporated city limits during the stated hours of the curfew. 
Secs. 16-115—16-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES 

Sec. 16-142. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the city as required shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the city without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2007, § 5) 
Sec. 16-143. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the city, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the city and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 16-144. - Registration. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the incorporated areas of the city during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the city or such other person designated by the governing authority at the city hall or such other place or places designated by the city. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the city council with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 16-145. - Fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are as established by the city council. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 16-146. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the city or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2007, § 6) 
Sec. 16-147. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2007, § 7) 
Sec. 16-148. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The city council hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other city, county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the city desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, and shall have the right to be represented by counsel and to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2007, § 8) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; control of water pollution and surface water use, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20; Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-440 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local ordinance governing land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD PREVENTION AND CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods which are inadequately elevated or floodproofed, or are otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 18-20. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 18-21. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 18-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. Accessory structures are not exempt from any requirements of this article. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the zoning administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the federal emergency management agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community in this article. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before July 6, 2010. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 2, 2009. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the federal Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after July 6, 2010, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced after November 2, 2009 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after November 2, 2009. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction. 
(1)  The term "start of construction" means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. 
(2)  The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include: 
a.  Initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; 
b.  The installation of streets or walkways; 
c.  Excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; 
d.  The installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. 
(3)  For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" applies to structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(3)  For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(4)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the building official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means manufactured home parks or subdivisions in which the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 6) 
Sec. 18-23. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 2, § H) 
Sec. 18-24. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 18-25. - Basis for areas of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated July 6, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated July 6, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for this city are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties, but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the city hall. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 18-26. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 18-27. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 18-28. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 18-29. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the city, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 18-30. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 2, § G) 
Secs. 18-31—18-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18-49. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The mayor and city council is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 18-50. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
(a) Duties of the zoning administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
(3)  Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(4)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(5)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with this article, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(7)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. 
(8)  Obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect when floodproofing is utilized for a structure. 
(9)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(10)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(11)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data and analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(12)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation, as provided in this article. 
(b)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 3, § C) 
Sec. 18-51. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be made to the zoning administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question, the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of this article; 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest-floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 3, § B) 
Secs. 18-52—18-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-76. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  With regard to elevated buildings: 
a.  All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; 
b.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
c.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article: 
1.  The unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
2.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
d.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
e.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
f.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
g.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
h.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
i.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 18-77. - Specific standards applicable to all areas of special flood hazard. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of this article regarding elevated buildings. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in an A1-30, AE, or AH zone may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in this article. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type of utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or meet all the requirements of this article regarding new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(4)  Floodways. Locations within areas of special flood hazard as provided in this article are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. Only if this subsection is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall be considered compliant with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 18-78. - Streams without established base flood elevations or floodway data (A zones). 
(a)  For locations within the areas of special flood hazard established in this article, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the zoning administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions of subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this article related to elevated buildings. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 18-79. - Special flood hazard areas (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
For locations within the areas of special flood hazard established in this article, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 18-80. - Areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in this article may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of this article regarding elevated buildings. The zoning administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as provided in this article. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 18-81. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for the subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 18-82. - Critical facilities. 
Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 4, § G) 
Sec. 18-83. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and city council may appeal such decision to the county superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor and city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  A variance shall be issued only when there is a finding of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(i)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(j)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  The zoning administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(l)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the mayor and city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2009, art. 5) 
Secs. 18-84—18-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the state board of natural resources, a board operating under the state department of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means the portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed by excavation, that is, the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. The term "cut" is also known as "excavation." 
Department means the state department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Lincoln County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan or plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in this article. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means the state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. that addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Lincoln County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State manual means the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission, which is specifically incorporated in this article. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the state manual. 
Surface mining shall have the meaning provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72 of the Mineral Resources and Caves Act. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence or natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the state manual. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § II) 
Sec. 18-111. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Minor land disturbing activities, such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)  Construction of single-family residences, when constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that: 
a.  Construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in this article. 
b.  For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection (a)(4), there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. 
1.  For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. 
2.  Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of this article and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
(5)  Agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the federal department of agriculture. 
(8)  Any project involving 1 1/10 acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection (a)(8), the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways that have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round. Any person responsible for a project which involves 1 1/10 acres or less, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project that is not specifically exempted by this section. 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this article and provided further that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state tollway authority that disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1. 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, provided that any such land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in division 2 of this article. 
(b)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in this article, issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § III) 
Secs. 18-112—18-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-136. - Plans to contain control measures and practices; application and installation. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § IV(A)) 
Sec. 18-137. - Best management practices required. 
(a)  Best management practices as set forth in this article shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. As used in this section, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(b)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity or receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(c)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by an issuing authority or by the division or any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § IV(B)) 
Sec. 18-138. - Conservation and engineering practices. 
(a)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection (a)(9), a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills shall not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible; provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided, however, the buffer requirement of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(1)  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(2)  Any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(c)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer, or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the city council, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
(1)  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(2)  Any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § IV(C)) 
Sec. 18-139. - More stringent regulations may be adopted. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent any issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions that contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § IV(D)) 
Sec. 18-140. - Injury does not constitute proof or presumption of violation of standards. 
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § IV(E)) 
Sec. 18-141. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § IX) 
Sec. 18-142. - Property owner responsible for compliance. 
Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(C)(4)) 
Secs. 18-143—18-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 18-168. - Permit required. 
No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(B)(1)) 
Sec. 18-169. - Separate permit required for each phase of development. 
If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(D)(3)) 
Sec. 18-170. - Review required; permit issued only to property owner. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(A)) 
Sec. 18-171. - Application. 
The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary, including as a minimum, the data specified in this article. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(B)(2)) 
Sec. 18-172. - Fee. 
The fee for land disturbance permits shall be established by the local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(B)(3)) 
Sec. 18-173. - Review by division; exception. 
(a)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. 
(b)  Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(B)4)) 
Sec. 18-174. - Prior violations as grounds for denial. 
If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(B)(5)) 
Sec. 18-175. - Bond. 
The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(B)(6)) 
Sec. 18-176. - Time of issuance. 
Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(D)(1)) 
Sec. 18-177. - Grounds for issuance. 
No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless: 
(1)  The erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district; 
(2)  The issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article; 
(3)  Any required variances have been obtained; 
(4)  Bonding requirements, if necessary, are met; and 
(5)  All ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(D)(2)) 
Sec. 18-178. - Certification of payment of ad valorem taxes required. 
No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the city certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(D)(5)) 
Sec. 18-179. - Notice of reason for denial. 
If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(D)(2)) 
Sec. 18-180. - Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. 
The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(D)(4)) 
Sec. 18-181. - Conditions of permit to be disclosed to successors in title. 
A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(D)(4)) 
Secs. 18-182—18-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-201. - General provisions. 
(a)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements. of this article. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. 
(b)  The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(C)(1)) 
Sec. 18-202. - Data required for site plan. 
The following information is required in all site plans: 
(1)  Notes or narrative, to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(2)  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
(3)  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
(4)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(5)  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
(6)  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, including a statement, in bold letters, that the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities. 
(7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates, and showing options for yearround seeding. 
(9)  Detail drawings for all structural practices in which specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the state manual. 
(10)  Maintenance statement providing that erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times and that additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(C)(2)) 
Sec. 18-203. - Maps, drawings and supportive computations. 
Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
(1)  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
(2)  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
(3)  Boundary line survey. 
(4)  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
(5)  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
(6)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
(7)  Delineation of the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
(8)  Delineation of the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
(9)  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(10)  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following (map scale: 1 inch = 100 ft. or larger scale): 

 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § V(C)(3)) 
Secs. 18-204—18-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-230. - Authority of soil erosion officer; right of entry for inspection. 
The soil erosion officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VI(B)) 
Sec. 18-231. - Refusal to provide entry or access; interference with officer. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VI(C)) 
Sec. 18-232. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity; penalties. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VII(A)) 
Sec. 18-233. - Periodic inspection; notice to correct deficiencies; failure to comply. 
(a)  The soil and erosion control officer will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. 
(c)  If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VI(A)) 
Sec. 18-234. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(b)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(c)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VII(B)) 
Sec. 18-235. - Bond forfeiture. 
(a)  If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. 
(b)  If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VII(C)) 
Sec. 18-236. - Monetary penalties. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person who violates any provisions of this article, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. 
(b)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, state statutes authorize municipal courts to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of city ordinances, state statutes authorize any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under city ordinances approved under this article to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(d)  The following minimum penalties shall apply to land disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this article, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article: 
(1)  There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy; and 
(2)  For all other violations, there shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VII(D)) 
Secs. 18-237—18-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - APPEAL AND REVIEW 

Sec. 18-266. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is: 
(1)  Not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  In violation of permit conditions; or 
(3)  In violation of any ordinance; 
shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VIII(A)) 
Sec. 18-267. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2001, § VIII(B)) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; minimum requirements for local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-20 et seq.; authority of local government units to enact fire prevention regulations, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1; regulation of blasting generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; volunteer firefighters for counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fire code adopted by the city or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in section 1-13. 
(b)  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each seven days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-27) 
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-21. - Established; enforcement of fire code. 
The fire prevention code adopted by the city shall be enforced by the fire department, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-22(a)) 
Sec. 20-22. - Appointment of chief; removal. 
The fire chief in charge of the fire department fire shall be appointed by the mayor and council on the basis of examination to determine his qualifications. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service, and he shall not be removed from office except for cause after public trial. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-22(b)) 
Sec. 20-23. - Inspectors. 
The chief of the fire department is permitted to detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-22(c)) 
Sec. 20-24. - Annual report. 
A report of the fire department shall be made annually and transmitted to the city council; it shall contain all proceedings under the fire code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department decides to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the fire code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-22(d)) 
Sec. 20-25. - Fire chief and members. 
The fire department shall be headed by a fire chief and shall be composed of such other paid and volunteer members and employees as may be determined necessary by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 20-26. - Assistance to be provided by other city officials. 
The chief of the fire department may request and shall receive so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the municipality. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-22(e)) 
Sec. 20-27. - Traffic authority of fire department personnel. 
Whenever the fire department is answering an alarm or operating at the scene of a fire or other emergency, every enrolled member of the department is hereby empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all provisions of this article and any other Code provisions, the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to assist in the control of the fire or other emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-3) 
Secs. 20-28—20-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED ACTS 

Sec. 20-54. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly enrolled member of the fire department shall ride upon the fire trucks of the city at any time, nor use, borrow or interfere with any fire department equipment, or attempt to use the equipment at the scene of a fire unless authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-2) 
Sec. 20-55. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the corporate limits. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-4) 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 
Secs. 20-56—20-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 20-86. - Adoption; enforced by chapter, building and zoning regulations. 
The city's fire code shall be as adopted in section 8-29. The fire code shall be enforced as provided in this chapter and as provided in the city's building and zoning regulations. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-21) 
Sec. 20-87. - Power to make modifications. 
The fire chief shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the intent of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-24) 
Sec. 20-88. - Appeals. 
Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant is permitted to appeal from the decision of the fire chief to the mayor and council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-25) 
Sec. 20-89. - New materials, processes or occupancies which require permits. 
(a)  The mayor and council, the chief of the fire department and the fire chief shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits in addition to those now enumerated in the code. 
(b)  The fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-2-26) 
Sec. 20-90. - Right to enter for inspection. 
The mayor and council, the fire chief and other designated city personnel may enter any premises within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of making inspections or investigations at all reasonable hours; provided that except in cases of emergency, the right and authority conferred by this section shall not apply to the entry of a private residence unless written notice is served on the occupant thereof. Such written notice shall contain a statement of the time that inspection will be made and shall also contain a statement of the purpose of such inspection or investigation. 
State Law reference— Right of certain fire officials and delegees to enter for purposes of inspection, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-22; local inspectors and inspections for building code enforcement purposes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; inspection of fire escapes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-51; municipal duty and authority to conduct fire safety inspections, O.C.G.A. § 25-5-12. 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND WELFARE 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 24 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; local ordinances regarding historic properties and historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Purpose. 
The mayor and city council hereby declare it to be the intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, for the following purposes: 
(1)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
(2)  In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
(3)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
(4)  In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § I) 
Sec. 24-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the mayor and council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in this chapter. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the mayor and council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in this chapter. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § II) 
Sec. 24-3. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § VI(C)) 
Secs. 24-4—24-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 24-25. - Established. 
The city has established a historic preservation commission, which is part of the planning mechanisms of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § III(A), (B)) 
Sec. 24-26. - Members; qualifications; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and council and ratified by the council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(b)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions, and at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. 
(c)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. 
(d)  Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § III(C)) 
Sec. 24-27. - Conflicts of interest. 
The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state law and this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § III(F)) 
Sec. 24-28. - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the mayor and city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Recommend to the mayor and city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts as the mayor and city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the mayor and city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the office of historic preservation of the state department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the mayor and city council without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the office of historic preservation of the state department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the mayor and city council enter into agreements to do the same. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § III(D)) 
Sec. 24-29. - Authority to adopt rules and standards; meetings; officers. 
The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § III(E)) 
Sec. 24-30. - Authority to receive funding. 
The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § III(G)) 
Sec. 24-31. - Acquisition of property. 
The commission may, where such action is authorized by the mayor and city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(M)) 
Sec. 24-32. - Records. 
A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § III(H)) 
Secs. 24-33—24-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-53. - Preliminary research. 
(a)  The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city, and present to the mayor and city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(b)  Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the mayor and city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
(1)  A physical description; 
(2)  A statement of the historical, cultural architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
(3)  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
(4)  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
(5)  Representative photographs. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(A)) 
Sec. 24-54. - Criteria for designation of historic districts; boundaries; classification. 
(a)  Criteria. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, that: 
(1)  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value of interest; 
(2)  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
(3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(b)  Boundaries . Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the city's official zoning map. 
(c)  Classification. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as contributing (contributes to the district), noncontributing (does not contribute but does not detract from the district), and intrusive (detracts from the district). 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(B)) 
Sec. 24-55. - Criteria for designation of historic property. 
A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the state, or the nation for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, the state, or the region; 
(4)  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(C)) 
Secs. 24-56—24-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 24-84. - Application for designation. 
Designations may be proposed by the mayor and city council of the city, the commission, or: 
(1)  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
(2)  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(1)) 
Sec. 24-85. - Alteration or demolition of property during designation process. 
If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property and to prohibit any alteration or demolition thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(9)) 
Sec. 24-86. - Public hearing; publication and service of notice. 
(a)  The commission and the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(3)) 
Sec. 24-87. - Notice to state of pending designation proceeding. 
No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(4)) 
Sec. 24-88. - Recommendation of commission. 
A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(5)) 
Sec. 24-89. - Approval or rejection by city council. 
Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the mayor and city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or may reject the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(6)) 
Sec. 24-90. - Form of designation ordinance. 
Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
(1)  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
(2)  Set forth the names of the property owners; 
(3)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(4)  Require that the property or district be shown on the city's official zoning map and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(2)) 
Sec. 24-91. - Notice of designation to property owners. 
(a)  Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(b)  A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(7)) 
Sec. 24-92. - Notice of designation to city and state agencies. 
The commission shall notify all necessary city and state agencies of the ordinance for designation. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § IV(D)(8)) 
Secs. 24-93—24-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 24-113. - Required for material change in property or district. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(A)) 
Sec. 24-114. - Application, plans and supporting documents. 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission, as further set forth on the application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(B)) 
Sec. 24-115. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of application for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangements or uses having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(C)) 
Sec. 24-116. - Technical advice. 
The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(D)) 
Sec. 24-117. - Public hearing. 
(a)  The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the county and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the proposed property. 
(b)  The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
(c)  The commission shall give the property owner and applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(E)) 
Sec. 24-118. - Criteria for approval or rejection of application by commission. 
(a)  Generally. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(b)  Criteria applicable to all alterations. The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the criteria set forth in this section. 
(c)  Criteria for proposed new construction, reconstruction, alteration and renovation. For reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation, the commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and landscaping as further specified in the design guidelines for the city, and to the federal Secretary of Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
(d)  Criteria for proposed relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
(1)  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting; 
(2)  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
(3)  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
(4)  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
(e)  Criteria for proposed demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by: 
(1)  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object; 
(2)  The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
(3)  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
(4)  Whether the building, structure, site or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the county; 
(5)  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
(6)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site or object from collapse; and 
(7)  Whether the building, structure, site or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(F)) 
Sec. 24-119. - Undue hardship. 
(a)  When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to these provisions, or to interpret the meaning of these provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these provisions, or that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. 
(b)  In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. 
(c)  An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(G)) 
Sec. 24-120. - Deadline for approval or rejection; issuance of certificate. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building, structure, site, or object located within a historic district. 
(b)  Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(c)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(H)) 
Sec. 24-121. - Notice and record of rejection of application. 
In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(I)) 
Sec. 24-122. - Suggestions for modification; reapplication. 
The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproved of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(I)) 
Sec. 24-123. - Rejection binding on building official; no building permits issued. 
In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure that would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(I)) 
Sec. 24-124. - Duration; void if construction delayed; renewal. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(K)) 
Sec. 24-125. - Recording. 
The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(L)) 
Sec. 24-126. - Compliance with certificate requirements; enforcement. 
(a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(b)  The mayor and city council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(J)) 
Sec. 24-127. - Appeal to council; judicial review. 
(a)  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the mayor and city council of the city. Any such appeal must be filed with the mayor and city council of the city within 15 days after the issuance of the determination or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for commission action. 
(b)  The mayor and city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination of the commission if the city council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decision of the mayor and city council may be taken to the county superior court in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § V(N)) 
Secs. 24-128—24-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 24-153. - Owner required to perform ordinary maintenance and repair. 
Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 and, at the direction of the mayor and city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § VI(B)) 
Sec. 24-154. - Certificate not required for ordinary maintenance or repair. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 5-2-1994, § VI(A)) 
Chapter 26 - LAND USE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1; city and county development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; city and county zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local zoning proposal review procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning and service delivery by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land, buildings and structures within the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 1-2) 
Sec. 26-2. - Purposes. 
The intent of this chapter is to establish a precise and detailed plan for the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. In furtherance of this general intent, the city establishes minimum standards for the use of land and improvements thereon. The zoning requirements and districts herein established are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
(2)  To guide development in accordance with existing and future needs; 
(3)  To provide adequate light and air; 
(4)  To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(5)  To facilitate economical and adequate provision of public facilities such as transportation, water, sewerage, education, recreation, sanitation, and other public requirements; 
(6)  To avoid undue concentration of population; 
(7)  To sustain the stability of neighborhoods; 
(8)  To protect property against blight and depreciation; 
(9)  To conserve the value of land and buildings; 
(10)  To secure economy in governmental expenditures; and 
(11)  To encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 1-4) 
Sec. 26-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building or use means one that is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or use, is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use served, is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use, and is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. 
Alley means a platted service way, but not a public right-of-way, providing a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration of building means any addition to the height, width, or depth of a building or structure; or any change in the location of the exterior walls. 
Amendment means any repeal, modification, or addition to these zoning regulations; or any change in the numbers, shape, boundary, or area of a district on the zoning map, or any repeal or abolition of any part thereof, or addition thereto. 
Apartment, garage, means a dwelling unit erected above a private garage. 
Applicant means the owner of land, or a designee authorized by the owner, submitting an application for development or rezoning. 
Automobile sales lot means a lot that is used principally for the storage and sale of complete and operable automobiles. 
Automobile service station means any land use, building, or structure primarily for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail, of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories, but not including major work such as motor overhaul, body and fender repair or spray painting. 
Automobile wrecking means a lot where three or more vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored, or any building or structure used principally for wrecking and storage of automobiles not in running condition. 
Billboard means any sign or advertisement used as an outdoor display by the painting, posting, or affixing on any surface of a picture, emblem, words, figures, numbers, or letters, such sign or advertisement being remote from the point of sale. 
Block means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity of the development of a subdivision. 
Bond means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the city council. All bonds shall be approved by the city council wherever a bond is required by these regulations. 
Buffer means a portion of a lot set aside for open space and visual screening between land uses to minimize conflicts between them. 
Buildable area means that portion of any lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with the regulations governing the given zoning district within which the particular lot is located, once the various front, side and rear yard requirements required for the land use have been subtracted from the total area. 
Building means a structure built, maintained, or intended for use as a shelter for persons, animals, or property of any kind. Where independent units with separate entrances are separated by common walls, each unit is a separate building. The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
Building area means the total areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average established grade at the building line to the highest point of the structure. 
Building line means a line, other than a lot line, used to regulate the location of a building or structure in relation to the abutting street or streets. 
Building official means the office or person duly appointed or authorized by the mayor and city council to enforce the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or municipal regulation related to building and construction. The term "building official" includes the building official's designees and alternates appointed by the city council including, but not limited to, the city building official. 
Building setback, front, means the minimum allowable distance between the front property line and the front of a building or structure on a lot. The front setback applies to and extends the full width of the lot. 
Building setback line means a line beyond which no foundation, wall, eave, or other part of any building shall be built, altered, or maintained, unless specified exceptions are made elsewhere in these regulations. 
Building setback, rear , means the minimum allowable distance between the rear property line and a building or structure on a lot. The rear setback applies to and extends the full width of the lot. 
Building setback, side, means the minimum allowable distance between the side property line and a building or structure on a lot. The side setback applies to the full depth of a lot. 
Building site means the ground areas of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
Child care center, family, means a private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than 24 hours a day, without transfer of legal custody, three but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
Child care center, group, means any place operated by any person or group wherein are received for pay not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for care and supervision less than 24 hours day. 
Club, lodge, civic or fraternal organization means buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational, religious, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Communications tower means a tower of any size, which supports communication equipment (transmission or receiving) utilized by commercial, government, or other public and quasi-public users. The term "communications tower" does not include antennas for private home use or satellite dish and television antennas or amateur radio operators as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, and excluding those used exclusively for dispatch communications. 
Conditional use means a use of property not permitted as a matter of right, but which may be permitted upon the imposition of conditions related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use; height, setback and other non-use requirements; and physical improvements to the property and infrastructure serving the property. A conditional use must be approved in the same manner as a rezoning request prior to the issuance of a permit. 
Construction plan means the maps and drawings accompanying a subdivision plat or plan which shows the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the mayor and city council as a condition of the approval of the plat or plan. 
Convenience gas station means buildings and premises where gasoline and oil may be dispensed at retail. Uses permissible also include the sale of cold drinks, package foods, tobacco and similar convenience goods for station customers. 
Corner lot means any lot bounding the intersection of two streets or located upon the inside of a curve of a street where the corner interior angle is less than 135 degrees. 
Customary home occupation means a business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain or support by any occupant of a dwelling and located entirely within a residential building, or a structure accessory thereto, which use is accessory, incidental, and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and does not change the essential residential character or appearance of such building. 
Design standards means the standards that set forth specific improvement requirements. 
Detention pond means a pond constructed for the temporary storage of runoff water where the opening for release is of a relatively fixed capacity and not manually operated. 
Developer means the owner or owners (or their representative) of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development. Also, the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
Dwelling, multi-family, means a building designed for and used as a residence for three or more families, and consisting of three or more separate dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a structure, including a site-built, modular or manufactured home (a mobile home is not a single-family dwelling), that contains one dwelling unit designed for residential use exclusively by one family that is surrounded by open space on the same lot. All single-family dwellings shall meet the appearance standards as provided in this chapter. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a building containing two housekeeping units and designed or used to house two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit means a structure or a portion of any structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels, motels, boarding houses or like uses. 
Easement means a right or privilege in the owner of one parcel of land by reasons of such ownership to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property interest in the owner. 
Engineer means a registered, practicing engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Escrow means a deed, a bond, money or a piece of property delivered to a third party to be delivered by him to the grantee only upon fulfillment of a condition. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship and not more than two unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit. 
Frontage means the distance along which the property abuts one side of a street, roadway, highway, or right-of-way. 
Garage means a building or structure used, or intended to be used, for the parking and storage of motor vehicles. 
Grade means the slope of a road, street, or other public way, specific in percentage terms from the horizontal. 
Health department means the health department duly authorized to perform health services in the city. 
Hotel means a building or group of buildings used, or intended to be used, for the provision of daily lodging of persons for compensation. 
Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage system, or any other sewage treatment device. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Such building must bear the insignia of approval issued by the commissioner of the department of community affairs. 
Junkyard means any lot or structure used for a salvaging operation, including but not limited to, the storage and sale of wastepaper, scrap metal, and building materials, and the collection, demolition, dismantling, storage, and salvage of automobiles or other vehicles or other machinery and parts thereof. 
Lot means a parcel or plat of land occupied by or designated to be developed for only one principal building or use and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to such building, use, or development, including such open spaces and yards as designated or required by this chapter for such building, use, or development. The word "lot" includes the words "plot," "parcel" or "tract". 
Lot area means the computed ground area inside lot lines. 
Lot coverage means the computed ground area occupied by buildings within a lot. 
Lot depth means the average distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
Lot frontage means the distance between the side lot lines measured at the street right-of-way line. 
Lot improvement means any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object, or improvement situation on a lot. 
Lot lines means the boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley or adjacent lots. 
Lot of record means a lot that is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court. 
Lot width means the average distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to those side lot lines. 
Maintenance guarantee means any security which may be required and accepted by the city to ensure that necessary improvements will function as required for a specific period of time. 
Manufactured home or mobile home means any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which: 
(1)  In the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or 
(2)  When erected on site, is 320 or more square feet; and 
(3)  Is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; 
except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Manufactured home community means a contiguous parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of three or more manufactured homes for residential occupancy in accordance with this chapter. 
Map or zoning map means the official zoning map of the city. 
Master sewerage plan means the long-range, master plan for the development of a public sewerage system as adopted by the mayor and city council. 
Mini-warehouse means a one-story building or series of one story buildings with separate enclosed areas available for rent for the storage of personal goods. 
Motel means a building or group of buildings used, or intended to be used, for the provision of daily lodging of persons for compensation, with a provision for direct vehicular access to each unit. 
Nonconforming lot means a lot existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (and not created for the purposes of evading the restrictions of this chapter) that does not meet the minimum area requirements of the district in which the lot is located. 
Nonconforming situation means a situation that occurs when, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, any existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one or more of the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among other possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum height limitations, because the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback requirements) is not in conformity with this chapter, or because land or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by this chapter. 
Nonconforming use means a use or activity that was lawful prior to adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning districts. 
Nonresidential subdivision means a subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial use. 
Occupied or used, as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the terms "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
Off-site means any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
Off-street loading space means the area required to load or unload goods or other material plus the necessary driveways and maneuvering areas. 
Off-street parking space means the area required to park one automobile plus the necessary driveways and maneuvering areas. 
Open space means a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of both land and water within the designated development and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of the development or for the general public, not including streets or off-street parking areas. 
Parking lot, accessory, means a parcel of land used by an individual, partnership, firm or corporation in any commercial or industrial district exclusively for the parking of vehicles of its employees or customers and for which no charge is made. 
Parking lot, public, means a parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces which may include partially enclosed one-story buildings, and where a charge is made for storage or parking of vehicles. 
Parking space means an area of appropriate dimensions of not less than 200 square feet, not exclusive of access or maneuvering area, or ramps or columns etc., to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for private motor vehicles. Truck loading and unloading space shall not be included in such area. When the application of a unit of measurement for parking spaces to a particular use or structure results in a fractional space, any fraction under one-half shall be disregarded and fractions of one-half or over shall be counted as one space. 
Paved-way width means the shortest distance as measured from curb face to curb face or, if without curbing, as measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement. 
Performance guarantee means any security that may be accepted by the city as a guarantee that the improvements required as part of an application for development are satisfactorily completed. 
Permitted use means a use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Personal care home means any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. 
Personal services includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. 
Planned unit development (PUD) means a development project comprehensively planned as an entity with an overall site plan which permits flexibility in building siting, mixtures of land uses, and the provision of open spaces. A PUD shall be primarily residential in character. 
Plat, final, means the plat submitted to the mayor and city council for final approval and subsequently to be recorded with the clerk of the county superior court. 
Plat, preliminary, means that plat or layout of a proposed subdivision submitted to the mayor and city council for approval prior to submission of the final plat. 
Portable sign means any sign, by design or construction, intended to be easily and readily relocated and not permanently affixed to the ground, a frame, a building or other structure. Portable signs shall include, but are not limited to, signs mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier, or other nonmotorized mobile structure with or without wheels. 
Principal building means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot or tract of land on which such building is located. 
Principal use means the primary use of land or structures as distinguished from a conditional use or accessory use. 
Private recreation facilities means a facility such as a swimming pool, tennis court, community center, beach, boat dock or basketball court which is an accessory use located on residential lots, the use of which is restricted to the occupants of the principal use and guests for whom no admission or membership fees are charged. 
Private street means a private access from a public street to land abutting on the right-of-way thereof; a road not maintained or owned by the city. 
Public means any land or building owned, used, or maintained by the federal, state, city or local governments or their agencies. 
Public improvement means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
Public sewerage means a sanitary sewerage system for the collection of waterborne wastes complete with a sewerage treatment plant or stabilization pond. The entire system must be either operated by the city or have been approved by the city. 
Public utility means an activity, or a building housing an activity, which operates to serve the community as a whole or a portion of the community, and which is publicly run or subject to special government controls. 
Radial lot means an irregular (pie-shaped) lot fronting on a curved street, and which is formed by its side lot lines being established along the course of a radius from the axis of the street curve. 
Right-of-way line means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, storm or sanitary sewer main, shade trees, or for another conditional use and owned by a city or municipality. 
Road plan means any legally adopted plan for the future development or classification of major streets and roads in the city. 
Setback means the distance between a building and the lot line nearest to the building. 
Shopping center means a group of three or more commercial establishments planned, developed, and managed as a unit with off-street parking provided on the property. 
Shoulder means that portion of a street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface or the curb to the inside edge of the ditch, gutter, or original ground surface. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street or road available exclusively for pedestrian traffic. 
Sign means every outdoor advertising device, billboard, poster panel, freestanding ground sign, roof sign, projecting sign, pylon sign, illuminated sign, sign painted on a wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy, and includes any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration, or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is placed in view of the general public, traveling along a public street right-of-way. 
Sketch plat or site plan means a generalized map prepared by the developer that shows the development concept. Its purpose is to serve as a basis for discussion before the subdivision process begins without either the building official or the developer making commitments. 
Street means, relates to, and includes streets and avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, and other ways. 
Street, arterial, means those streets indicated as such on the zoning map, with traffic signals or stop signs at major and minor intersections that collect and distribute traffic to and from collector streets. 
Street, collector, means those streets indicated as such on the zoning map, which serve as feeders to an arterial or a major street, as collectors of traffic from minor streets and for circulation around a residential neighborhood. 
Street, cul-de-sac, means a land service street that terminates in dead-end turnarounds and not intended for future extension. 
Street grade means the grade of the curb or centerline of a street measured at any point along the street. 
Street, local, means a street used primarily in residential subdivisions for access to abutting properties as opposed to the collection and dispersion of traffic. 
Street, major, or highway means those streets indicated as such on the zoning map, which serve primarily as major traffic ways for travel, used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic, through and within the city. 
Street width means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Subdivider means any person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under these regulations, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under these regulations. 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all such division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision. 
Surveyor means a registered, practicing surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Temporary sign means a nonpermanent sign lasting for a limited time other than a portable sign as defined herein. 
Use means the activity or function that actually takes place or is intended to take place on a lot. 
Used or occupied . See Occupied or used . 
Utility facilities means any aboveground structures or facilities (other than buildings, unless such buildings are used as storage incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities) owned by a governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public utility for any purpose under state law and used in connection with the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals. 
Utility facilities, neighborhood, means utility facilities that are designed to serve the immediately surrounding neighborhood and that must, for reasons associated with the purpose of the utility in question, be located in or near the neighborhood where such facilities are proposed to be located. 
Variance means an alteration of the development standards of this chapter where such alteration will not be contrary to the public interest, convenience and welfare, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property of which the applicant for the variance has no control, a literal enforcement of this chapter would create unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Yard means an unoccupied area of a lot, open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Yard, front, means an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a depth measured horizontally at right angles from the front lot line to the front of the structure. 
Yard, rear, means an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a depth measured horizontally at right angles from the rear lot line to the rear of the structure. 
Yard, side, means an open space extending along the side line of a lot between the front yard and the rear yard and of a width measured horizontally at right angles from the side lot line to the side of the structure. 
Zoning administrator means an individual appointed by the mayor and city council to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Zoning district means a specifically delineated area or district within the city in which the requirements of these regulations govern the use, placement, spacing and the size of land and buildings. 
Zoning change means an action by the city council causing a change in the boundary of a zoning district so as to change the zoning designation on a property. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 2-1, 2-2) 
Sec. 26-4. - Applicability. 
Except as otherwise provided, no structure or land shall be used after the adoption of these zoning regulations, and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or moved, unless in conformity with the requirements herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-1.1) 
Secs. 26-5—26-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-27. - Time for processing applications for permits and certificates. 
The building official shall approve or deny the application for a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or sign permit within five business days of receipt of the application and all required materials. The applicant shall be notified in writing of either the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application within five working days after such decision is made. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-2(a)) 
Sec. 26-28. - Conditional approval. 
Conditional approval shall require that the conditions and reasons therefor be stated in writing and be agreed to by the applicant. Such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-2(b)) 
Sec. 26-29. - Reapplication and appeal. 
If an application for a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or sign permit is denied by the building official, the applicant may reapply to the building official provided that the applicant overcomes, to the satisfaction of the building official, the causes for the previous disapproval. The applicant may also, with or without reapplication, institute appeal proceedings. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-3(c)) 
Sec. 26-30. - Records of applications, permits and certificates. 
Records of applications for building permits, building permit approvals and denials, records of plats and plans in connection with said permits, records of applications for certificates of occupancy, certificate of occupancy approvals and denials shall be kept on file in the office of the building official and shall be furnished upon request to any person interested in the building, structure, or land involved. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-7) 
Secs. 26-31—26-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 26-49. - Required; time for making application; penalties for noncompliance. 
(a)  Any person or corporation intending to build or have built a house or other structure having a roof or to build an addition to a house or structure within the city, shall make application to the city at least five days before beginning work for a permit to erect the building or structure. The application shall state: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the proposed building or structure; 
(2)  The size, material and location of the proposed building or structure; and 
(3)  Whether the work is done under contract or by the day's work, and, if by contract, the name of the contractor. 
(b)  No person or corporation, contractor or builder shall begin the erection of any building structure within the city without a permit therefor as hereinbefore provided. Any violation of the terms of this section in refusing or neglecting to obtain a permit shall result in the person, upon conviction thereof, being punished as provided in section 1-13. Each day's work without a permit shall be a separate offense. In addition, if a permit is not purchased before constructions begins the permit fee shall be doubled. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-1-1(a), (c)) 
Sec. 26-50. - Inspection of site and report of building official. 
(a)  The building official shall inspect the site of the proposed building or structure with reference to: 
(1)  Its encroachment on the streets and alleys; 
(2)  Danger to adjacent buildings or structures; and 
(3)  Other conditions and circumstances as the building official deems necessary to ensure that the structure complies with all city zoning and building regulations. 
(b)  The building official shall report to the mayor and council his approval or disapproval of the permit, and, if he disapproves, submit his reason for disapproval in writing. 
(c)  In the event of the disapproval of the building official, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council, and upon the approval of that body, the building official shall issue the permit. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-1-1(b)) 
Sec. 26-51. - Cancellation of permit for delay in beginning or completing construction; exception. 
If the construction for which a building permit is issued is not begun within six months of issuance of the permit, the permit shall be canceled. If construction will take longer than six months to begin, the person requesting the permit can avoid cancellation by having a water meter installed and paying the minimum water bill until construction is completed. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-1-1(g)) 
Sec. 26-52. - Site plan. 
The applicant shall submit a plat drawn to scale showing the following items in sufficient detail to enable the building official to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration is in conformance with this chapter: 
(1)  The shape, size, and location of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)  The shape, height, use and location on the lot of buildings or structures to be erected or altered; 
(3)  The sizes, locations, and use of all existing buildings or structures on the lot; 
(4)  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, if any; 
(5)  The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots; 
(6)  The layout of off-street parking spaces; 
(7)  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-5.1) 
Sec. 26-53. - Issuance. 
If the application conforms to the provisions of this article, the city building codes and other ordinances of the city, the building official shall issue a permit upon payment of the required fee. If not, the building permit shall be refused by the building official stating such refusal in writing with the cause. The building permit shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The block or street number of the lot to which the permit applies; 
(3)  The zoning district in which the property is located; 
(4)  Whether the permit authorizes excavation, construction, moving, or alteration and the type of structure being built or placed on the lot; 
(5)  The date of the application; 
(6)  The signatures of the applicant and the building official. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-5.2) 
Sec. 26-54. - Display of permit. 
Before commencing excavation, construction, moving, or alteration, the building permit, or copy thereof, shall be placed in a conspicuous location on or near the front of the property for the duration of the excavation, construction, moving, or alteration, and in such a manner that it is protected from the weather. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-5.2) 
Secs. 26-55—26-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 26-82. - Required. 
No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in its use shall be occupied or used until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-6.1) 
Sec. 26-83. - Issuance. 
Within three days after the application for a certificate of occupancy is received on the form provided for that purpose, the building official shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the building, structure, or land, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city then in force, and complies with the plans submitted for the building permit. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-6.2) 
Sec. 26-84. - Grounds for denial. 
A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of the building, structure, or land, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city then in force, and complies with the plans submitted for the building permit. The building official shall state in writing the reasons for denying such certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-6.3) 
Secs. 26-85—26-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-112. - Classes of districts. 
The city is divided into the following classes of districts or zones: 
(1)  Residential zoning districts: 
a.  R-1—Single-family residential. 
b.  R-2—Multi-family residential. 
c.  RMH—Manufactured home residential. 
(2)  Nonresidential zoning districts: 
a.  D-1—Future development. 
b.  P-1—Professional. 
c.  C-1—General commercial. 
d.  C-2—Highway-oriented commercial. 
e.  I-1—Industrial. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 12-1) 
Sec. 26-113. - Purpose of districts. 
(a)  Single-family residential (R-1). The purpose is to establish a low-density, single-family residential district and to protect property in this district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
(b)  Multi-family residential (R-2). The purpose is to establish a medium to high-density residential district and to protect property in this district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
(c)  Manufactured home residential (RMH). This zoning district provides residential areas with low population densities for manufactured home communities and manufactured homes not meeting the definition for dwelling, single-family, in section 26-3. 
(d)  Future development (D-1). The purpose is to establish a district on the fringe of urban growth where the predominant character of development has not yet been fully established, but where the current characteristics of use are primarily agricultural and residential. As urban growth continues, demand will grow for amendments to remove land from the future development district and place it in more intensely developed zones. However, the intent of the future development district is to reserve the bulk of the land for agricultural and low-density residential uses. 
(e)  Professional (P-1). This district is established to provide areas for the development of structures for professional services that complement the character of adjacent districts. This district is not intended to accommodate general and highway-oriented commercial uses or residential uses, but rather to serve as a transition between more intensely developed commercial areas and residential districts. 
(f)  General commercial (C-1). This district is intended to be a general commercial zone to provide a wide variety of commercial and service facilities. 
(g)  Highway-oriented commercial (C-2). This district is intended to be utilized by those commercial uses that serve community and regional shopping needs as well as the traveling public. These commercial uses occupy relatively large sites and require access to major thoroughfares. It is intended that this district be located at major road intersections. 
(h)  Industrial (I-1). This district is intended to provide areas for industrial uses and related activities such as wholesaling, warehousing, and storage, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects of industrial uses. This district is not intended to accommodate general commercial uses or residential uses. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 12-1.1—12.1.8) 
Sec. 26-114. - Official zoning map. 
The boundaries of the various districts shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. The official zoning map is hereby made a part of this chapter, and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be a part of this chapter as if set forth herein. The official zoning map, as adopted by the mayor and the city council and subsequently amended from time to time, shall be maintained as so revised by the zoning board. The zoning board shall interpret the zoning map and answer questions concerning district boundary lines and lot lines. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 12-2) 
Sec. 26-115. - Completion of existing buildings. 
(a)  Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of a building actually under construction at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; provided, however, that such building and use thereof was lawful under the zoning ordinance as may have existed when construction or use commenced. 
(b)  If any amendment to this chapter is hereafter adopted changing the boundaries or districts or changing the provisions of this chapter with regard to buildings or uses legally existing, or to buildings legally under construction or to building permits legally issued in the area affected by such amendment at the time of the passage thereof, such amendment shall not cause such use to be terminated or bar the occupancy of such building unless provided by other proceedings at law. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-1) 
Sec. 26-116. - Existing lots. 
Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or his successors in title thereto, does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the required dimensions in this chapter, such lot may be used as a building site provided that yards are established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as applied to the district where the lot is located. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-2) 
Sec. 26-117. - Public utilities and public services. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as to limit or interfere with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance for public utility purposes of water and gas pipes, mains and conduits, electric light and electric power transmission and distribution lines, telephone and telegraph lines, oil pipe lines, sewer mains, incidental appurtenances and substations where permanent personnel will not be required. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-4) 
Secs. 26-118—26-147. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 26-148. - Resolution of conflicts. 
(a)  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any aforementioned districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise shown on the zoning map, the boundary lines of districts or zones are lot lines, street centerlines, creeks and streams, railroad rights-of-way. 
(2)  Where the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundary. 
(b)  Where the boundary lines of districts or zones do not coincide with lot lines, the centerlines of streets, creeks and streams, railroad rights-of-way, or the incorporated city limit line, such district or zone boundaries shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 12-3.1) 
Sec. 26-149. - Boundary changes. 
(a)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed in the official zoning map, changes shall be made on the official zoning map by the zoning board promptly, after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the final authority as to the current zoning status of land in the city shall be the official zoning map as adopted and amended by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 12-3.2) 
Secs. 26-150—26-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-167. - District lot area, yard and height standards. 
All requirements of this chapter regarding lot size, building size and building placement on the lot for each zoning district shall be met in addition to and as supplemented by the following table: 
Zoning District, Area, Yard and Height Requirements 

 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 13-1) 
Sec. 26-168. - Public street frontage. 
No building shall be erected on a lot that does not have immediate frontage of at least 50 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 13-1.1) 
Sec. 26-169. - Permitted and conditional uses. 
(a)  No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in this chapter. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the schedule of uses. 
(b)  A permitted use is a principal use permitted as a matter of right, and a conditional use is a principal use allowed only if a conditional use permit is granted by the zoning board. For uses not included on this list, where the building official is unable to determine clear placement, application shall be made to the zoning board for interpretation. 
Schedule of Uses 
(P=Permitted Use; C=Conditional Use) 

 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 13-2) 
Sec. 26-170. - Special conditions for corner lots. 
(a)  Required width. Corner lots shall be 20 percent wider than interior lots in order to meet minimum front yard requirements on all sides adjacent to a street. 
(b)  Vision clearance. On any corner lot, no fence, sign, or other structure, planting, or other obstruction to vision over three feet above the established street grades shall be erected or maintained within the line connecting points on the street right-of-way line 15 feet distant from the corner. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-7) 
Sec. 26-171. - Residence above a first floor permitted use. 
A single-family dwelling unit is permitted as a conditional use above a ground floor permitted use in the C-1 and C-2 commercial districts with the approval of the city council and provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  No outside mailboxes are permitted. 
(2)  Daily or weekly boarding rooms are prohibited. Only full-time renter or owner-occupied dwelling units are permitted. 
(3)  No drying of clothes is permitted on the outside of any building. 
(4)  Entry to the unit or to a hallway serving one or more units shall be provided by a stairway opening directly to the outside, except where the owner occupies both the ground level and the upper floor residential apartment, then entry may be through the ground floor. 
(5)  No recreation, entertainment, public gathering or placement of furniture is permitted on the sidewalks unless permitted by the mayor and council. 
(6)  No garage sales or yard sales are permitted. 
(7)  A separate trash container approved for residential use for each dwelling unit with its location approved by the city shall be furnished by the lot owner. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-13) 
Sec. 26-172. - Satellite dish antennas. 
A satellite dish antenna shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A satellite antenna dish with a diameter 13 feet or larger must be located behind the rear building line and outside the side yard setback. 
(2)  A satellite dish antenna 18 inches or smaller shall not be located on the dwelling front yard wall or on any front yard roof plane. A satellite dish antenna may be located on a backyard roof plane, backyard dwelling wall or side yard dwelling wall. 
(3)  If a satellite dish antenna cannot be located as per the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section to receive an adequate signal, said satellite dish antenna may be located as necessary on the satellite dish antenna owner's property to facilitate adequate reception. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-8) 
Secs. 26-173—26-197. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUFFERS 

Sec. 26-198. - Required; exception. 
A buffer shall be required whenever two adjoining properties are in different zoning districts. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a parcel along all lot lines adjoining different zoning which may be separated by an existing or proposed public right-of-way. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing dedicated or reserved public or private street right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-10) 
Sec. 26-199. - Commercial and industrial districts. 
In any commercial or industrial zoning district, where a commercial or industrial lot abuts any adjacent nonconforming residential use within that district, the required buffer for the commercial or industrial property when acquiring a building permit, unless the buffer was pre-existing, shall consist of a 50-foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a 20-foot base width consisting of plantings plus a wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory building), fence or a berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-10.1) 
Sec. 26-200. - Between adjoining residential, commercial and industrial uses. 
(a)  When two adjoining properties are in different residential, commercial or industrial zoning districts, the property within the zoning district allowing for more intensive uses is required to provide the buffer when acquiring a building permit unless an approved pre-existing buffer exists and complies with all requirements of this article. When two adjoining vacant parcels are in different zoning districts, no buffer is required when the parcel zoned for the less intensive use acquires a building permit. 
(b)  The required buffer shall consist of a 50-foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a 20-foot base width consisting of plantings plus a wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory building), fence or a berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-10.2) 
Sec. 26-201. - Between adjoining manufactured home communities, multi-family residential and single-family residential uses. 
(a)  When two adjoining properties are different in intensity of use (single-family residential is a less intensive use than either a multi-family residential or a manufactured home community), whether in the same or in different zoning districts, the property of the more intensive use is required to provide a buffer when acquiring a building permit unless the buffer was pre-existing. 
(b)  The required buffer shall consist of plantings or a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory building), or a berm, which meets the screening standards in this chapter. If plantings are used as the method of screening, the planting area shall have a minimum base width of 12 feet. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-10.3) 
Sec. 26-202. - Maintenance responsibility. 
The responsibility for maintenance of buffers shall remain with the owner of the property. Any required plant that has expired shall be replaced. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-10.4) 
Secs. 26-203—26-227. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SCREENING 

Sec. 26-228. - Screening methods. 
Screening is a method of visually shielding one use from another by walls, fence, berms or densely planted vegetation. The building official shall make a determination as to whether the required screening has occurred. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-12) 
Sec. 26-229. - Height of fences and walls in a residential zoning district. 
No fence or wall, other than a retaining wall, in a required setback area for a residential zoning district shall be more than six feet in height above finished grade, except as required for screening defined in sections 26-230 through 26-233. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-9) 
Sec. 26-230. - Plantings. 
(a)  Plantings shall consist of either trees or shrubs or any combination of both. Planted areas shall be located along the abutting property lines or in areas that provide the best screening effectiveness. 
(b)  If trees or large shrubs are used solely as the screening device, under normal growing conditions, they should attain a minimum growing height of eight feet and a canopy spread of ten feet within four years. They shall be planted a minimum of 20 feet on center. 
(c)  When trees or large shrubs, are used in conjunction with a wall, fence or a berm, or combination thereof, to form the required screening, the minimum sufficient opaqueness shall be held to require no less than three feet of trees or shrubs in the area immediately adjacent to the wall, fence or a berm. This is to be measured along the ground surface from the fence to the inside border of said plantings. They should attain a minimum growing height of eight feet and a canopy spread of ten feet within four years. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-12(a)) 
Sec. 26-231. - Walls. 
Walls shall be of masonry construction and a minimum of six feet in height, but no greater than eight feet in height. The wall shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intense use of land. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-12(b)) 
Sec. 26-232. - Fences. 
Fences shall be a minimum of six feet in height, but no more than eight feet in height. They shall be constructed of standard wood fencing material or methods of chain link with woven inserts that will provide 90 percent visual blockage. The fence shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intense land use. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-12(c)) 
Sec. 26-233. - Berms. 
Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of six feet. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-12(d)) 
Sec. 26-234. - Screening of service areas. 
Any service area, loading area, refuse or storage area between a principal building and a public street being visible from said street and lying within 100 feet of said street shall be provided with screening consisting of not less than a 20-foot base width consisting of plantings plus a wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory building), fence or a berm, or any combination thereof, which meet the screening standards of this division. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-11) 
Secs. 26-235—26-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - OFF-STREET PARKING 

Sec. 26-262. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide regulations to ensure safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians on public and private streets and to minimize nuisances from on-street parking. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-1(a)) 
Sec. 26-263. - General requirements. 
(a)  Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot, tract or parcel on which any permitted use or conditional use is established in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  No structure hereinafter may be erected nor shall any of the following uses be established unless the minimum number of parking spaces as required below are provided. 
(c)  Each parking space shall be at least 200 square feet exclusive of area need and interior circulation and shall have access for vehicles to a public space. 
(d)  Parking lots of more than five vehicles shall provide sufficient turning to prevent cars from backing into the street. 
(e)  Spaces for persons with handicaps shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 USC 12101 et seq. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-1(a)) 
Sec. 26-264. - Location on other property. 
If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be provided on the same lot where the principal use is located, the zoning board may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided that such property lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-1(b)) 
Sec. 26-265. - Extension of parking space in residential districts. 
Required parking space may extend up to 100 feet into a residential district, provided that the parking space adjoins a commercial or industrial district and has its only access on the same street as the property for which it serves and is separated from abutting residences by a planted buffer strip as established in division 4 of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-1(b)) 
Sec. 26-266. - Number of required spaces. 
In addition to the number of spaces required by the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 USC 12101 et seq., off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a public street, and it shall be equal to or greater than the minimum requirements for the specific use set forth below: 

 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-1(c)) 
Sec. 26-267. - Uses not specified. 
In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in this division, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be determined by the zoning board. Such determination shall be based upon the requirements set forth for the most comparable use specified in this division. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-1(d)) 
Sec. 26-268. - Variance by zoning board. 
The zoning board may, at its discretion, reduce the minimum number of parking spaces required for a specific use, provided that sufficient evidence is presented justifying the need for reduction in the requirements and every effort has been made to provide off-street parking in accordance with the stipulations of this division. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-1(e)) 
Secs. 26-269—26-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - OFF-STREET LOADING 

Sec. 26-300. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide regulations to ensure the adequate provision of off-street loading and unloading space. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-2(a)) 
Sec. 26-301. - General requirements. 
Every building or structure or lot used for business, trade, or industry shall provide space as established herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or alley. Such space shall have access to a public street or alley. Such space shall be arranged so that no vehicle is required to back into a public street, road or highway in order to leave the premises. Specific space requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Retail business services: ten percent of the floor area. 
(2)  Wholesale and industrial: five percent of the floor area. 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals: sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks that will be stored and loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 18-2(b)) 
Secs. 26-302—26-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 26-321. - Customary home occupation defined. 
A customary home occupation is a gainful occupation or profession conducted by members of a family residing on the premises and conducted entirely within the dwelling. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-5) 
Sec. 26-322. - Permitted home occupations. 
The following customary home occupations, subject to the requirements of the definition provided in this division, are permitted as customary home occupations: 
(1)  Barbershops and beauty shops operated by not more than two members of the residence. 
(2)  Artist, dressmaker, seamstress, tailor and interior decorator. 
(3)  The professional office of architect, accountant, lawyer, engineer, doctor or dentist. 
(4)  Teaching, including tutoring, musical instruction, or dancing, but limited to three pupils at a given time. 
(5)  Any similar use which upon review by the zoning board is deemed to be a home occupation by reason or acceptance as a home occupation in the community. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-5) 
Sec. 26-323. - Notice to other property owners required; approval. 
Before a home occupation shall be permitted, property owners within a 1,500-foot radius shall be notified at least 15 days prior to a meeting of the city zoning board, which shall grant a home occupation permit upon showing that this section has been complied with. 
Sec. 26-324. - Grounds for denial of use. 
A home occupation permit may be denied by the zoning board if, in their judgment, such occupation will be hazardous or injurious to the welfare of the community, and that this article has not been complied with. 
Sec. 26-325. - Standards and specifications of use. 
(a)  Generally. Customary home occupations shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The office must be situated in the same dwelling unit as the home of the occupant. 
(2)  The residential character of that dwelling unit may not be changed. 
(3)  There shall be not more than one assistant employed other than the immediate members of the family residing on the property. 
(4)  The necessary functions of the home occupation shall not occupy over 20 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit. 
(b)  Exterior appearance. Dwellings housing customary home occupations shall display no stock in trade outside the dwelling, and no alteration to any building shall indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purposes other than a residential unit, including permitted accessory buildings. 
(c)  Signs. The dwelling may display one nameplate or sign for each dwelling unit, subject to city sign regulations, indicating the name of the occupant or any permitted occupation, excluding flashing or animated types. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-5) 
Sec. 26-326. - Special equipment. 
Where special equipment is used, the building and technical codes of the city shall govern installation, including electrical wiring and plumbing. 
Secs. 26-327—26-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD) 

Sec. 26-356. - Purpose. 
This division is intended to permit greater flexibility in the development of residential areas and establish a review process by the zoning board for such development plans. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.1) 
Sec. 26-357. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each planned unit development shall be subject to independent review and approval by the zoning board. This review process shall conform in general to the subdivision regulations of the city. In addition, the requirements of this section must be met. 
(b)  The developer shall submit a site plan to the zoning board for review and approval. The zoning board shall approve or disapprove the site plan within 30 days after submittal. The site plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Total acreage in the tract proposed for the PUD; 
(2)  Street access and street layout; 
(3)  Arrangement of existing and proposed buildings and structures; 
(4)  Existing and proposed land uses throughout the tract; 
(5)  Topography by contours at intervals of at least five feet and extending at least 200 feet outside the tract; 
(6)  Name, date, north arrow, and graphic scale; 
(7)  A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed PUD to surrounding development; 
(8)  The location and dimensions of off-street parking spaces; 
(9)  The location and size of all proposed utility and storm drainage facilities and solid waste collection points; 
(10)  Such other information as the zoning board may deem necessary because of physical characteristics peculiar to the particular development. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.6) 
Sec. 26-358. - Design standards. 
Planned unit developments provide flexible standards for building siting, mixtures of land uses, and the provision of open space within residential zoning districts. A PUD shall be primarily residential in character, and may include the following: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings; 
(2)  Single-family attached dwellings such as, townhouses, condominiums, and duplexes; 
(3)  Multi-family dwellings; 
(4)  Public or semi-public institutions such as schools, churches, and community or club facilities; 
(5)  Recreational facilities, including swimming pools, golf courses, tennis courts and other recreational facilities intended for the primary use of the residents of the development; 
(6)  Open space; 
(7)  Commercial, retail, and professional uses subject to the following limitations: 
a.  The commercial, retail or professional use is designed to primarily serve the residents of the development. 
b.  The uses shall not have adverse affects on the residential uses within the development or in adjacent developments, or create traffic hazards to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.2) 
Sec. 26-359. - Size of tract; paved public road access required. 
The minimum size of any tract zoned and developed as a planned unit development shall be five acres. Such PUD shall also have permanent, paved access to a public road. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.3) 
Sec. 26-360. - Area limitations. 
(a)  A maximum of five percent of the total area of the development may be devoted to commercial, retail or professional uses. 
(b)  A maximum of 75 percent of the remaining (noncommercial) area of the development may be devoted to residential use. This percentage includes streets, parking areas, private yards and courts, and accessory residential uses. 
(c)  A minimum of 25 percent of the remaining (noncommercial) area of the development shall be devoted to recreational and/or open space. This percentage may include public and semi-public buildings, recreational facilities and buildings, and common open space. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.4) 
Sec. 26-361. - Street access. 
Any building established in connection with a PUD that cannot properly be served by emergency or service vehicles from an abutting street shall be made accessible to such vehicles by a paved driveway with a width of not less than 20 feet, exclusive of parking space. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.5(a)) 
Sec. 26-362. - Off-street parking. 
The off-street parking facilities established in connection with a PUD shall be of such a design that it will not interfere with the safe movement of pedestrians, the efficient flow of traffic, and will not interfere with the access of service and delivery vehicles. The requirements for off-street parking for uses in a PUD shall follow the general off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.5(b)) 
Sec. 26-363. - Separation within development. 
All buildings within a PUD shall be at least 20 feet apart, but at least 40 feet apart when front to front. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.5(c)) 
Sec. 26-364. - Building length. 
In residential buildings, no single row of dwelling units which are physically attached shall be greater than 200 feet in length. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.5(d)) 
Sec. 26-365. - Setback requirements. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, there shall be no minimum lot size, no minimum setbacks, and no minimum lot widths within the PUD; provided, however, that measures are taken to provide reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units. There shall be provided a minimum of a 20-foot buffer between any PUD and adjacent residential areas. Further, each dwelling unit shall have access to a street, walkway, or other common area, and no structure or building shall be erected within 15 feet of any other structures. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.5(e)) 
Sec. 26-366. - Water, sewer and drainage. 
Adequate provisions for water supply, sanitary sewerage, and storm drainage shall be installed by the developer in accordance with accepted engineering principles. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 16-6.5(f)) 
Secs. 26-367—26-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 26-391. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for the continuation and, within a suitable period of time, elimination of existing uses of property that that did not conform to the requirements of this chapter on December 1, 2003. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 17-1) 
Sec. 26-392. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing at the time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter may be continued even though such use does not conform with provisions of this chapter, except that the nonconforming structure or use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Re-established after discontinuance for one year; 
(3)  Extended or enlarged unless such addition is made to conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is located; or 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered, repaired or replaced after incurring damages exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time or condition except in conformity with this chapter. A nonconforming mobile home may not be replaced with another mobile home or manufactured home after it is removed from the property. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 17-2) 
Sec. 26-393. - Temporary nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Application; renewal. An application for a temporary use permit authorizing temporary occupancy shall be submitted to the mayor and city council for approval. Upon approval, such temporary permit shall be issued for a period not exceeding one year. Applicant can seek permit renewal in 12-month increments if necessity continues beyond the initial year. 
(b)  Construction projects. A temporary use permit may be issued by the city for an appropriate period of time not to exceed 12-month increments for nonconforming buildings, structures or uses incidental to and necessary to provide for the preparation of a construction site or the completion of a construction project. The owner of such temporary nonconforming use must agree to remove the temporary use upon expiration of the permit. 
(c)  Sick or infirm resident . A manufactured home may be placed on a lot occupied by a permanent building where, for humanitarian reasons, it is necessary to provide for the care of a sick or infirm immediate family member on that lot. Once the necessity for such use terminates, the manufactured home must be removed within 45 days. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 17-4) 
Secs. 26-394—26-416. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-417. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide standards and regulations to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. The city recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of city residents for affordable housing and is compatible with site-built housing if developed in accordance with comparable standards. These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes on single lots within the incorporated limits of the city. It is the intent of this article to empower the building official and the city tax commissioner to review and issue, if all requirements are met by the applicant, the appropriate permits and decals for manufactured homes within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-1(a)) 
Sec. 26-418. - Recreational vehicles excepted. 
(a)  The requirements of this article do not apply to recreational vehicles because they are not acceptable for permanent occupancy and may be used for a maximum of 90 consecutive days as a temporary residence. All recreational vehicles must display a current state license plate sticker before movement. Building permits will not be issued for recreational vehicles. 
(b)  Permanent connection of recreational vehicles to water, sewer or electrical service is prohibited. Installation of recreational vehicles on piers and jacks permanently is also prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 14-6, 14-7(c)) 
Sec. 26-419. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Manufactured home or mobile home means any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which: 
(1)  In the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length; or 
(2)  When erected on site, is 320 or more square feet; and 
(2)  Is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; 
except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
New manufactured home means any manufactured home that has not been previously used as a residence, has not been titled, and complies with the current standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. Compliance shall be evidenced by presence of a HUD certification label and manufacturer's data plate in accordance with 24 CFR 3280, Manufactured Homes Construction and Safety Standards. 
Pre-owned/used manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. Compliance shall be evidenced by inspection by the building official or his designated representative. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-1) 
Sec. 26-420. - Annual location disclosure and decal requirement. 
Every person, firm, corporation, or other entity holding title to or possessing a manufactured home that is placed or located within the city limits, shall report the location of the home to, and obtain a location decal for said manufactured home from the county tax commissioner annually, no later than April 1 of each year. Such location decal shall be designated in such manner and affixed to the manufactured home in such manner as to cause it to be easily visible for inspection. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-3) 
Secs. 26-421—26-438. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 26-439. - Authority of building official. 
(a)  All applications for manufactured permits under this article shall be submitted to the building official. The building official shall make an investigation of all applicants and shall make a determination regarding the applicant or owner's compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The building official shall render a decision regarding approval or disapproval of the manufactured home permit within 14 days of the building official's receipt of the application and any other documents required under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-6(c)) 
Sec. 26-440. - Appeal to zoning board. 
Any applicant or owner who alleges there is an error in, or who is aggrieved by a decision of the building official in the administration, enforcement, or interpretation of this article, may file a written appeal with the zoning board which states the grounds for such appeal. The zoning board is hereby authorized to hear and decide said appeal. The zoning board reserves the right to establish the process for such an appeal, including creation of forms and other documents. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-6(c)) 
Sec. 26-441. - Penalties. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any owner or person who moves, assists in moving, or transports into the city or moves a manufactured home from one location in the city to another location in the city without a city manufactured home permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
(b)  Any applicant or owner who shall willfully violate any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 per day or more than $1,000.00 per day for each day that such violation has continued or shall continue. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-4(f)) 
Secs. 26-442—26-465. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 26-466. - Building permit required; water and sewer tap fees; inspection. 
Any owner of a manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said manufactured home within the city, shall file an application, together with a fee in the amount established by the city council, for a building permit at city hall. All city water and sewer tap fees must be paid prior to obtaining a building permit. The building official shall inspect the site and shall issue a building permit if the site is appropriate for placement of a manufactured home and the requisite water and sewer fees have been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-4(a)) 
Sec. 26-467. - New homes. 
(a)  Compliance required. No new manufactured home shall be moved into or within the city until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  Location decal. A valid location decal must be obtained from the tax commissioner's office, a copy of which must be forwarded to the building official. 
(2)  Site plan. A site plan for the proposed location of the new manufactured home must be completed, a copy of which must be forwarded to the building official. 
(3)  Application. An application for a new manufactured home permit shall be made on forms developed for that purpose and shall be submitted to the building official for review and approval in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Inspection; issuance of permit. Upon completion of the preceding conditions, the building official shall review and determine whether the proposed new manufactured home is in compliance with the requirements established by this article. The building official shall issue a new manufactured home permit or deny the request after the application has been fully reviewed. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-4(b)) 
Sec. 26-468. - Pre-owned and used homes. 
(a)  Compliance required. No pre-owned or used manufactured home shall be moved into or within the city until the conditions provided in this section have been met. 
(b)  Location decal. A valid location decal must be obtained from the tax commissioner's office, a copy of which must be forwarded to the building official. 
(c)  Application. An application for a pre-owned or used manufactured home permit shall be made on forms developed for that purpose and shall be submitted to the building official for review and approval in accordance with this article. The application for a pre-owned or used manufactured home permit shall be made on forms developed for that purpose and shall be submitted to the building official for review and approval in accordance with this article. 
(d)  Site plan. A site plan for the proposed location of the pre-owned or used manufactured home must be completed, a copy of which must be forwarded to the building official. 
(e)  Transport permit. A transport permit must be obtained from the building official. To obtain a transport permit, an applicant shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Affidavit of compliance with code standards. The applicant must provide a notarized affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned or used manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by the land development code and this article. The affidavit shall be made on forms developed and provided for by the city for that purpose. 
(2)  Bond. 
a.  The applicant must provide a $1,000.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond; such bond shall be by cash, certified check, bank check or money order. 
b.  Upon completion of setup, all required repairs and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, $500.00 of the $1,000.00 guarantee of condition bond will be refunded to the applicant/owner. 
c.  The guarantee of condition bond shall be forfeited in its entirety $1,000.00 should the applicant or owner: 
1.  Fail to complete the necessary corrections required to bring the home into compliance with this article within 90 days of issuance of a manufactured home permit; or 
2.  Fail to demolish or remove from the city within 14 days any pre-owned or used manufactured home which has been declared unsafe for human occupation by the building official. 
(f)  Pre-installation inspection. Upon issue of transport permit an inspection will be completed by the building official at the location in which the manufactured home will be installed to ensure the manufactured home meets the standards established by this article. If the manufactured home does not meet these standards, the building official shall approve or disapprove the manufactured home for installation by written report. The report shall list defects or code violations found during the pre-installation inspection with corrective action required to obtain compliance with this article. Manufactured homes installed or setup on lots or parcels within the confines of the county or city may be inspected on or at the original site prior to relocation to a new lot or parcel. In no case shall any pre-owned or used manufactured home be relocated within the city prior to the completion of the pre-installation inspection. 
(g)  Issuance of permit. Upon determination by the building official that the pre-owned or used manufactured home will meet the minimum manufactured home standards provided in this article, by condition or corrective action to be performed, a manufactured home permit will be issued for the home. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-4(c), (d)) 
Sec. 26-469. - Certificate of occupancy; utility services. 
Utility services such as water, sewer, gas and electricity shall not be provided to any manufactured home until the building official determines that the requirements of this article have been met. The building official shall then issue a certificate of occupancy. No manufactured home shall be occupied or used until after the building official shall have issued a certificate of occupancy therefor. The certificate of occupancy shall be evidence that these regulations have been met, and utility service may then be provided. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 14-2, 14-5) 
Secs. 26-470—26-491. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 26-492. - Minimum standards generally. 
All manufactured homes shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Compliance with HUD code. Every pre-owned or used manufactured home located or relocated in the city shall be in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 USC 5401—5445 (the HUD code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets HUD code. 
(2)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. The bottom board or under board shall be continuous and free of defects. All plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and electrical connections shall be sealed to the bottom board/under board to prevent rodent and insect infestation. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(5)  Heating system. Heating systems shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented fuel-fired space heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Electrical system. Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Aluminum wiring smaller than #6 American wire gauge shall be prohibited. 
(7)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(9)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one working domestic hood system or other ventilation device. 
(10)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-4(e)) 
Sec. 26-493. - Site requirements. 
All manufactured homes must be located on an approved site where the minimum lot size shall be 7,500 square feet. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-6(b)) 
Sec. 26-494. - Utility connections. 
(a)  Permanent connection required. All manufactured homes must be permanently connected to water, sewerage and electrical service. 
(b)  Water. Water service shall be public. Connection procedures must meet the requirements of the city's building and technical codes and must be freezeproof above and below ground. The water connection must be inspected and approved by the building official and the water system must be approved by the county health department. 
(c)  Sewer. Plumbing for sewage must meet the requirements of the city's building and technical codes and any applicable county health department requirements. The sewerage system must be approved by the county health department. 
(d)  Electrical. Electrical service must meet requirements of the city's building and technical codes. Electrical connections must be inspected and approved by the building official prior to authorization to the servicing power company to install permanent power service. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-7(a)) 
Sec. 26-495. - Foundation. 
All manufactured homes must be installed on a pier system, installed with permanent skirting, secured with tie-down devices and provided with steps and landings. The installation of all required foundation requirements must be inspected and approved by the building official. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-7(b)) 
Sec. 26-496. - Pier system. 
Piers or load-bearing supports or devices shall be designed and constructed to evenly distribute the loads. Piers shall be securely attached to the frame of the manufactured home or shall extend at least six inches from the centerline of the frame member. Manufactured load-bearing supports or devices shall be listed or approved for the use intended, or piers shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  Piers less than 40 inches in height shall be constructed of open or closed cell, eight-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch concrete blocks (with open cells vertically placed upon the footer). Single-stacked block piers shall be installed with the 16-inch dimensions perpendicular to the main (I-beam) frame. The piers shall be covered with a two-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch pressure treated wood or concrete. 
(2)  Piers between 40 and 80 inches in height and all corner piers over three blocks high shall be double blocked with blocks interlocked and capped with a four-inch by 16-inch by 16-inch solid concrete block, or equivalent. 
(3)  Piers over 80 inches in height shall be constructed in accordance with this section and they shall be laid in concrete mortar and steel reinforcing bars inserted in block cells with the block cells filled with concrete. 
(4)  All piers shall be placed on footings of solid concrete not less than 16 inches by 16 inches by four inches. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-7(b)(1)) 
Sec. 26-497. - Skirting. 
Installation of skirting shall be required. Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Acceptable materials may include masonry, stone or brick material for the purpose of skirting. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-7(b)(2)) 
Sec. 26-498. - Tie downs. 
(a)  Each manufactured home shall have tie downs or other devices securing the stability of the manufactured home as per installation of manufactured homes and mobile homes rules and regulations established and published by the state safety fire commissioner and O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
(b)  The requirements for units 14 feet and less in width require two types of anchorage: over the top tie downs to restrict overturning and frame tie downs to restrict the unit from being pushed from its piers. The requirements for units over 14 feet in width ("doublewides") require frame tie downs only. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-7(b)(3)) 
Sec. 26-499. - Steps and landings. 
Steps and landings are required for all homes and shall be constructed to the standards set forth in the city's building and technical codes. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-7(b)(4)) 
Secs. 26-500—26-521. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL ZONING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-522. - Permitted locations as single-family dwellings. 
(a)  Permitted locations. Manufactured homes qualifying as single-family dwellings shall be allowed in all locations and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Compatibility standards. Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of a single-family dwelling are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum width in excess of 16 feet. 
(2)  Minimum square footage required by the zone in which located. 
(3)  Roof with a minimum 2:12 (two inches of rise for every 12 inches of run) roof pitch and a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built-up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the building official. 
(4)  Exterior siding materials consisting of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, Masonite, metal or vinyl or other materials of like appearance. 
(5)  Attachment to a permanent foundation. 
(6)  Construction according to standards established either by the state minimum standard codes as amended from time to time for site-build homes or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. for manufactured homes or the state industrialized building regulations, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq., for residential industrialized buildings, provided that each of these codes shall be applicable to the specific structure to which it applies. 
(7)  Removal of all towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches. 
(8)  Landing at each exterior door that is a minimum of 36 inches by 48 inches. 
(c)  Comparison to housing in immediate vicinity. Manufactured homes qualifying as a single-family dwelling shall be compared to site build and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this chapter or existing development or proposed development in the same area. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-8) 
Sec. 26-523. - Permitted locations of other manufactured homes for residential use. 
Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of a single-family dwelling shall be permitted within areas designated as manufactured home communities, subject to the requirements of this chapter. Manufactured home communities are allowed in the RMH district subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 14-9) 
Secs. 26-524—26-554. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUBDIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-555. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 4-1.2, 21-2) 
Sec. 26-556. - Subdivision requirements generally. 
(a)  Sale or conveyance of subdivided land. No person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legal entity, or agent therefor or representative thereof, shall transfer, convey, sell, agree to sell or negotiate to sell any part of a subdivision of land by reference to or exhibition of a plat which has not been prepared, approved and recorded according to these regulations. 
(b)  Submissions to building official. No subdivision shall be approved unless the developer or his agent has submitted to the building official the required fees, plats and plans as described in these regulations, has obtained approval of all plats and plans, including approval of the final plat or plan, by the city council or building official, and the approved final plat is recorded with the clerk or the superior court. 
(c)  Filing and recording. No plat of a subdivision within the city shall be filed or recorded by the clerk of county superior court until the final plat shall have been prepared, submitted to, approved and recorded according to these regulations. 
(d)  Acceptance by city. The city shall not accept any subdivision not designed, developed and recorded in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, nor shall it improve, maintain, grade or pave any street within such subdivision unless such street shall have met the specifications described herein. 
(e)  Unauthorized conveyances. No lot, street, alley, improvement, easement, right-of-way or other property or property right of any kind shall be conveyed, by deed or otherwise, to the city, the city council or other public authority without its express acceptance of such conveyance as indicated by the signature of its authorized agent on such deed or other document of conveyance. 
(f)  Utility services. The city shall not authorize the extension of water service, sewer service, or other publicly operated services of any subdivision not designed, developed and recorded in accordance with the provisions of these regulations or to extend utility services to any parcel created in violation of these regulations. 
(g)  Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor shall the city have any obligation to issue certificates of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel created in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-2) 
Sec. 26-557. - Unsuitable land. 
All land physically unsuitable for subdivision shall not be improved. This includes: 
(1)  Property affected by flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, or other such features which may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply or maintenance of services. 
(2)  Property which other public agencies concerned have investigated and found in the best interest of the public not suitable for the type of platting and development proposed. Such property shall not be approved for subdivision unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for meeting the problems created by subdivision of such property. 
(3)  The mayor and city council shall not approve what it considers to be scattered or premature subdivision of land which would endanger the health, safety and general welfare of city residents or property because of lack of or adverse effect on the city's water supply, schools, drainage, adequate transportation or other public services. 
(4)  The mayor and city council shall not approve a subdivision where the soil conditions have been determined not suitable for development by the city health department pursuant to local, state, and federal laws, regulations and standards. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 4-7, 8-10) 
Sec. 26-558. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of each subdivision must have the approval of the mayor and city council. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-9) 
Sec. 26-559. - Area and setback requirements. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be erected on a lot unless such building or structure, enlargement, additions or alterations conform to the area regulations and setback requirements of the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-2) 
Sec. 26-560. - Reduction of lot area. 
No lot shall be reduced, diminished and so maintained that the yards, other open space or total lot area shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-3) 
Sec. 26-561. - Height, density and lot area. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered to: 
(1)  Exceed the height limit established for the zone wherein such building or structure is located; 
(2)  Exceed the number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family; or 
(3)  Reduce or diminish front yards, rear yards, side yards, or other open spaces; 
unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-4) 
Sec. 26-562. - Yards apply to only one building. 
No part of a yard or other open space or the off-street parking or loading spaces required around any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of the yard or open space or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building or structure. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-5) 
Sec. 26-563. - One principal building on a lot. 
Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereinafter be erected on any lot. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-6) 
Sec. 26-564. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
(a)  If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to the land shall make provision as the mayor and city council may require. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the mayor and city council, and shall conform to the proposed land use standards established in the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the mayor and city council that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  All proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimension to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
(2)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
(3)  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
(4)  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water drainage. 
(5)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
(6)  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential areas. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-8) 
Sec. 26-565. - Subdivision plats not subject to standards and improvements. 
(a)  A subdivision plat that represents four lots or less fronting on a public street shall not be subject to the requirements for improvements and design specified in this article if it meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The original tract for subdivision fronts for a distance of 150 feet on a public street which is identified as such on the official city road map, as adopted by the mayor and city council. 
(2)  The size and zoning classification of each lot resulting from the subdivision shall meet the minimum standards set forth in the city zoning regulations. 
(b)  Platted lots on streets and roads which have been accepted as part of established subdivisions under the minimum standards of this article cannot be further subdivided unless such future subdivision was made part of the original approval of the plat of such subdivision. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-9) 
Sec. 26-566. - Subdivisions on private roads. 
(a)  The subdivision of land abutting on private roads shall be allowed only under exceptional circumstances. Prior to approval, the developer shall furnish proof to the mayor and city council that: 
(1)  Said roads will be maintained in perpetuity as private roads; 
(2)  Each owner of the lots abutting on such road owns as undivided interest in the road; or 
(3)  The developer has ensured by some other method acceptable to the city council that such private roads are not public, not the responsibility of the city, and will be adequately maintained. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall be provided such documents as may be required by them to ensure that the foregoing provisions have been established for the maintenance of such private roads. Such documents shall be in a form suitable for recordation in the office of the clerk of the county superior court and shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(c)  As a condition to approval, the mayor and city council may require that private roads be developed in accordance with all or a portion of the standards in this article. 
(d)  An appropriate permanent sign identifying such roads as private will be erected by the developer or owners at all locations where private roads intersect with public roads. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 4-10) 
Secs. 26-567—26-595. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLAT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 26-596. - Approval required. 
The owner of any land lying within the area of jurisdiction of these regulations who wishes to subdivide such land shall seek plat approval by the mayor and city council according to the procedures provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, art. 5, intro.) 
Sec. 26-597. - Official submission dates. 
The statutory period required for formal approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the preliminary or final plat submittal shall begin on the official submission date. The official submission date for a preliminary plat is the date of the conclusion of the plat hearing before the city council. The official submission date for a final plat is the date of the conclusion of the public meeting for consideration of the plat. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 5-1) 
Sec. 26-598. - Informal consultation. 
(a)  Prior to the review, consideration and approval of a preliminary plat by the mayor and city council, the subdivider may schedule an initial meeting with the building official to discuss the proposed development. The developer may offer a simple sketch plan showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision to the building official. 
(b)  The purpose of the meeting is to assist the subdivider with questions he may have prior to extensive site planning necessary for the preparation of the preliminary plat and to enable the subdivider to become familiar with the regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. 
(c)  Recommendations received from the building official concerning the proposed development or the sketch plan do not authorize the developer to begin the proposed construction or improvements. 
(d)  No fee shall be charged for this informal consultation and no formal application shall be required. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 5-2) 
Sec. 26-599. - Submission of preliminary plat. 
Prior to making any street improvements or installing any utilities, the prospective subdivider shall submit to the mayor and city council a preliminary plat. Approval of the preliminary plat by the mayor and city council constitutes authorization for the subdivider to develop the subdivision subject to the minimum standards for required improvements and design standards. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 5-3) 
Sec. 26-600. - Submission of final plat. 
After approval of the preliminary plat by the mayor and city council, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat and other documents as may be required in connection therewith. No final plat shall be approved by the mayor and city council until either: 
(1)  The required improvements listed are constructed in satisfactory manner and approved by the building official and the mayor and city council; or 
(2)  In lieu of such prior construction, the mayor and city council has accepted an approved bond or security in the amount equal to the estimated cost of installation and completion of the required improvements, whereby improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to the city in the event of default by the subdivider. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 5-4) 
Secs. 26-601—26-618. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 26-619. - Application procedure. 
The application for preliminary approval of a subdivision plat shall be submitted to the building official together with the appropriate fee as determined by the mayor and city council. The building official shall check the plat for conformance to these regulations and report his findings and recommendations to the zoning board. The zoning board shall then review the application for preliminary plat approval and make a recommendation to the mayor and city council who shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat. No preliminary plat shall be approved by the mayor and city council without full compliance with the requirements of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-1) 
Sec. 26-620. - Public hearing. 
Upon receipt of the zoning board's recommendations, the mayor and city council shall call a public hearing for the next scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council to be held at least 30 days after the date of the application. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-2) 
Sec. 26-621. - Public notice. 
(a)  Public notice of the hearing on the application for preliminary plat approval shall be given at least 15, but not more than 45, days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The building official shall file a notice of public hearing which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county setting forth the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Such notice shall identify the property affected. The cost of such newspaper notice shall be paid by the applicant for preliminary plat approval. 
(b)  Additionally, at least 15 days before the scheduled public hearing, the building official shall post in a conspicuous place on the property a sign at least two feet by three feet in size. It shall set forth the time, place and purpose of the public hearing before the mayor and city council. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences limiting the effectiveness of notice by a sign posted on the property shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-3) 
Sec. 26-622. - Approval procedure. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall approve, disapprove or approve with modification, the preliminary plat within 45 days after the date it is presented at the public hearing. The mayor and city council shall consider the recommendations of the zoning board when rendering a decision. If approved, the mayor and city council shall indicate so in writing, stating the conditions of such approval, if any, or, if disapproved, the mayor and city council shall express in writing its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 
(b)  Failure of the mayor and city council to act within 45 days after the preliminary plat is presented at the public hearing shall be deemed to constitute approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the mayor and city council on demand; provided; however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. 
(c)  Preliminary approval of the subdivision plat shall be noted on the plat and certified by the mayor and city council. Also noted shall be the date on which the mayor and city council granted preliminary approval and the date of written notification to the subdivider or subdivider's authorized agent. 
(d)  Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat. Preliminary approval shall constitute approval of the proposed widths and alignments of streets and the dimensions and shapes of lots subject to the final approval of the city health department. Application for approval of the final record plat will be considered only after the requirements for final plat approval as specified herein have been fulfilled and after all other specified conditions have been met. 
(e)  Upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat by the mayor and city council, the subdivider may proceed to comply with the other requirements of these regulations and the preparation of the final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-4) 
Sec. 26-623. - Standards for approval. 
(a)  No preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision shall be recommended for approval by the zoning board or approved by the mayor and city council unless the applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence that: 
(1)  Definite provision has been made for a water supply system that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality to provide an appropriate supply of water for the type of subdivision proposed; 
(2)  If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate provision has been made for such a system and, if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed, that such systems will comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations; 
(3)  All proposed streets on the preliminary plat are in conformity with adopted design standards, and existing and proposed public street improvements; 
(4)  All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve soil or topographical conditions presenting hazards or requiring special precautions have been identified by the subdivider and the proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions; 
(5)  The subdivider has the financial ability to complete the proposed subdivision in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations; 
(6)  There is no other available subdivided land in the jurisdiction of the city that would be more suitable for the applicant's proposed uses of the subdivision; 
(7)  The proposed subdivision will not result in the scattered subdivision of land that leaves undeveloped parcels of land lacking urban services between developed parcels; 
(8)  The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate the impact of the proposed subdivision on public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  The mayor and city council are authorized to disapprove the preliminary plat even though the proposed use is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-5) 
Sec. 26-624. - Public improvements. 
The mayor and city council may require that all public improvements be installed and dedicated prior to the signing of the final subdivision plat. If the mayor and city council does not require that all public improvements be installed and dedicated prior to signing of the final subdivision plat, the mayor and city council shall require that the applicant execute performance and maintenance guarantees. The mayor and city council shall require the applicant to indicate on the plat all roads and public utility improvements which shall be required to be established or extended, and any other special requirements deemed necessary by the mayor and city council in order for the subdivision plat to conform to the city comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-6) 
Sec. 26-625. - Effective period of approval. 
The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year from the date that the preliminary plat is approved by the mayor and city council, at the end of which time the applicant must have submitted a final subdivision plat for approval. If a subdivision plat is not submitted for final approval within the one-year period, the preliminary approval shall be null and void, and the applicant shall be required to submit a new plat for preliminary plat review subject to the then existing subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-7) 
Sec. 26-626. - Plat requirements. 
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and meet the minimum standards of design set forth in these regulations. The plat shall be submitted in not less than five blueline prints and shall be such as to meet the minimum requirements contained herein. The sheet size shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches nor be less that 8½ inches by 11 inches. It shall include the following information: 
(1)  General information. 
a.  Full name of proposed subdivision. 
b.  Name, address, and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer or designer. 
c.  All names and addresses of all property owners of the site. 
d.  All names and addresses of adjoining subdivisions or all deed record owners of the land adjacent to the site. 
e.  Date, scale, and north arrow on map. 
f.  Location or vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile tying the subdivision into the present road system and relating the subdivision to its surrounding area. 
g.  Acreage to be subdivided. 
h.  A written legal description (metes and bounds with all bearing and distances) of the acreage to be subdivided. 
i.  Proper identification of the boundaries of the tract to be subdivided with all bearings and distances indicated. The boundary survey shall be to such a degree of accuracy that the error of closure is 1:7,500 or greater. 
(2)  Existing conditions. 
a.  Topographic map on a scale of one inch representing 100 feet or less and contour intervals of five feet or less, showing major watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, and other outstanding features. 
b.  In case of resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon. 
c.  Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, swamps, and land subject to flood based on a 100-year flood frequency on the property to be subdivided. 
d.  Exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, by bearings and distances; lot lines with approximate dimensions; minimum front building setback line. 
e.  Location of existing buildings on the property to be subdivided. 
f.  Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines, either on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided, with statement as to whether utility lines are in easements or right-of-way and show location of poles or towers. 
g.  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the street or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
h.  The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision. 
i.  All elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. 
j.  Location of city limit lines. 
k.  Location of any wetlands situated on the property to be subdivided. 
(3)  Proposed conditions. 
a.  Layout of streets, roads, alleys, public crosswalks, with widths, road names, or designations, grades and cross sections. 
b.  Profile of proposed streets showing natural and finished grades with percent of grade slope. 
c.  Detailed layout of all lots, including building setback lines, scaled dimensions on lots, utility easements with width and use. 
d.  The layout of the water distribution system showing connections to existing or proposed water supply systems; evidence of approval of the water system plans by city engineer. 
e.  The layout of the sewerage system showing connections to public sewerage systems (where required) and evidence of approval of system plans by city engineer and any other state or local agencies or officers having jurisdiction over such systems (approval of city health officer where on-site disposal is to be used or approval of state water quality control board where private sewerage is to be provided). 
f.  The layout of storm and surface water drainage system and evidence of approval of system plans by city engineer and by the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations of the city. 
g.  Designation of all land (if any) to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
h.  Designation of proposed use of all lots to be used for other than single-family residential (if any). 
i.  Proposed major contour changes to areas where substantial cut and/or fill is to be done. 
j.  A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures. 
k.  Any adjoining areas to be developed at a later date by the subdivider as an extension of or addition to the proposed subdivision as part of a continuing or long-range development plan. 
l.  Total number of lots, total acreage, total length and width of new streets. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-8.3) 
Sec. 26-627. - Certificate of preliminary approval. 
A certificate of approval of the preliminary plat, in the form approved by the building official, shall be inscribed on the plat indicating the building official's approval thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 6-9) 
Secs. 26-628—26-657. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 26-658. - Application. 
(a)  Dedications. The application for final plat approval shall be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government uses, utilities, parks, and easements, in a form approved by the city attorney; and the subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as follows: 
"The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to the local government all the streets, local government uses, easements, parks, and required utilities shown on the subdivision plat and construction plans in accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated ____________ and recorded with the Lincoln County Clerk of Superior Court." 
(b)  Documents for recording. The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed to all dedicated lands and improvements in proper form for recording, together with a title policy for the local government in the sum not less than $10,000.00, which sum shall be determined by the city attorney before signing of the final subdivision plat. 
(c)  Review by building official. The application for final approval of the subdivision plat shall be submitted to the building official, who shall examine the final plat to determine if: 
(1)  It meets all requirements of these regulations; 
(2)  Conforms to the approved preliminary plat; 
(3)  Has approval of the health department; 
(4)  Design of the roads has been approved by the city engineer; and 
(5)  Streets and easements have been dedicated or qualify for dedication. 
The final subdivision plat shall include an original and two duplicate copies prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Review by zoning board. The building official shall then submit the final plat application to the zoning board, which shall review the application for final subdivision plat approval. The zoning board shall then report its recommendations to the mayor and city council, which shall afford a final subdivision plat determination. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 7-1) 
Sec. 26-659. - Determination. 
(a)  Upon the completion of review and recommendation by the zoning board, the city clerk shall schedule the final subdivision plat determination for the next available regular meeting agenda of the mayor and city council. Public notice of final plat determination shall be given at least 15, but not more than 45, days prior to the next available regular meeting. The building official shall file a written notice which shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in Lincolnton setting forth the time, place, and purpose of the announcement. Such notice shall identify the property affected. The cost of such newspaper notice shall be paid by the applicant for final plat approval. 
(b)  At the meeting, the mayor and city council shall review the recommendations of the zoning board. The mayor and city council shall then approve, disapprove or approve with modification, the final plat. If approved, the mayor and city council shall indicate so in writing, stating the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, the mayor and city council shall express in writing its disapproval and its reasons therefor. If the mayor and city council does not act within 45 days of the official submission of the final plat to the mayor and city council, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued by the mayor and city council on demand. 
(c)  Guarantees. The application for final plat approval shall be accompanied by performance and maintenance guarantees, if required by the mayor and city council, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney and in an amount established by the mayor and city council upon recommendation of the city engineer, and shall include a provision of final subdivision plat approval as determined by the mayor and city council, and shall include, but not be limited to, the performance of all required subdivision and off-site improvements, and that all improvements and land included in the irrevocable offer of dedication shall be dedicated to the local government free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the premises. 
(d)  Final plat determination may be approved by the building official provided there are no major changes from the approved preliminary plat. Determination shall be made by the building official as to whether significant changes from the preliminary plat have been made. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 7-1, 7-2) 
Sec. 26-660. - Recording. 
(a)  If approved, a plat shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court upon authentication by the mayor and city council, within 60 days after final approval thereof. Otherwise, such approval shall be withdrawn by the mayor and city council and the superior court clerk shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision until such plat has been approved by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  The plat shall include two blueline prints. The clerk shall enter thereon the filing date, plat cabinet number and slide number. One duplicate copy shall be delivered to the mayor and city council as required. Any person requesting a copy of the recorded plat shall include an extra blue print copy at the time of filing for record. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 7-3) 
Sec. 26-661. - Plat approval not acceptance of dedication offers. 
The approval of a plat by the building official shall not be deemed to constitute or effect the acceptance by the city of any street or other ground shown on the plat. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 7-4) 
Sec. 26-662. - Plat requirements. 
(a)  The final subdivision plat shall be prepared in accordance with accepted professional standards. The final plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and meet the minimum standards of design set forth in these regulations. The plat shall be submitted in not less than five blueline prints and shall be such as to meet the minimum requirements contained herein. The final plat shall contain the following specific information: 
(1)  Name, location and acreage of subdivision; name and address of owner of record and subdivider, name, registration stamp, and signature of the designer and surveyor of the subdivision. 
(2)  The date, north arrow and graphic scale. 
(3)  Name, registration number and seal of registered land surveyor. 
(4)  The total number of lots and average lot size. 
(5)  Vicinity map showing exact location of the subdivision in relation to surrounding area and showing streets or roads at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet. 
(6)  Exact boundary lines of subdivision tract, names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets, the location and ownership of adjoining property. 
(7)  Layout of streets showing street names, rights-of-way, pavement widths, and classifications, street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
(8)  Lot lines with dimensions and bearings, minimum front building setback lines, lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically, area of each lot. 
(9)  Locations, dimensions and purposes of any easements, recreational areas, land to be dedicated for public use, land to be used for purposes other than residential, and land for future development. 
(10)  A statement, either on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
(11)  All dimensions shall be to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and angles to the nearest second. 
(12)  Locations, material and descriptions of monuments and markers. 
(13)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street, lot line, boundary line, front building setback line and block line, whether curved or straight. 
(14)  Floodplain data. 
(15)  A final plat shall be a good legible print, blue, white or other commercial print reproduced from a tracing made in India ink on a commercial grade of tracing cloth, tracing film, or tracing paper with a sheet size of not more than 18 by 24 nor be less than 8½ × 11 inches, leaving a two-inch binding edge. Where more than one sheet is required, an index map shall be required on the same size sheet. 
(16)  Utility easements by widths and locations to include water, gas, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electrical lines and telephone lines. 
(b)  A certificate of approval for recording, a certificate of accuracy, and a certificate of ownership and dedication, in the form approved by the county, shall be placed on an original of the approved final plat by the mayor and city council and that original shall be returned to the subdivider for recording. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 7-5) 
Secs. 26-663—26-682. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-683. - Purpose. 
The purpose of a well-designed subdivision, with all of the necessary improvements, is to create a functional and attractive development, to minimize adverse impact and to ensure a project will be an asset to the community. To promote this purpose, the subdivision shall conform to the following improvement requirements and design standards which are designed to result in a well planned community without adding unnecessarily to development costs. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-1) 
Sec. 26-684. - Monuments. 
The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required in these regulations and as approved by a registered land surveyor. 
(1)  Monuments and lot markers. Numbered concrete monuments, four inches in diameter or square, three feet long with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners, at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at the intersection of curves and tangents along street lines, and at all corners of the plot. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade. All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(2)  Accuracy. Land surveys, both within the limits of incorporated areas and beyond shall be at an accuracy of at least 1:7,500. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-5) 
Sec. 26-685. - Required improvements. 
In order that prospective purchasers may get useable lots and new subdivisions may be an asset rather than a liability to the community, the subdivider shall install and pay for the following improvements required by these regulations necessary to serve the subdivision prior to the approval of the final plat: 
(1)  Natural gas. When gas lines are located in a street right-of-way, where possible, such lines shall be located outside the portion of the street to be surfaced to prevent having to cut into the paved surface to serve abutting properties. 
(2)  Water supply. 
a.  Each subdivision developer shall be required to provide a potable water supply subject to the approval of the city health department. 
b.  Where specifically required by the city engineer, each subdivision developer shall provide the subdivision connection to the city water system. 
c.  When a water system is installed in a subdivision with more than 30 lots, water mains shall provide a minimum flow of water of 500 gallons per minute for four minutes or 250 gallons per minute for two hours at the furthermost point from the tank. Fire hydrants shall be provided at distances not greater than 500 feet apart. When the water main is located in the street to serve the abutting lots a, water service line three-fourths inch in size shall be stubbed-out to the property line to serve each lot before the street is surfaced. When connection to the city water system is not available, the city council may make an exception to this rule. The water system shall then be a permitted community water system as required by the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq. 
(3)  Sanitary sewage. In the areas of the city designated for sewerage service, all subdivision developers shall install a sanitary sewerage collection system. The layout and specifications of the system shall be approved by the city engineer. Where sanitary sewerage collection systems are not specifically required by the city engineer, all lots shall contain adequate area for the installation and safe operation of approved septic tanks and disposal fields, and must be approved by the city health department and other agencies having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(4)  Lighting. In accordance with the requirements of this chapter, lighting requirements necessitate that all public streets, sidewalks and other common areas or facilities in subdivisions created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using such streets, sidewalks and other common areas or facilities. 
(5)  Electricity. Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a source of electric power adequate to accommodate the reasonable need of such use and every lot within such subdivision. 
(6)  Telephone service. Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a telephone service cable adequate to accommodate the reasonable need of such use and every lot within such subdivision. 
(7)  Curb and gutters. Where curb and gutters are required, all new streets shall be constructed by the subdivision developer in accordance with the city's specifications for curb and gutters. 
(8)  Street grading and surfacing. Street grading, base preparation, and surfacing shall be carried out by the subdivider according to plans and specifications approved by the city and/or state department of transportation. Prior to acceptance of the streets as part of the road system, the same must be paved at the expense of the developer and/or owner in accordance with city and state specifications for roads and must be conveyed or transferred to the city upon acceptance. 
(9)  Preparation of right-of-way. 
a.  The full width of all roadways shall be prepared so that pavement and sidewalks (where required) can be constructed in such a manner that future extension of additional utilities or street improvements will not damage yards of abutting property. Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. Due regard shall be shown for desirable trees not impairing visibility. 
b.  Before grading is started, the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the subdivider shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas not paved. 
c.  Immediately after grading and filling and respreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized and seeded (or, in steep areas, sodded or otherwise appropriately treated) with suitable vegetative cover to retard erosion. 
d.  The pavement base shall conform to the city's specifications for such pavement base and shall be approved by the city engineer. 
e.  All new streets shall be surfaced by the developer with paving as required by the city specifications regarding street paving and surface. 
f.  The preparation and development of all new streets shall comply with the city's specifications and shall be approved by the city engineer before such streets may be developed and accepted by the city engineer as well as the mayor and city council. Also, before final plat approval will be issued by the mayor and city council. 
(10)  Storm drainage. 
a.  An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges and other necessary appurtenances shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
b.  All storm drainage systems shall comply with the city's specifications for such systems and shall be approved by the city engineer before such systems may be installed and before final plat approval will be issued by the mayor and city council. 
(11)  Drainage . The preliminary plat and the final subdivision plat, shall include the following: 
a.  A plan showing the acreage of all on-site and off-site drainage areas contributing flow through the project. 
b.  A hydrology report which shall include: 
1.  Minimum design frequency of a 25-year storm; 
2.  Minimum time of concentration of ten minutes; 
3.  Detailed calculations indicating the formula used; 
4.  The coefficient of run-off; 
5.  The time of concentration; 
6.  The rainfall intensity; 
7.  The discharged velocity; and 
8.  The source of all data used. 
c.  Where the drainage area exceeds 150 acres, two formulas shall be used and the average of the two submitted. 
(12)  Fire hydrants. 
a.  Every development subdivided or unsubdivided that is served by a public water system shall include a system of fire hydrants sufficient to provide adequate fire protection for the buildings located or intended to be located within such development. 
b.  Water lines that serve hydrants shall be at least six-inch lines, and, unless no other practicable alternative is available, no such line shall be dead-end lines. 
(13)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision. The location and design shall be approved by the mayor and city council. 
(14)  Topsoil. Wherever grading or filling occurs on lots within the subdivision, the subdivider shall first stockpile the topsoil from the affected areas, immediately after grading and filling, and shall redistribute to areas of disturbed soil sufficient topsoil to support growth of lawn grass, and other vegetation and shall immediately seed such areas with appropriate vegetative cover to prevent erosion, silting of streams, and other damages. Due regard shall be shown for such desirable trees as are already on the site, and grading and filling should be planned to preserve as many as possible. 
(15)  Entrances. At the preliminary plat stage, the mayor and city council may limit the number of entrances, driveways, or "curb cuts." At the preliminary and final plat stages, the mayor and city council shall be consistent with all state, federal, and local laws and applicable ordinances, including the state department of transportation rules and all amendments or revisions in effect as of the date of the preliminary plat approval. At the preliminary plat stage, the mayor and city council may consider safety as well as require available alternatives for reducing the number of entrances, driveways or "curb cuts." 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-2) 
Secs. 26-686—26-705. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STREET AND SIDEWALK DESIGN CRITERIA 

Sec. 26-706. - Dedications. 
After the adoption of a major street plan as provided by law, the city or other public authority shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or authorize the laying of water mains, sewers, connections or other facilities or utilities in any street within the territorial jurisdiction of the city council unless such street has been accepted or opened as, or shall otherwise have received the legal status of, a public street prior to the attachment of the city council's jurisdiction, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat duly approved by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-3) 
Sec. 26-707. - Access; regarding; drainage. 
The zoning board shall not review and the mayor and city council shall not approve a subdivision in a location where the existing roads providing primary access are inadequate to serve the additional traffic generated by the development. If the ditches on existing city streets are to be used for drainage from the subdivision, the developer will regrade said ditches and provide an all-weather drainage outlet. All regrading and drainage outlets shall be approved by the city council or its authorized representatives. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-4) 
Sec. 26-708. - Compliance with standards required. 
In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width and improvements to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to fire, police and sanitation department personnel as well as road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid hardships to adjoining property, the design standards for streets provided in this article are required and shall be planned for and provided by the subdivider, prior to final plat approval. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-6) 
Sec. 26-709. - Street classification. 
Streets and roads are hereby classified according to the function which they are to serve, the type, speed, and volume of traffic they will carry, and the required standards of design. The classifications of streets and roads shall be arterial roads, collector streets, and local streets and are displayed on the major road plan adopted by the mayor and city council. The designation in the major road plan of arterials and collectors shall not prevent other streets proposed in or adjoining subdivisions from being similarly classified. Street classifications and subclassifications are as follows: 
(1)  Arterial roads. 
(2)  Collector streets. 
(3)  Local streets. 
(4)  Residential: 
a.  Small lot subdivisions (lots less than 50,000 square feet). 
b.  Large lot subdivisions (lots larger than 50,000 square feet with a minimum frontage of 125 lineal feet). 
c.  Rural subdivisions (lots larger than 2.5 acres). 
d.  Large lot rural subdivisions (lots larger than 5.0 acres). 
(5)  Industrial. 
(6)  Commercial. 
(7)  Service drive. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.1) 
Sec. 26-710. - Relation to present, proposed and future street system. 
(a)  The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to the official major road plan as adopted by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Existing streets which terminate at or adjoin a subdivision boundary shall be deemed a part of the subdivision. The proposed street system within a subdivision shall have the right-of-way of existing streets extended no less than the required minimum width. Subdivisions that adjoin only one side of existing streets shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet minimum width requirements. If any part of the subdivision includes both sides of an existing street, all the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
(c)  The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. Where possible, existing major streets shall be extended. 
(d)  Where, in the opinion of the mayor and city council it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property. 
(e)  When an arterial road adjoins or is included in a subdivision, lots therein which abut the arterial road shall be provided with another means of access, e.g.: 
(1)  Platting a single tier of lots which back to the arterial road and front on a minor street; 
(2)  Platting a service drive; 
(3)  Platting a looped land service street and culs-de-sac; 
(4)  Platting a rear service drive for access; or 
(5)  Other methods approved by the mayor and city council. 
(f)  Subdivision streets which intersect an arterial road shall do so at intervals not less than 1,200 feet for a limited access arterial road and 400 feet for other arterial roads. 
(g)  When land is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of streets in the future. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.2) 
Sec. 26-711. - Street names. 
Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, regardless of the use of designator, such as street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat by marking or in any deed or instrument without first getting approval of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.3) 
Sec. 26-712. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets by less than the minimum stopping distance specified in this division shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.4) 
Sec. 26-713. - Right-angle intersections. 
(a)  All streets shall intersect at right angles; such intersecting streets shall continue as perpendicular from the center point of the intersection for not less than the minimum stopping sight distance for their respective rated speeds in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall have a radius of curvature of not less than 20 feet. Wherever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the street right-of-way line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.5) 
Sec. 26-714. - Culs-de-sac. 
A cul-de-sac is a minor street not to extend more than 700 feet in length. Such street shall be provided with a turnaround having a roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.6) 
Sec. 26-715. - Alley. 
Service alleys or drives may be required in multiple-dwelling, commercial, and industrial developments and shall have a minimum surface treatment width of 15 feet, but shall not be provided in one and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the mayor and city council of the need for alleys. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.7) 
Sec. 26-716. - Entrances to streets. 
All driveway entrances and other openings onto streets within the city's jurisdiction shall be constructed so that: 
(1)  Interference with the free and convenient flow of traffic in abutting or surrounding streets is minimized; 
(2)  No point of ingress/egress shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersection; 
(3)  An ingress/egress driveway shall be located not closer than 30 feet to another such driveway on the same street. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.8) 
Sec. 26-717. - Access to arterial roads. 
When a subdivision is proposed with frontage along an existing arterial road or state-numbered highway, every attempt must be made to provide an access road or frontage road for direct access to the proposed lots. The mayor and city council shall evaluate this requirement in an attempt to reduce the number and frequency of curb cuts along arterial roads and state-numbered highways. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.9) 
Sec. 26-718. - Right-of-way widths. 
Street rights-of-way are designed and developed to carry motor vehicle traffic, and in some cases, allow on-street parking; to provide a safe and convenient passageway for pedestrian traffic; and to serve as an important link in the city's drainage system. In order to fulfill these objectives, minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Curb-and-gutter type of construction. 

 
(2)  Shoulder-type lane construction. 

 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.10) 
Sec. 26-719. - Vertical alignment of streets. 
(a)  Grades on arterial, collector and industrial streets shall not exceed seven percent; grades on commercial streets shall not exceed ten percent; grades on residential streets shall not exceed 13 percent; all curbed and paved raised edge streets shall have a minimum grade of one percent. 
(b)  All changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve so constructed as to afford a minimum sight distance, said sight distance being measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be 3¾ feet above the pavement surface, to an object six inches high on the pavement. 
(c)  This minimum sight distance shall be the minimum stopping sight distance for the rated speed of the street as follows: 

 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.11) 
Sec. 26-720. - Horizontal alignment of streets. 
(a)  Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the radius of curvature of the center line of said street shall be not less than as follows: 

 
(b)  A tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-7.12) 
Sec. 26-721. - Blocks. 
(a)  Length . Blocks shall be neither less than 400 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length, except as the mayor and city council considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street pattern. In blocks greater than 800 feet in length, the mayor and city council may require at locations it deems necessary one or more public crosswalks of not less than ten feet in width to extend entirely across the block, or pedestrian easements in lieu thereof. 
(b)  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two rows of lots, except where reverse frontage on major streets is provided or when prevented by topographic conditions or size of property or location next to an arterial road, in which case the mayor and city council may approve a single row of lots. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-8) 
Sec. 26-722. - Pedestrian ways. 
Crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the mayor and city council where it is deemed essential in order to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-11) 
Sec. 26-723. - Sidewalk. 
When sidewalks are included within a subdivision, sidewalks shall be within the dedicated non-paved right-of-way of all streets within the subdivision. Concrete curbs are required for all streets where sidewalks are to be installed. The minimum paved width of sidewalks shall be four feet, and a median strip of landscaped area that includes shade trees at least three feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs within the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 8-12) 
Secs. 26-724—26-742. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DEDICATIONS, RESERVATIONS AND EASEMENTS 

Sec. 26-743. - Streets. 
All land designated for street purposes or street widening shall be laid out and shown on the map of the subdivision and shall not have rights-of-way less than the widths specified in this article. All streets which are designated as part of the street system of the city, or part, division, or section thereof shall be coordinated with adjoining links in said system and dedicated at the same or greater widths. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 9-1) 
Sec. 26-744. - Public open spaces. 
Where a school or recreation area, shown on an official map or in a plan made and adopted by the mayor and city council, is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the city council may require the dedication or reservation of such open space within the subdivision up to a total of ten percent of the gross area of the plot, including any water frontage for park, school or recreational purposes. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 9-2) 
Sec. 26-745. - Utility easements. 
Except where alleys or rear service drives are permitted, easements along rear or side lot lines shall be at least 15 feet wide and shall be required for the extension of existing or planned utilities. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 9-3) 
Sec. 26-746. - Drainage easements. 
In cases in which a subdivision is traversed by a stream or drainage channel, there shall be provided a stormwater easement of such width along each side of the stream as the mayor and city council deems necessary for the purpose of widening, deepening, protecting, relocating, or otherwise improving such drainage elements. Additional requirements include: 
(1)  A five-foot easement along all side property lines. 
(2)  A ten-foot easement along all rear property lines. 
(3)  All storm drainage pipes shall be located within a ten-foot easement. 
(4)  All stormwater discharge into natural drainage areas shall be as straight as possible. 
(5)  All storm drainage pipes shall be at least 18 inches in diameter and 18 inches below the surface and shall have a slope of at least one percent. 
(6)  Catchbasins shall be located at all low points of streets and shall be located so as to service no more than four acres. 
(7)  High water elevation contour based on a 25-year storm at the entrance of each head wall. 
(8)  All drainage easements, natural ditches, and drainage areas shall be grassed and/or rip-rapped as necessary to control erosion. 
(9)  All subdivisions plans shall include a method of control so as to prevent the silting or erosion of natural drainage areas, natural drains and streams, and adjoining property; such plans shall also provide for control of the rate of discharge of excess water. 
(10)  In addition to the requirements of these regulations, all property located in a floodprone area shall be developed in accordance with the minimum standards of the state and federal laws and rules governing flood prone areas. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 9-4) 
Sec. 26-747. - Pedestrian easements. 
In such cases and at such locations as the zoning board deems advisable, easements along side or rear lot lines not exceeding 12 feet in width may be required for pedestrian or bicycle traffic to and from schools, parks and other public places. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 9-5) 
Secs. 26-748—26-766. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES 

Sec. 26-767. - Written approval required for preservation and design of development. 
(a)  In all new development or construction, no trees with a diameter of six inches or over, measured 4½ feet above ground level shall be taken down, damaged or destroyed without prior written approval of the mayor and city council. Limits of root damage shall be taken into consideration prior to such approval. Trees with a diameter of six inches or over and located in buffer or setback areas shall be shown on development or building site plans. It shall be the intent of this section to retain as many trees as possible for the visual attractiveness, natural preservation and energy conservation benefit gained by doing so. This provision shall not apply to individual owner-occupied parcels of land. 
(b)  Existing features that would add value to residential development or to the local government as a whole, such as trees, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, watercourses and waterfalls, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of grade. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 9-6.1) 
Sec. 26-768. - Shade trees planted by developer. 
As a requirement of subdivision approval, where the development is not naturally wooded, the applicant shall plant shade trees on the property within the subdivision. Trees are to be planted within five feet of the right-of-way of the road or roads within and abutting the subdivision. One tree shall be planted for every 40 feet of frontage along each road. New trees shall shave a minimum trunk diameter (measured 12 inches above the ground level) of not less than two inches. Only long-lived shade trees shall be planted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 9-6.2) 
Sec. 26-769. - Tree maintenance. 
The developer shall be responsible for replacing any tree that dies within three years of the completion of the entire development or, if a phased development, within three years of the completion of the phase in which the now dead tree was planted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 9-6.2) 
Secs. 26-770—26-789. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES 

Sec. 26-790. - Purpose. 
When deemed necessary by the mayor and city council, improvement guarantees shall be provided to ensure the proper installation and maintenance of required streets, utility and other improvements. The nature and duration of the guarantee shall be structured to achieve this goal without adding unnecessary costs to the developer of a proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 10-1) 
Sec. 26-791. - Application. 
(a)  Before the recording of a final plat, or as a condition of final site plan approval, the mayor and city council may require and may accept in accordance with the requirements of this chapter the following guarantees: 
(1)  The furnishing of a performance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 120 percent of the cost of installation of improvements; 
(2)  The provision for a maintenance guarantee for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15 percent of the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed, or the improvements are covered by a performance guarantee or maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance guarantee or maintenance guarantee shall be required by the mayor and city council for such utilities or improvements. 
(b)  The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the mayor and city council by resolution. 
(c)  Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the developer may notify the mayor and city council in writing of the completion or substantial completion of improvement and it shall send a copy to the city engineer. The city engineer shall inspect all improvements of which such notice has been given and it shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the mayor and city council indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth. 
(d)  The mayor and city council shall either approve, partially approve or reject the improvements on the basis of the report of the city engineer, and it shall notify the developer in writing of the contents of the report and the action not later than 30 days after receipt of the notice from the developer of the completion of the improvements. Failure of the mayor and city council to provide notification within 30 days after receipt of the notice from the developer of the completion of the improvements, shall be held to constitute approval of the improvement and the obligor as well as the surety, if any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to such performance guarantee for such improvements. 
(e)  Where partial approval is granted, the developer shall be released from all liability except for that portion of improvements not yet approved. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 10-2) 
Sec. 26-792. - Performance and maintenance mechanisms. 
The performance and maintenance guarantees shall be provided by a variety of means including, but limited to the following: 
(1)  Security bond. The applicant may obtain a security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in this state. 
(2)  Letter of credit. The applicant may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution. 
(3)  Escrow account. The applicant may deposit cash, or other instruments readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the city, or in escrow with a bank. 
(4)  Property . The applicant may provide as a guarantee land or other property. 
(5)  Subdivision improvement agreement. An applicant may provide as a guarantee a subdivision improvement agreement between the lender, applicant and the city. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 10-3) 
Secs. 26-793—26-811. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 

Sec. 26-812. - Prior approval. 
No construction activity of any kind, including grading, installation of improvements, and building, shall begin on any land subject to these regulations without prior recommendation by the zoning board and subsequent approval of the preliminary plat by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 11-1) 
Sec. 26-813. - Grading. 
The grading operations may begin following approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 11-2) 
Sec. 26-814. - Utilities. 
Utility installation shall not occur until the building official has approved the rough grade of the street and shoulder preparation. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 11-3) 
Sec. 26-815. - Inspections. 
Periodic inspection during the installation of the physical improvements in a subdivision shall be made by the building official to ensure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the building official when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 11-4) 
Sec. 26-816. - Sale and transfer. 
No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred or a building permit issued until the final plat, of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 11-5) 
Sec. 26-817. - Building permit. 
The building official shall not issue any permit for the erection of any building or structure to be located in any subdivision, a plat whereof is required to be recorded pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, until such plat shall have been admitted to record as provided for in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 11-6) 
Sec. 26-818. - Occupancy. 
No dwelling within the city may be occupied for dwelling purposes until all required utility installations, including water supply and sanitary sewer systems, have been completed to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 11-7) 
Secs. 26-819—26-834. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-835. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of the city council in enacting this chapter to provide standards to safeguard life, public health, property and welfare by regulating the location, size, illumination, erection, maintenance and quality of materials of all signs. More specifically, signs have a powerful impact on the aesthetic environment of the community, and it is the purpose of this article to encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, while allowing sufficient opportunities for communications to serve business and comply with the federal and state constitutions and laws. 
(b)  Signs create visual clutter and therefore should be regulated in their size, location, construction and illumination. Signs can detract from the beauty of the neighborhood and lower property values. In seeking to comply with federal and state law, the board has determined that large billboards are, as the U.S. Supreme Court has recognized, an aesthetic harm; that the Georgia Supreme Court has upheld sign regulations on the basis of aesthetics and preserving the beauty of environment; and, that the Eleventh Circuit Court has recognized portable signs are visual clutter and a potential traffic hazard. These holdings show that the city's ordinance is within the law and therefore constitutional, which is a goal of the city. 
(c)  Many signs can also be a hazard and negatively impact traffic safety, by distracting drivers and blocking views of other vehicles and dangers, by making intersections more treacherous, and by making it difficult to see oncoming traffic when entering a roadway. Therefore, it is also the purpose of this article to prevent those harms by regulating signs to safe locations, safe sizes, with proper and safe illumination and construction. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-1) 
Sec. 26-836. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the use of all land and development within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-1-3) 
Secs. 26-837—26-865. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED SIGNS 

Sec. 26-866. - Purpose; applicability. 
This division enumerates the signs that are permitted and prohibited in each specific zoning district, subject to standards and specifications otherwise provided in this article. If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this division shall be prohibited. Any sign not visible from the outside of a structure or to passing members of the public is not regulated by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 19-2, 19-2-2(E)) 
Sec. 26-867. - R-1, R-2, RMH and D-1 zoning districts. 
The following signs are permitted in R-1, R-2, RMH and D-1 zoning districts: 
(1)  Ground signs. Permitted grounds signs are limited to one single-face sign per lot having an occupied residential structure with a maximum size of six square feet, a maximum height of six feet above ground level, and a maximum width of six feet. Illumination of ground signs shall be governed by general ground sign illumination standards as provided in this division. 
(2)  Window signs. Permitted window signs are limited to one sign per dwelling with a maximum size of four square feet; provided, however, that window signs may not cover more than 25 percent of the window. 
(3)  Wall signs . Wall signs are not permitted. 
(4)  Monument signs in subdivisions. Subdivision monument signs shall be governed by general subdivision entrance sign standards as provided in this division. 
(5)  Roof signs. Roof signs are not permitted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2(A)) 
Sec. 26-868. - Single business lots in P-1, C-1, and C-2 zoning districts. 
For all uses other than residential planned developments in C-1 and C-2, the following signs are permitted on single business lots in P-1, C-1 and C-2 zoning districts: 
(1)  Ground signs. The permitted ground sign shall be limited to a maximum height of 30 feet above ground level, a maximum width of 25 feet, and maximum size as follows: 
a.  For lots containing a principal building of up to 10,000 square feet, one double-face sign per total road frontage with a maximum size of 112 square feet per face; 
b.  For lots containing a principal building of 10,001 to 100,000 square feet, one double-face sign per total road frontage with a maximum size of 150 square feet; and 
c.  For lots containing a principal building of 100,000 square feet or greater, one double-face sign per total road frontage with a maximum size of 200 square feet. 
(2)  Alternative ground signs. As an alternative to the ground sign permitted in subsection (1) of this section, one double-face monument sign is permitted, not to exceed 32 square feet per feet, with a maximum height of eight feet above ground level and a maximum width of 16 feet. 
(3)  Window signs. Total window signage for each exterior building wall may not exceed 25 percent of the area of all windows on that wall. 
(4)  Wall signs . Wall signs are limited to a total area of up to 100 square feet for all walls of business buildings up to 15,000 square feet and up to 200 square feet for all walls of business buildings of greater than 15,000 square feet. Wall signs may not exceed the height of the wall upon which they are attached or extend below the ceiling of any incorporated exterior walkway or other ceiling. 
(5)  Roof signs. Roof signs are not permitted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2(B)) 
Sec. 26-869. - I-1 zoning districts. 
For all uses other than residential planned developments located in I-1 zoning districts, the following signs are permitted: 
(1)  Ground signs. The permitted ground sign shall be limited to a maximum height of 30 feet above ground level, a maximum width of 25 feet, and maximum size as follows: 
a.  For lots containing a principal building of up to 50,000 square feet, one double-face sign per total road frontage with a maximum size of 112 square feet per face; 
b.  For lots containing a principal building greater than 50,000 square feet, one double-face sign per total road frontage with a maximum size of 150 square feet. 
(2)  Alternative ground signs. As an alternative to the ground sign permitted in subsection (1) of this section, two double-face monument signs are permitted, placed one at each entrance, not to exceed 32 square feet per feet, with a maximum height of eight feet above ground level and a maximum width of 16 feet. 
(3)  Window signs. Total window signage may not exceed 25 percent of the total area of all windows facing road frontage. 
(4)  Wall signs . For industries having a principal building of up to 50,000 square feet, wall signs are limited to a total area of up to 100 square feet for all walls. For industries having a principal building of greater than 50,000 square feet, wall signs are limited to a total area of up to 200 square feet for all walls. Wall signs may not exceed the height of the wall to which they are attached or extend below the ceiling of any incorporated exterior walkway or other ceiling. 
(5)  Roof signs. Roof signs are not permitted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2(C)) 
Sec. 26-870. - Residential planned development signs in C-1, C-2 and I-1 zoning districts. 
For residential planned developments located in C-1, C-2 and I-1 zoning districts, the following signs are permitted: 
(1)  Ground signs. The permitted ground sign shall be limited to a maximum height of 35 feet above ground level, a maximum width of 25 feet, and maximum size as follows: 
a.  For developments containing up to 50,000 total square feet, one double-face sign per total road frontage with a maximum size of 112 square feet per face, generally for purposes of presenting the development name; and 
b.  For developments containing greater than 50,000 total square feet, one double-face sign per total road frontage with a maximum size of 150 square feet, generally for purposes of present the development name. 
(2)  Window signs. Total window signage per business per wall may not exceed 25 percent of the total area of each wall. 
(3)  Wall signs . Wall signs may not exceed the height of the wall to which they are attached or extend below any incorporated exterior walkway or other ceiling. The maximum permitted size of wall signs shall be as follows: 
a.  Each individual commercial business having less than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area may erect up to two wall signs not to exceed a total of 100 square feet of sign space for all walls of each business. 
b.  Each individual commercial business having 15,000 square feet or more of gross floor area may erect up to four wall signs not to exceed a total of 200 square feet of sign space for all walls of each business. 
(4)  Roof signs. Roof signs are not permitted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2(D)) 
Sec. 26-871. - Corner lot signs. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, single business and planned developments on corner lots are allowed ground signs on both roads or streets provided that the lot frontage on the secondary road, as designated by the state department of community affairs, must be a minimum of 200 feet. Corner lots have frontage on secondary roads of less than 200 feet shall be permitted one double-faced monument sign not to exceed 32 square feet of total area per sign face. Such signage limitations apply to each side of the lot having road or street frontage and shall not be accumulated and used on only one of the street frontages. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(J)) 
Sec. 26-872. - Subdivision entrance signs. 
One single- or double-face monument sign is permitted at every main entrance to any residential subdivision, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, apartment complex, or other similar residential development. Such signs shall not exceed six feet in height, 12 feet in width, or 32 square feet of sign area for each face. Only external illumination is permitted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(B)) 
Sec. 26-873. - Entrance and exit signs in commercial and industrial zones. 
In the commercial and industrial zones two single- or double-faced pole or monument-style signs each clearly indicating "Entrance" and "Exit" respectively are permitted. Each sign may not exceed three feet in height or three square feet of total area per sign face. Such signs shall be internally illuminated only and shall be placed at least five feet back from the road right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(C)) 
Sec. 26-874. - Public purpose and safety signs. 
State and local public purpose and safety signs are permitted in every zoning district. Such signs can be placed in the right-of-way provided that they do not create a safety hazard. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(D)) 
Sec. 26-875. - Real estate signs. 
One non-animated real estate sign, per agency, per lot is permitted. Such signs shall not require a permit and shall be limited to signs whose permitted maximum display surface area does not exceed four square feet in residential district and 16 square feet in commercial districts. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(G)) 
Sec. 26-876. - Construction and improvement signs. 
(a)  Residential home construction and improvement signs may be placed on the site of the construction or repair, provided all such signs do not exceed six square feet in size and are removed within seven days after completion of work. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial construction signs displaying the intended occupant (i.e. "Coming Soon") or the names of the contractors or subcontractors may be placed on the site of the construction or repair, provided all such signs do not exceed 32 square feet and are removed within seven days after cessation or completion of construction. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(H)) 
Sec. 26-877. - Political signs. 
Political signs shall require no permit and may be permitted in all zoning districts. Such signs shall be limited to one single-face sign per road frontage and shall not exceed six square feet of total sign face area in any residential zoning district or 32 square feet of total sign face area in nonresidential zoning districts. Signs shall be permitted to be display eight weeks prior to the election and must be removed within 14 days following any election or runoff election and shall thereafter be forfeited to the city for immediate removal. All such signs shall conform to any other applicable provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(K)) 
Sec. 26-878. - Strip panel rotating signs. 
Strip panel rotating sign faces shall be permitted; however, such rotation is restricted to the vertical strip sign advertising face only where such strips do not exceed six inches in width. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(L)) 
Sec. 26-879. - Double-face copy change board signs. 
In addition to any single-support sign permitted in the C and M zoning districts, a double-faced copy change board may also be permitted in those same districts, excluding any planned developments. Such sign shall be located on the same support structure, separate from and below the main sign, and may not exceed four feet by eight feet. Double-face copy-change board signs may not be placed lower than ten feet above common grade level. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(M)) 
Sec. 26-880. - Individual vehicles signs. 
Vehicles may display up to four square feet of signage. Such signs shall be attached or be adhered directly to the body of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(A)) 
Sec. 26-881. - Holiday lighting. 
Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message, illuminated only between November 1 and January 15, are permitted in all districts. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-2-2(F)) 
Secs. 26-882—26-910. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 

Sec. 26-911. - Designated. 
Signs that are prohibited include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Roof signs. 
(2)  Sidewalk, A-frame, sandwich type, curb type, or daily placement signs. 
(3)  Portable signs, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(4)  Animated signs involving motion or sound, including rotating signs or parts thereof. 
(5)  Flashing, blinking, or signs of varying light intensity with the exception of signs giving the time and temperature. 
(6)  Exposed neon or signs containing exposed neon tubing which are not enclosed within a channel or box lettering. 
(7)  Lighter than air, balloon, blimp, or other inflatable device which is tethered. 
(8)  Signs that contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal, or can be confused with an official traffic sign including those signs employing the word "Stop", "Yield", "Go", etc. 
(9)  Signs that have been abandoned, including signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer active or in existence. 
(10)  Banners within 20 feet of a property line or right-of-way. 
(11)  Signs not in good repair, specifically including any sign which is in a state of disrepair or disassembly, or any sign which has its internal lighting exposed to view for more than one week. 
(12)  Signs or advertising devices attached directly onto any vehicle parked for more than 48 hours so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, except for work vehicles of a business and common carriers or other vehicles used for daily transportation. 
(13)  Canopies or awnings having a commercial message sign attached to or incorporated within the canopy or awning, with the exception of the name and address of the establishment. 
(14)  Streamers or beacons. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 19-3(A)—(N)) 
Sec. 26-912. - Forfeiture of signs; costs of removal. 
(a)  The following signs may be forfeited to the public and are subject to immediate confiscation by the city: 
(1)  Any sign installed or placed on public property, including right-of-ways, except in conformance with the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Any sign attached to any street sign or marker, traffic control signs or devices; 
(3)  Any sign attached to or painted on any sign pole or any post, tree, rock, or other natural object or feature. 
(b)  In addition to all other remedies available to the city under this Code or state law, the city shall have the right to recover from the sign owner or persons placing or maintaining signs enumerated in subsection (a) of this section the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-3(O)) 
Secs. 26-913—26-942. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TEMPORARY SIGNS 

Sec. 26-943. - Short duration signs (1—14 days). 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section for weekend signs: 
(1)  Short duration temporary signs can be erected in any zoning district for a maximum of two weeks. No more than two signs can be erected on any lot at one time. 
(2)  Such signs shall not exceed six feet in height and 16 square feet per side, and shall not be more than two-sided. 
(3)  Such signs shall be made of waterproof material, and must be attached to an independent mounting device. The mounting must be secure to prevent the sign from being blown off the device. (See subsection (b)(2) of this section.) The mounting device or sign should bear the name and phone number of the party responsible for the device. 
(4)  No such sign can be placed within 100 feet of an intersection or closer than ten feet from the pavement of the roadway. In no event shall such signs be placed on a public right-of-way. 
(5)  Short duration signs cannot be placed on the same lot more than four times per year. 
(b)  Weekend signs. 
(1)  Weekend signs shall not exceed three feet in height and four square feet per side, and shall not be more than two-sided. 
(2)  Such signs shall be made of waterproof material, and must be attached to an independent mounting device no more than 40 inches above ground level. The mounting must be secure to prevent the sign from being blown off the device. The sign or mounting device should bear the name and phone number of the party responsible for the device. 
(3)  No such sign can be placed within 100 feet of an intersection, nor shall any sign be closer than ten feet to the pavement of a roadway. In no event can such signs be placed on a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-5.2(b)) 
Sec. 26-944. - Long duration signs (15—60 days). 
(a)  A temporary permit may be issued for long duration temporary signs permitted pursuant to this section. Such permits shall not be issued for signs intended to be used for less than 15 days and shall be valid for not more than 60 days. A business or individual cannot request more than one temporary permit for long duration signs every six months. 
(b)  Only one long duration temporary sign or device may be used on one lot at the same time. 
(c)  The types of long duration temporary signs that may be displayed only in the C and I zoning districts upon the issuance of a temporary permit for a long duration temporary sign by the zoning board are: 
(1)  Inflatable ground advertising devices and figures; 
(2)  Search lights, lasers and similar devices; and 
(3)  Banners, including flag banners. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-5.1) 
Secs. 26-945—26-961. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 26-962. - Applicability. 
The standards and specifications of this division shall apply to all signs in the city notwithstanding any other provision of this article. 
Sec. 26-963. - Construction and maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to erect or place any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, shall be kept in constant repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or noncorroding metal, shall periodically be given a protective coating. The area immediately in front of all freestanding signs shall be maintained free of high weeds and debris. 
(c)  The staff of the zoning board may periodically inspect every sign in order to determine that each meets the requirements set forth in this article. 
(d)  The owner or entity shall be required to remove or have removed from the premises discarded or unusable paper, sign faces, parts and debris resulting from the changing of the advertising copy or message or maintenance of any sign or sign structure. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9) 
Sec. 26-964. - Computation of total sign area. 
The area of a sign shall be computed as the area within the smallest square, rectangle, or portion thereof enclosing, or which would have enclosed, the outer limits of the sign face and frame, text, material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign or used to differentiate the sign face and frame from the structure upon which it is placed. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(A)) 
Sec. 26-965. - Content. 
Any sign, display or device allowed under this chapter may contain any commercial or noncommercial message, except that such messages cannot be profane, depict obscenity as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, or advertise any illegal activity. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(B)) 
Sec. 26-966. - Embellishments. 
Sign embellishments (including protrusions) shall not constitute greater than 20 percent of the surface of the sign face or perimeter. Protrusions greater than 12 inches from the sign face and 18 inches from the sign perimeter are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(C)) 
Sec. 26-967. - Number. 
For the purposes of determining the number of signs, ground signs shall be equal to the number of sign structures. All other (non-ground signs shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in random manner without organized relationship of elements, such elements shall be considered to be a single sign. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(D)) 
Sec. 26-968. - Illumination. 
(a)  Ground signs shall not be internally illuminated in the residential districts (D-1, R-1, R-2, RMH). All external lighting shall be positioned and shielded so that the light source cannot be seen directly by any passing motorist or cause detriment to any surrounding businesses for residents. 
(b)  Flashing, blinking or other illumination of varying degree is not permitted. Lighting that causes confusion with, or distraction from, any traffic signal or safety device shall not be permitted. 
(c)  All externally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light and eliminate light trespass. 
(d)  All internally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. 
(e)  All signs over six feet in height shall be internally illuminated or by external lighting fixtures located below the sign area. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(E)) 
Sec. 26-969. - Support and stabilization. 
With the exception of planned development signs that may be of a double-pole type, all other signs, banners, and the like shall be self-supporting upon a single support (e.g., a monopole) and within its own framework structure. Such signs shall not employ the use of guy wires or other external support bracing for stabilization. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(F)) 
Sec. 26-970. - Setbacks. 
All signs or protrusions thereof that are located on the ground must be setback at least five feet from any public right-of-way or property line. No permanently affixed ground sign shall interfere with any public utility or vehicular line of sight. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(G)) 
Sec. 26-971. - Corner visibility. 
No sign or sign structure above the height of three feet may be sited within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of either street. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(H)) 
Sec. 26-972. - Fire safety restrictions. 
No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any form of fire escape or fire lane. No sign or portion of a sign may project or extend over any residential, commercial, industrial structure, any driveway, walkway or the like. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-4(I)) 
Secs. 26-973—26-1002. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 

Sec. 26-1003. - What constitutes; when removal required. 
(a)  Signs that do not comply with this article and that were legally placed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this article and subject to the provisions of this division. Signs that were illegally erected, established or maintained with respect to the applicable requirements of prior city sign regulations are not nonconforming signs under this division and shall be removed or brought into compliance with this article. 
(b)  Nonconforming signs made of paper, cloth or other non-durable material, all temporary signs other than those permitted in this article, and any signs that are not affixed to a building or the ground or are located within a public right-of-way, must be removed by the sign or property owner. 
(c)  Upon failure to comply with the requirements of this article, the zoning board may cause the removal of any nonconforming sign at the expense of the owner or associated party. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9(1)) 
Sec. 26-1004. - Replacement. 
(a)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that the substitution or interchange of advertising panels, painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
(b)  Those signs considered nonconforming (grandfathered) as of December 1, 2003, shall be governed by the signage requirements for the zoning classification, as designated by the department of community affairs, that most closely approximates its use. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9(2)) 
Sec. 26-1005. - Repair and maintenance. 
Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as repainting, electrical repairs and neon tubing may be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9(3)) 
Sec. 26-1006. - Relocation if removal necessitated by city or state improvement projects. 
If a nonconforming sign must be removed due to a city or state road improvement or other project, the zoning board may authorize the relocation of such sign even though the new location may not meet the setback requirements or other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9(4)) 
Secs. 26-1007—26-1025. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SIGN PERMITS 

Sec. 26-1026. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  A sign permit is not required for the erection of a weekend sign, or a ground or window sign in the D-1, R-1, R-2, RMH zoning districts; provided, however, that the exception provided in this subsection shall not act to exempt signs using electrical wiring and connections from the requirement for electrical permitting. 
(b)  For all other signs, a sign permit is required before a ground or wall sign may be erected and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated, or materially improved upon to an extent of 60 percent of its total replacement value. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.1(a)) 
Sec. 26-1027. - Issuance subject to applicability and conformance. 
A sign permit shall be issued by the building official when the plans, specifications, and intended use of the applied sign or part thereof conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by all the information required under this division and such other information as the building official may require. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.1(b)) 
Sec. 26-1028. - Applications; time for processing; grounds for denial. 
(a)  Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or owner's agent with the building official upon forms as provided. Any information pertinent to the sign application as may be requested by the zoning board and may include, but not limited to: 
(1)  The type and purpose of the sign as defined by this article or the state department of community affairs (DCA). 
(2)  A site plan showing the location of the sign, and construction plan describing the material the sign is to be constructed from. 
(3)  Elevation drawing showing the height and dimensions of the sign face. 
(4)  The total construction cost of the sign. 
(5)  The street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the subject property. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the department of community affairs shall be used. 
(6)  The square foot area per sign face and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(7)  The names and addresses of the owners of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(8)  The name, address, phone number, and business license number and home jurisdiction of the sign contractor. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a sign as permitted under the provisions of this section, the zoning board, shall examine and process the application within 15 working days. 
(c)  A permit may be denied if the applicant, landowner, or lessee or other party is presently maintaining any sign in violation of the sign provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 19-6.2, 19-6.4) 
Sec. 26-1029. - Indemnification and hold harmless agreement and liability insurance required. 
Each sign application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and hold the city harmless of all damages, demands, or expenses which may in any manner be caused by the sign, or the sign's erection, continued existence, or removal. Each applicant shall present to the city upon request a certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 19-6.1(c), 19-6.4) 
Sec. 26-1030. - Expiration date. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance; provided, however, that a six month extension of the permit may be granted by the building official. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.3) 
Sec. 26-1031. - Fees. 
No permit should be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the zoning board and the appropriate fee has been paid, which fees shall from time to time be established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.5) 
Sec. 26-1032. - Electrical permits required. 
All signs in the city using electrical wiring and connection shall require an electrical permit regardless of whether a sign permit is required under the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 26-1033. - Appeal of permit denial. 
Upon denial of an application for a sign permit, the applicant shall be given verbal notice or written notice within 15 days of the denial stating the reasons for denial of the permit. The aggrieved party may appeal any decision as provided in the manner as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.7) 
Sec. 26-1034. - Variances. 
(a)  By zoning administrator. Administrative variances to the requirements of this article may be granted by the zoning administrator, provided that any variance that is granted should conform to the intent and purpose of this article. 
(b)  By city council. Variances may be granted from the provision of this chapter by the city council as recommended by the zoning board and shall apply both to signs that are nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived as well as the new signs erected thereafter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.8) 
Secs. 26-1035—26-1051. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 26-1052. - Right of entry for inspection. 
City enforcement personnel are hereby empowered to enter upon or into a building, structure, or premises upon which a sign is located for the purpose of inspecting the sign, or its structural and electrical connections, and to ensure compliance with the provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.6) 
Sec. 26-1053. - Removal after notice. 
(a)  Authority. City enforcement personnel may order the removal of any sign in violation of this article. 
(b)  Notice required. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this division, notice of noncompliance shall be given to the permit holder or property owner, then to the owner of the sign, or, if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, notice shall be given to the sign erector or property owner, or any party associated with such sign. 
(c)  Grounds for order of removal generally. Except as otherwise provided herein with regard to invalid sign permits, the removal order shall be issued only after the appropriate party fails to comply with the terms of this article for seven working days after the receipt of written notice of noncompliance from the zoning board or other authorized enforcement personnel or within ten working days from the mailing of such notice, if no return receipt is received indicating acceptance. 
(d)  Removal resulting from invalid permit. City enforcement personnel may issue a removal order when it has been determined: 
(1)  That a permit was improperly issued as a result of misstatement of fact or fraud; 
(2)  That the sign has not been placed or constructed in compliance with the specifications of the application or site plans; 
(3)  That the sign permit has expired; or 
(4)  That the sign is otherwise not in compliance with the article. 
(e)  Automatic revocation of sign permit. If a permit was issued, a notice given under this division shall operate to revoke the permit. 
(f)  Appeal. An aggrieved party may appeal the removal order within ten working days from the date that the notice was received in the same manner as provided in this chapter for permit denials. 
(g)  Effect of failure to remove; removal by city; costs. If the sign is not removed within 30 days after the order of removal is delivered or mailed, or 45 days from the mailing of such notice if no return receipt is received indicating acceptance, or 30 days after the date any appeal becomes final, city enforcement personnel are authorized to remove the sign or cause this sign to be removed and to collect the costs thereof as provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9) 
Sec. 26-1054. - Removal without notice. 
City enforcement personnel or any other authorized city agent may remove or direct the removal of any sign in violation of this article without giving notice to any party, if the sign is on the public right-of-way or other public property or the sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any member of the public. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9) 
Sec. 26-1055. - Cost of removal. 
(a)  The removal or the cost of removal of any sign removed or ordered to be removed under this division shall be the responsibility of the sign owner without liability to the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees. 
(b)  If the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then the costs of removal shall be the joint and several responsibility of the sign erector or property owner or any other party associated with the placement of the sign. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9) 
Sec. 26-1056. - Collection of unpaid costs. 
If the sign is removed by the city and if payment is, or satisfactory arrangements to make payment are, not made by the property owner, sign erector, or owner within 30 days after the receipt of a statement for the costs of removal, city enforcement personnel shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the city attorney. The city shall be afforded all means available to remedy the collection of the reimbursable funds. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9) 
Sec. 26-1057. - Disposition of unclaimed removed signs. 
In the event any signs that are removed remain unclaimed for more than 60 days from the date of removal, the signs may be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9) 
Sec. 26-1058. - Penalties. 
Without limitation, sign erectors or owners, property owners or associated parties may be cited for the violation of any provision of this article and thereupon shall be subject to penalties provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 19-6.9) 
Secs. 26-1059—26-1084. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-1085. - Building official. 
The building official shall have the power and duty to provide the following services related to this chapter: 
(1)  Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Issue and when necessary revoke building permits according to the procedures outlined in chapter. 
(3)  Issue a certificate of occupancy according to the procedures outlined in this chapter. 
(4)  Issue a sign permit when the applicant meets the requirements outlined in this chapter. 
(5)  Enter upon any premises for the purpose of making inspections of premises or buildings necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(6)  Maintain complete records concerning this chapter and related matter and make such records available to the public upon request. 
(7)  Maintain the official zoning map for public display. 
(8)  Advise the general public on how to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(9)  Maintain complete records concerning this chapter and related matter and make such records available to the public upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-3) 
Sec. 26-1086. - Matter to be determined by the city council. 
The city council shall hear and make decisions concerning: 
(1)  Proposed amendments to this chapter. 
(2)  Adoption and amendment to the zoning map, including amendment of text. 
(3)  Approval, disapproval or other action on all requests for zoning changes as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  Upon consideration of the recommendation from the zoning board, grant or deny applications for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  Approval or disapproval of conditional use permits. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-2) 
Sec. 26-1087. - Required disclosures. 
(a)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. require disclosure of financial interests by all government officials, including city council members and zoning board members, who will consider a rezoning action. State law also requires disclosure of campaign contributions or gifts by the rezoning applicant or his attorney. 
(b)  All government officials, including city councilmembers and zoning board members, are required to disclose in writing any ownership interest they have or any family members have, in real property made the subject of a rezoning request. Additionally, these officials are required to disclose in writing any financial interest of ten percent or more in any business entity which has an ownership interest in the property to be considered. 
(c)  An applicant for a rezoning and his attorney must disclose all campaign contributions or gifts aggregating $250.00 or more which were made within two years of the filing of the application for rezoning. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Disclosure required to be in writing, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-2. 
Sec. 26-1088. - Fees. 
Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the cost of administration, inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to applicants for rezoning applications, amendments to the map or text), variance applications, an appeal from action of the building official and other administrative relief. The amount of the fees charged shall be as set forth by the city. Fees shall be paid upon submission of a signed application or notice of appeal. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-8) 
Sec. 26-1089. - Remedies. 
If any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building official or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent such violation. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-10) 
Sec. 26-1090. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found in violation of any provision of the chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation or imprisoned in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition shall pay the cost of such action. Each offense shall constitute a separate offense for each day such violation continues. 
(b)  The city, through its attorney or other official designated by the city council may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any building erected in violation of this chapter shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building official, city attorney, or other official designated by the city council may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-9) 
Sec. 26-1091. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the zoning board or the mayor and city council relating to the regulations set forth in this chapter or with any official charged with the enforcement of any order, requirement or decision of said city council, any time may take an appeal to the county superior court in the manner provided by state law. 
(b)  If appeal is not filed in the manner and within the time provided by state law, the decision of the zoning board or the city council, or any official charged with the enforcement of any order, requirement or decision in connection therewith, shall be final. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 21-11) 
Secs. 26-1092—26-1120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING BOARD 

Sec. 26-1121. - Established. 
The zoning board is hereby established to hear and decide appeals and to recommend action to the mayor and city council for variances from the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1, 3-1.1(a)) 
Sec. 26-1122. - Members; qualifications; terms. 
There shall be a zoning board consisting of six members appointed by the mayor and city council. Members appointed to the zoning board shall hold no other public office. All members shall be qualified electors of the city. Members shall serve overlapping terms of four years, except for the initial appointment in which three members shall be appointed for initial terms of four years and three members shall be appointed for three-year terms of office. Zoning board members may be appointed to succeed themselves and for terms of four years. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-1.1(b)) 
Sec. 26-1123. - Vacancies in office. 
Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms. A vacancy in a term of office shall occur whenever the mayor and city council finds that a member has resigned, or when the mayor and city council shall have dismissed a member because of his repeated failure to attend meetings of the zoning board without just cause, or because the member has been guilty of malfeasance or misconduct in office. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-1.1(c)) 
Sec. 26-1124. - Organization. 
The zoning board shall hold an annual organizational meeting and shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-1.1(d)) 
Sec. 26-1125. - Rules of procedure. 
The zoning board may adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with the state statutes and these regulations. 
Sec. 26-1126. - Meetings. 
The zoning board shall meet at the call of the chairperson and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. The members of the zoning board shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the zoning board. Minutes shall be kept of all zoning board proceedings. All zoning board meetings shall be open to the public. Whenever feasible the agenda for each meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-1.2) 
Sec. 26-1127. - Quorum and voting. 
Four members of the zoning board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. All actions of the zoning board shall be taken by a majority vote, a quorum being present. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-1.3; Ord. of 3-2011) 
Sec. 26-1128. - Powers and duties. 
The zoning board does not have the power to amend any zoning ordinance regulations, to rezone any land, to declare this chapter or any amendment thereto invalid or to allow any use not permitted by this chapter. The zoning board does have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Recommend to the mayor and city council changes in the zoning ordinance that the zoning board believes are appropriate. 
(2)  Recommend to the mayor and city council approval, disapproval or other action on all requests for zoning changes as provided in this chapter. 
(3)  Hear requests for the interpretation of the official zoning map and for any special questions upon which the zoning board is authorized to pass. 
(4)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination or refusal made by the building official or other administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision of this chapter, as provided in this chapter. 
(5)  The zoning board shall hear and recommend to the mayor and city council applications for variances from the requirements of this chapter, as provided in this chapter. 
(6)  Conduct such other business and affairs as may be, from time to time, designated by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-1.4(a)—(d)) 
Sec. 26-1129. - Appeal of zoning board action. 
Any person or persons, jointly or separately, aggrieved by any decision of the zoning board may appeal to the county superior court in the manner provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 22-5) 
Secs. 26-1130—26-1151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - APPEALS, VARIANCES, AND CONDITIONAL USES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-1152. - Application forms; fees; time for filing. 
Applications for hearing and decision on requests for an appeal, a variance, or a conditional use shall be submitted to the building official on forms approved by the city council, together with a fee in the amount determined by the city council, at least 30 days prior to the next regularly schedule meeting of the zoning board. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.5, 22-4(a)) 
Sec. 26-1153. - Contents of application. 
Each application shall contain such information as the building official may require to enable the zoning board to make its decision on an appeal or conditional use, or a recommendation on a variance request. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.5, 22-4(a)) 
Sec. 26-1154. - Time for scheduling public hearing. 
Within a reasonable time after receiving an application for an appeal, variance, or conditional use, the zoning board shall schedule a public hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.5, 22-4) 
Sec. 26-1155. - Notices of hearing. 
(a)  The zoning board shall publish once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a written notice of such public hearing at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing. The public notice shall indicate the time, place and nature of the appeal, variance or conditional use to be considered by the zoning board. 
(b)  Additionally, at least 15 days before the scheduled public hearing, the building official shall post, in a conspicuous place on the property that is the subject of the application, a sign at least two feet by three feet in size. The sign shall set forth the time, place and purpose of the public hearing before the zoning board. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences limiting the effectiveness of notice by a sign posted on the property shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.5(b), 22-4(b)) 
Sec. 26-1156. - Rights of parties to present evidence. 
The appellant and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the zoning board at the public hearing required by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-14(e)(3), 22-1.3) 
Secs. 26-1157—26-1175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPEALS 

Sec. 26-1176. - Actions subject to appeal. 
The zoning board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the building official or other administrative official in the administration or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(d), 22-1) 
Sec. 26-1177. - Persons who may seek appeal. 
An appeal to the zoning board may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision of the building official or other administrative official with respect to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3.14(e)(1), 22-1.1) 
Sec. 26-1178. - Notice of appeal; time for filing; transmittal to zoning board. 
Appeals under this article shall be made within 15 days following notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action was taken. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3.14(e)(1), 22-1.1) 
Sec. 26-1179. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal under this division stays all actions by the building official seeking enforcement of or compliance with the order or decision appealed from, unless the building official certifies to the zoning board that a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-14(e)(2), 22-1.2) 
Sec. 26-1180. - Withdrawal of appeal. 
Any appeal may be withdrawn upon written notice to the city clerk or building official and city clerk, but no appeal shall be withdrawn after the posting of a hearing notice or prior to the zoning board's action thereon without formal consent of the zoning board. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-14(e)(4)) 
Sec. 26-1181. - Determinations by zoning board. 
The zoning board may modify in whole or in part any order, requirement, or decision of the building official and, to that end, shall have the power of the building official or administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The zoning board may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the building official to carry out the decisions of the zoning board. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(e)(5), 22-1.4) 
Secs. 26-1182—26-1210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 26-1211. - Types of matter subject to application for variance. 
(a)  The zoning board shall hear and recommend to the mayor and city council applications for variances from the requirements of this chapter, but only in individual cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. Such cases may include: 
(1)  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property that at the time of adoption of this chapter was a lot or plat of record; or 
(2)  When by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of a piece of property, the strict application of the requirements of this chapter would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon, the owner of such property. 
(b)  The zoning board shall not be authorized to recommend a density variance or a use variance to permit a use in a district in which the use is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(f), 22-3) 
Sec. 26-1212. - Applications. 
In addition to any other information required generally for applications under this chapter, each application for a variance shall include a plat drawn to scale showing the following information: 
(1)  All property lines, with dimensions. 
(2)  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks and easements referenced to the property line of the property in question. 
(3)  The north arrow, land district and land lot marker. 
(4)  Location of setback lines or other dimensional requirements from which the variance is sought. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 3-1.5(a)) 
Sec. 26-1213. - Time within which determination on application must be made. 
The zoning board shall consider and decide whether to recommend approval or disapproval of a variance request within 45 days after the public hearing thereon. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 22-3.4) 
Sec. 26-1214. - Burden of proof. 
In reviewing an application for a variance, the burden of showing that the variance should be granted shall be upon the person applying therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(f), 22-3) 
Sec. 26-1215. - Required findings for recommendation of variance. 
No variance shall be recommended unless the zoning board finds that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular parcel of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography. 
(2)  The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship. 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity. 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(f), 22-3) 
Sec. 26-1216. - Conditional variances. 
During its review of a variance request, the zoning board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served and to provide adequately for the maintenance of the integrity and character of the zone in which such permit is granted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(f), 22-3.1) 
Sec. 26-1217. - Guarantees; violation of conditions. 
When necessary, the zoning board may require guarantees, in such form as it deems proper, to ensure that conditions designated in connection therewith are being or will be complied with. Where any condition under which a request has been granted appears to have been violated, the zoning board may hold a public hearing thereon to determine whether or not the permit theretofore granted shall be terminated. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(f), 22-3.2) 
Sec. 26-1218. - Subdivision regulation variances. 
The zoning board may recommend, and the mayor and city council may grant, variances from the required improvements and minimum standards of design contained in the city's subdivision regulations; provided that the subdivider makes a specific request and shows to the satisfaction of the zoning board and the mayor and city council that topographical or other conditions peculiar and particular to the site are such that strict adherence to the requirements would cause him unnecessary hardship and would not carry out the intent of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 22-3.3) 
Sec. 26-1219. - Effective time period. 
The zoning board, upon recommendation, and subsequently, the mayor and city council, when granting a variance, may establish a time period for said variance. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(f), 22-3.5) 
Sec. 26-1220. - Grant to be included in minutes. 
The grant of a variance shall be stated in the minutes with the reasons for departure from the strict application of this chapter and the conditions under which the variance was granted. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(f), 22-3.5) 
Sec. 26-1221. - Termination. 
Any variance granted shall terminate automatically when the use ceases to be in full compliance with any conditions imposed by the zoning board, when the use has been abandoned, or when the building permit shall have expired. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, §§ 3-1.4(f), 22-3.5) 
Secs. 26-1222—26-1245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 26-1246. - Certain uses and conditions allowed. 
Some zoning districts permit certain uses only upon approval of the zoning board. These uses are identified in this chapter as conditional uses and such uses may be allowed under special conditions. The granting of a conditional use does not constitute a permanent change in zoning or use. The conditional use may be forfeited if it does not meet the criteria provided in this section. Generally, a conditional use shall be compatible with the applicable zoning district under special conditions. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 22-2) 
Sec. 26-1247. - Approval. 
Conditional uses shall be permitted subject to an approval by the zoning in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The required review shall determine whether the uses conform to the standards set forth in this article. 
Sec. 26-1248. - Conditions and development standards. 
(a)  The conditional use shall be approved if it meets all the following factors: 
(1)  A rezoning to a more intensive zoning district, which contains that use as a use by right, would not be appropriate for the property. 
(2)  The location and character of the conditional use shall be compatible with the community development pattern and consistent with the needs of the neighborhood. 
(3)  The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the natural environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity, or diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  The conditional use will not increase state or local expenditures in relation to the cost of servicing or maintaining neighborhood properties. 
(b)  The zoning board may impose any additional conditions and development standards, along with the grant of the conditional use, as may be necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of surrounding landowners, neighborhoods and workers. The zoning board may require as part of its approval, the following conditions: 
(1)  Planted or screen buffers to reduce adverse or potentially adverse effects on adjoining properties. 
(2)  Limitation of street access ways, parking areas, and loading docks. 
(3)  The rearrangement of structures on the development site. 
(4)  Increases in maximum building height. 
(5)  Increases in the district requirements for lot size and building line setbacks, but not a reduction of these requirements. 
(6)  Limitations on the hours of business operation when it can be shown that proposed operational times would cause an adverse effect on adjoining, existing uses. 
(7)  Specified distances from existing residential, public, or institutional developments. 
(c)  In no case, however, shall the zoning board exempt any conditional use from meeting the minimum lot and structure requirements of the zoning district in which the proposed use is to be located. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 22-2(b), (c)) 
Secs. 26-1249—26-1269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - AMENDMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-1270. - Amendment defined. 
As used in this article, the term "amendment" shall mean both a change to the official zoning map and a change to the text of this chapter unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-1(b)) 
Sec. 26-1271. - Grounds for amendment. 
The mayor and city council may from time to time, amend these regulations set forth in this chapter or the boundaries of the zoning districts established on the zoning map subject to the conditions provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-1) 
Sec. 26-1272. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Generally. The exercise of the zoning power by the city, including the city's authority to amend this chapter, shall constitute an effort to balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right of property owners to the unrestricted use of their property. 
(b)  Compatibility of uses; preservation of value. Further, it is the policy and intent of the city to exercise the zoning power for purposes of assuring the compatibility of use of adjacent and nearby properties and the preservation of the economic value of adjacent and nearby properties while enabling a reasonable use of all property. 
(c)  Conformity to comprehensive plan. It is further the policy of the city to exercise its zoning power in conformity with the policy and intent of the city comprehensive plan insofar as that plan is current in its application to the specific property that is the subject of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-3) 
Sec. 26-1273. - Factors to be considered by zoning board and city council. 
(a)  The factors set forth in this section shall be considered by the zoning board when reviewing and making its written recommendation and by the city council when making a decision whether to approve or deny the requested amendment. These factors are determined to be relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of the property. 
(b)  The relevant factors to be considered by the zoning board and the city council under this section are: 
(1)  Whether the proposed amendment would allow a use that is generally suitable for the site compared to other possible uses and the uses and zoning of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(2)  Whether the proposed amendment would adversely affect the economic value or the uses of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(3)  Whether the property to be affected by the proposed amendment can be used as currently zoned; 
(4)  Whether the proposed amendment, if adopted, would result in a use which would or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, schools, sewers, water resources, police and fire protection or other utilities; and 
(5)  Whether there are other conditions or transitional patterns affecting the use and development of the property sought to be rezoned, if applicable, which give ground for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-3) 
Secs. 26-1274—26-1304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 26-1305. - Persons who may initiate amendment proceedings. 
No amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been initiated by the city council, the zoning, board, the property owners, an individual who has the owners' power of attorney authorizing him to act, or a request signed by 60 percent of the property owners who hold not less than 60 percent of the affected land. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-1(a)) 
Sec. 26-1306. - Applications. 
Applications proposing amendments to the text of this chapter or to the city zoning map shall be submitted in writing to the city building official on a form providing by the city, together with a fee in the amount established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-2(a)) 
Sec. 26-1307. - Applications regarding property in violation of chapter not accepted. 
(a)  No application will be accepted from any person regarding any property that is in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  If at the time of application the property that is the subject of an amendment or any other action of the mayor and city council is found to be in violation of this chapter, the building official will not accept or process any application from that applicant until the applicant voluntarily removes or changes the cause of the violation or ceases to be in violation. The applicant must then notify the building official that he is no longer in violation and obtain a release from the building official as to the violation. Once released, the mayor and city council will then accept the application for amendment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-2(b)) 
Sec. 26-1308. - Review by zoning board; findings and recommendation. 
(a)  All proposed amendments shall be submitted to the building official, who shall then refer the proposals for amendment to the zoning board. It will study the proposed amendment and determine if it meets the standards provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The zoning board shall submit its findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council within 30 days from the date it received the petition. 
(c)  If the zoning board fails to submit a report within a 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the requested change. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-2(c)) 
Sec. 26-1309. - Public notice. 
(a)  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the building official shall file a notice of public hearing which shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city setting forth the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Such notice shall indicate the nature of the change proposed, identify the property affected. The cost of such newspaper notice shall be paid by the applicant for zoning amendment. 
(b)  When a proposed amendment affects the district classification of particular parcels of property, the building official shall place conspicuously on the property that is the subject of the amendment, not less than 15 days prior to the public hearing, a sign not less than nine feet square, with not less than three-inch black letters upon a white background. The notice to be included in the sign shall be in the form prescribed from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-5) 
Sec. 26-1310. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Required. Before taking action on a proposed amendment, the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. 
(b)  Time and place. A public hearing shall be conducted at the time and place specified by the mayor and city council and as set forth in the public notice thereof. 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose of such hearing shall be to present to the public the proposed zoning amendment, and to receive comments thereon from the public. The mayor and city council shall consider the proceedings and comments of such hearing on the proposed zoning amendment in making a final decision on whether to approve or deny the amendment application. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-4) 
Sec. 26-1311. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  The hearing shall be convened by the mayor at the time and place scheduled. 
(b)  The mayor shall open any hearing with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and a description of the general rules for the conduct of the hearing. The mayor or his delegate may describe the authority and role of the city council in any zoning decision. 
(c)  The mayor shall review the procedures for holding the public hearing which shall be as follows: 
(1)  No person may speak until recognized by the mayor. Upon rising to speak, the person recognized must first state his name and address. 
(2)  The person speaking will be allowed two minutes to express opinions and make points on each separate element of the proposed zoning revisions which he wishes to address; provided, however, that no person shall speak longer than an aggregate of ten minutes. 
(3)  The mayor or his delegate shall allow the person initiating the proposed zoning amendment or his designee to present a description of the proposed zoning amendment and the reasons for initiating the proposed zoning amendment. 
(4)  The mayor or his delegate shall give persons opposed to the proposed amendment the opportunity to address the city council. 
(5)  Any remark amounting to attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual, or comment not factually supportable, or comment in the form of an emotional outburst, shall be non-germane to the purpose of any hearing and may be ruled out of order. 
(6)  Additional persons will be recognized in accordance with the procedure set forth above for the purpose of addressing additional issues and making additional points, but no speaker shall be allowed to address points which have already been thoroughly discussed. 
(7)  Upon conclusion of the presentation of persons opposing the proposed zoning amendment, the mayor or his delegate shall afford the person initiating the petition an allotted time to address the mayor and city council in rebuttal of any issues raised by persons addressing the city council in opposition to the proposed zoning amendment. 
(d)  When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the mayor or his delegate shall declare the public hearing closed. 
(e)  No further public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment shall be required prior to the final determination of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-6) 
Sec. 26-1312. - Final determination by city council. 
The zoning board's role in any zoning decision shall be advisory only. Any zoning decision shall be made by the mayor and city council, which shall either approve or disapprove the proposed zoning amendment. When the public hearing is conducted by the city council at a regular council meeting, action may be taken approving or rejecting the proposal at that meeting, or the council may table the question for consideration at its next regular meeting or a called meeting to be held no later than the next regular meeting. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-7) 
Sec. 26-1313. - Reversionary zoning procedure. 
For a period of 12 months from the date of approval, the zoning board may submit information to the mayor and city council concerning property that has been rezoned and for which no site plan or preliminary plat or building permit has been obtained. The mayor and city council may then review such information, and if considered appropriate, initiate reversionary zoning procedures. Such reversionary procedures shall proceed in accordance with the amendment provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-8) 
Sec. 26-1314. - Limitation on reapplications. 
If the city council shall take official action defeating a proposed zoning amendment that seeks to rezone property, the same property may not be considered again for rezoning until the expiration of 12 months from the date of the official action of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-10) 
Sec. 26-1315. - Appeal. 
Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council regarding the adoption or disapproval of a zoning amendment shall be made in the manner provided in this chapter regarding judicial review and as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 12-2003, § 23-9) 
Chapter 28 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Law enforcement generally, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-1 et seq.; compensation of law enforcement officers on commission basis prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-26-19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Disposition of stolen abandoned and impounded property. 
All personal property seized or abandoned and in the custody of the police department shall be disposed of only in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 17-5-54. 
Sec. 28-2. - Wrecker services; call list. 
A call list of wrecker services is established for police department use. All local wrecker services licensed within the city shall appear on the call list. Any wrecker service located outside the city limits which wishes to be placed on the call list must first purchase a business license under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-1-22) 
Secs. 28-3—28-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 28-23. - Composition of department. 
The police department shall consist of those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 28-24. - Responsibilities. 
The department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 28-25. - Oath. 
Prior to entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of the police department shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the city council. 
Sec. 28-26. - Police chief. 
(a)  The police chief shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and the city council. 
(b)  In the exercise of his duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with this Code, all other resolutions and ordinances of the city, and the laws of the state. 
(c)  In the event of resignation, removal, death, or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. 
Sec. 28-27. - Police operations manual. 
The chief of police shall be responsible for compilation and maintenance of a city police department operations manual, copies of which shall be available in the offices of the city clerk and the city police chief. 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; crimes generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq.; nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal and magistrate courts regarding nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-12-5; misdemeanor nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6; placement of posters, signs, and advertisements on public or private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq.; dogs as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7; unlawful junkyards as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-246. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-1-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 30-2. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on the streets of the city or in any public place in an intoxicated condition. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-1-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 30-3. - Noise; creating unnecessary noise. 
(a)  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of that device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this section shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices . Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noisy vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding or rattling, or other noise. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of the proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. 
(8)  Noise near institutions requiring quiet . The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(9)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(10)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(c)  None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor; and 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(d)  The prohibitions of this section shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city clerk. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city; provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the federal, state, county or city functions. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-1-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Posting signs without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-1-4) 
State Law reference— Damaging municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 30-5. - Weapons; discharge in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including, but not limited to, pistols, rifles and shotguns, or to shoot an air gun, including but not limited to, BB guns and pellet guns, within the city, except by law enforcement officers in the line of duty, and the military when on drill or parade, or at a funeral in honor of the dead; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to shoot a BB gun upon private property if that person shall have first obtained the express permission of the owner of that property to do so. 
A permit to allow citizens to shoot squirrels in the city may be obtained with the following stipulations: 
(1)  The permit is in effect for one week. 
(2)  The permit will be issued by the chief of police. 
(3)  There will be no charge for the permit. 

(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-1-5; Ord. of 2-4-2013) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearms, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-103, 16-11-104; regulations of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-6. - Damage to property. 
Any person who shall deface, destroy, mutilate or otherwise do any damage to the real or personal property of another, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be tried in municipal court, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by section 1-13. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-1-6; Ord. of 12-2-1985) 
State Law reference— Damaging municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 30-7. - Marijuana. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess marijuana in the city where prohibited by state law. The city may prosecute persons found to be in unlawful possession of one ounce or less of marijuana. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30(j). 
Secs. 30-8—30-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal and magistrate courts regarding nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-12-5; misdemeanor nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6; placement of posters, signs, and advertisements on public or private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq.; dogs as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7; unlawful junkyards as nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-246. 

Sec. 30-33. - Nuisances defined. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple family complexes, such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 30-34. - Offense; penalty. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-2-6) 
Sec. 30-35. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-2-2) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court to determine existence of nuisance and order its abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 30-36. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. 
(b)  The municipal court after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the municipal court shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(c)  Animal control officers, license and building officials shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 30-37. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the municipal court judge that it must be immediately abated, the municipal court judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. 
(b)  The chief of police in such case shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 30-38. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 9-2-5) 
Secs. 30-39—30-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-65. - Certain minors not to enter billiard parlors and poolrooms; exception. 
It is unlawful for any person who operates a billiard parlor or poolroom in the city to allow any person less than 16 years of age to enter billiard parlors or poolrooms in the city, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, a billiard parlor or poolroom which does not allow any use of tobacco products, or consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, and does not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., may allow persons under 16 years of age to enter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-4-4; Ord. of 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 30-66—30-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 30-89. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person found guilty of a violation of this division shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-13; provided, however, that any such person the age of 16 years and under who is charged with a violation of this division shall be referred to juvenile court for disposition pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-11-36 et seq. 
(Ord. of 8-5-1996, § 3) 
Sec. 30-90. - Curfew hours; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor the age of 16 years and under in the incorporated area of the city to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highway, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, on any weekday between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on the following day. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(4)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(5)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through the incorporated area of the city being excepted in all cases from the curfew. 
(Ord. of 8-5-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 30-91. - Parental responsibility for compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child the age of 16 years and under to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow, such child to violate the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-5-1996, § 2) 
Chapter 32 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City and county recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; gifts of public parks or pleasure grounds to municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; park and recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; establishment of city and county supervised recreation, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-3; political subdivisions to have environmental testing on property acquired for park or recreational area, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY PARKS 

Secs. 32-19—32-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 32-40. - Use of clubhouse. 
(a)  The clubhouse will not be rented to anyone under 21 years of age. 
(b)  Persons renting the clubhouse will be held responsible for leaving the clubhouse clean and in orderly condition. 
(c)  Renters will be responsible for any damage done to the clubhouse during use of same. 
(d)  Order is to be maintained at all times while the clubhouse is in use. 
(e)  No alcoholic beverages are allowed in the clubhouse or on grounds of the same at any time. 
(f)  The clubhouse is to be vacated by 12:00 midnight when rented. 
(g)  The clubhouse key must be returned to city hall or to the police department if city hall is closed, by 10:00 a.m. of the morning following use. 
(h)  Police will be instructed to patrol and keep a check on the clubhouse while in use. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-3-1; Ord. of 1-1979) 
Chapter 34 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1; city and county development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; city and county zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local zoning proposal review procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning and service delivery by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; downtown development authority created, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-4. 

Sec. 34-19. - Declaration of need. 
There is hereby determined and declared to be a present and future need for a downtown development authority, as more fully described and defined in the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq., to function in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-2-1) 
Sec. 34-20. - Activation. 
There is hereby activated in the city the public body corporate and politic known as the "Downtown Development Authority of Lincolnton, Georgia," which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-2-2) 
Sec. 34-21. - Membership. 
The authority shall consist of seven directors appointed for staggered terms of six years, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-42-4. Each of the directors shall be a taxpayer of the city, residing in the city, and not less than four of the directors shall either have or represent a party who has an economic interest in the redevelopment and revitalization of the downtown development area. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-2-3) 
Sec. 34-22. - Organization; powers; duties. 
The board of directors shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-2-4) 
Sec. 34-23. - Downtown development area. 
The downtown development area shall be that geographical area described in exhibit A to the resolution of February 11, 1985, which is made a part hereof by reference, which area, in the judgment of the mayor and council of the city, constitutes the central business district of the city as contemplated by the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. A copy of exhibit A shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 6-2-5) 
Chapter 36 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1; hazardous waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-79; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings and disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; authorization for local government units to enforce collection of taxes, fees, or assessments for solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3; authority of local governments to adopt and enforce local regulations for the handling and disposal of solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Premises means land, buildings, or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored for collection. 
Refuse means all solid wastes of a community, including garbage, ashes, dead animals, rubbish, street cleanings, and solid market and industrial wastes, but not including body wastes. 
Responsible authority means the city sanitation department or its authorized representative who shall be authorized and directed to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by section 1-13. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-12) 
Sec. 38-3. - Accumulation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, abandon, leave, keep, store, suffer or permit the placement, abandonment, leaving, keeping or storage of nonfunctioning motor vehicles or appliances out of doors upon any public or private property within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-9(a)) 
Sec. 38-4. - Functions of the responsible authority. 
The responsible authority, in order to protect the health and safety of the people of this city, is authorized and directed, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, to control the storage, collection and disposal of refuse within the city, to provide a public refuse collection and refuse disposal service from designated sites or premises within the city so that the type and usual quantity of refuse can be safely and expeditiously handled by such public refuse collection and disposal service, or to approve and regulate the establishment, maintenance, and operation of private refuse collection systems and refuse disposal methods and sites. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 38-5. - Funds, appropriation, borrowing and other means. 
The city council is authorized to make funds available by appropriation, by borrowing or by other means in accordance with the laws and procedures of this city, for equipment for the collection or disposal of refuse, and for the establishment, maintenance and operation of refuse collection systems and refuse disposal methods and sites. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-3(a)) 
Secs. 38-6—38-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-29. - Prohibitions; private responsibility. 
(a)  The owner or his agent, or the occupant of any premises within the city shall be responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises occupied by him, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or allow to be placed or deposited on his premises any refuse except as designated by the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit refuse except bulky rubbish to accumulate on any premises, except in containers which are approved by the city council in accordance with specifications contained in this chapter. 
(c)  Any person responsible for refuse on premises not served by the refuse collection system of the city, or refuse not acceptable for collection by the city, shall make arrangements for the collection and disposal of such refuse. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-4) 
Sec. 38-30. - Refuse collection. 
The city shall collect all refuse acceptable for collection as provided in this chapter from all single-family dwellings, all multi-family or apartment dwellings, and from certain types of institutions and business and industrial establishments. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-10) 
Sec. 38-31. - Place of collection. 
All refuse to be collected by the city shall be placed not more than 100 feet from property line abutting the main street. All rubbish such as yard clippings and bulky items shall be placed at the curb in suitable containers. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-11) 
Sec. 38-32. - Roll carts; hot ashes; tampering with carts. 
(a)  Except for bulky items, refuse shall be disposed of by a system approved by the city known as the "roll cart system." Ashes containing hot embers shall not be placed in containers for collection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove covers, overturn or otherwise damage receptacles; or to create litter or health problems. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-9(e)—(g)) 
Sec. 38-33. - Bulky items. 
Bulky rubbish such as trees, weeds and large cardboard boxes must be bundled so as not to exceed four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-9(d)) 
Sec. 38-34. - Refuse acceptable for collection. 
The following refuse shall be considered to be acceptable for collection by the city: 
(1)  Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods. 
(2)  Ashes. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
(3)  Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, metals and similar materials. 
(4)  Dead animals. Small dead animals, not exceeding 75 pounds each in weight, which die in the normal course of community activity, excluding condemned animals, animals from a slaughter house or other animals normally considered industrial refuse, shall be removed by the city upon request. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-7) 
Sec. 38-35. - Refuse not acceptable for collection. 
The following types of refuse are not acceptable for city collection: 
(1)  Dangerous materials or substances (i.e., poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials and explosives). 
(2)  Unusual quantities of materials resulting from the repair, excavation or construction of buildings or structures (i.e., earth, plaster, mortar, bricks and roofing materials). 
(3)  Materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance with these regulations. 
(4)  The solid wastes resulting from industrial processes. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-8) 
Sec. 38-36. - Service charges. 
Refuse service charges within the city, for the purpose of financing the establishment, maintenance and operation of refuse collection systems or refuse disposal methods and sites, shall be in the amount established by the city council, payable monthly as a separate item in conjunction with the water and sewerage bill. Such refuse service charges shall be collected by the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-3(b), (c)) 
Secs. 38-37—38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 38-61. - Inspection. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall devise a method to periodically inspect each and every premises within the city in such a manner as to systematically locate existing nonfunctioning motor vehicles or appliances and require the abatement thereof. 
(b)  The responsible authority, upon presenting proper identification, shall have the power to enter upon private or public property at reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, §§ 4-2-6, 4-2-9(c)) 
Sec. 38-62. - Notice of nonemergency violation. 
(a)  Whenever the responsible authority determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, it shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The notice shall be in writing, include a statement of reasons why it is being issued, allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires, and be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant of such premises. The notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when a copy thereof has been served personally on the owner or his agent or the occupant by any law enforcement officer of the city. 
(c)  The notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and state that, unless conditions or practices described in such notice which violate this chapter are corrected within the reasonable time specified in such notice, a penalty as hereinafter provided will be assessed. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-5(a)) 
Sec. 38-63. - Request for and conduct of hearing on nonemergency order. 
(a)  Any person who is affected by any notice issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the city council; provided that such person shall, within ten days after the day on which the notice was served, file a written petition, in the office of the responsible authority, requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such petition, the responsible authority shall set a time and place for such a hearing. The petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(c)  The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that upon application of the petitioner, the responsible authority may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when, in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-5(b)) 
Sec. 38-64. - Decision of city council after hearing appeal of nonemergency order. 
After such hearing, the mayor and council shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice, depending upon its finding based on such hearing as to whether or not the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. If the mayor and council sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice shall automatically become an order if written petition for hearing has not been filed in the office of the responsible authority within ten days after such notice was served. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-5(c)) 
Sec. 38-65. - Emergency orders; notice and time of appeal to city council. 
(a)  Whenever the responsible authority finds that an emergency exists involving a serious health hazard which requires immediate action to protect the public health, it may, without notice or hearing, issue a written order reciting the existence of such an emergency and the conditions violating this chapter which require corrective action to remove such health hazard. If such corrective action is not taken, the responsible authority may take such action as may be necessary to protect the public health. 
(b)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the mayor and council shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible but, in any case, not later than three days after the petition is filed. 
(c)  After such hearing, depending upon its finding as to whether or not the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, the mayor and council shall continue such order in effect, modify it, or revoke it. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-5(e)) 
Sec. 38-66. - Records; appeal. 
The proceedings at such hearing, including the finding and decision of the mayor and council, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the responsible authority. Such record shall include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of this state. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-2-5(d)) 
Chapter 40 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to grant right to erect obstructions in streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; enclosures of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Penalties. 
All persons found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-9) 
Sec. 40-2. - Sidewalk construction; permit required. 
No sidewalk of any description of any brick, wood or other material shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation without a written permit from the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-6) 
Sec. 40-3. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bitulithic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-7) 
Sec. 40-4. - Deposits and discharges. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any rubbish or any material that may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article that may do injury to any person, animal, or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or to allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk, or other organic material. Thus, it shall be unlawful for anyone to wash autos on the city sidewalks. 
Sec. 40-5. - Private use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
Sec. 40-6. - Acceptance of new streets. 
No new streets shall be accepted by the city unless it meets the standards and specifications for width, grading, base preparation and sealing published by the state department of transportation and identified in the most recent edition of the publication entitled Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges, which document is incorporated by reference into this Code, and is filed in the office of the city clerk where it is available for public inspection. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-8) 
Secs. 40-7—40-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 40-31. - Permit required; exception. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. 
(b)  A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the city, but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 40-32. - Application. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 40-33. - Indemnification of city. 
Any person, firm or corporation obtaining a permit under this article agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-3) 
Sec. 40-34. - Street restoration required; penalties for violation. 
(a)  When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person, firm or corporation making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation, neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city clerk, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 40-35. - Warning devices required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a permit under the sections of this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of work. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 4-1-5) 
Secs. 40-36—40-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES 

Sec. 40-59. - Parades; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, conduct or accompany any organized parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property in the city unless an application has been previously filed and a permit granted to conduct such parade or procession within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-4-1) 
Sec. 40-60. - Application for permit. 
An application for permit to conduct or sponsor a parade or procession shall be filed with the chief of police in writing and shall contain the following information furnished by the person in official charge of the proposed parade or procession: 
(1)  The name of all organizations or persons organizing or sponsoring the parade or procession; 
(2)  The purpose of the parade or procession; 
(3)  The date and hours of the parade or procession; 
(4)  The proposed route of the parade or procession, and its beginning and termination points; 
(5)  The number and types of vehicles, marching units and floats to be used in the parade or procession; and 
(6)  The number of persons participating in the parade or procession. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-4-2) 
Sec. 40-61. - Investigation. 
The chief of police shall investigate all applications for parade permits, and may issue the permit, when the information required by this article has been furnished, and provided the proposed parade or procession is otherwise lawful and can be held without undue interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the city, regarding which circumstances the chief of police shall exercise his discretion. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 7-4-3) 
Chapter 42 - SUBDIVISIONS 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 44 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— For business occupation taxes, see Chapter 10. For alcoholic beverage excise taxes, see Chapter 4. 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county tax officials and administration, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-100 et seq.; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; miscellaneous local administration provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380; sales and use taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.; taxes on tobacco products, O.C.G.A. § 48-11-1 et seq.; levy of occupation taxes by counties and municipalities on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq.; authority of counties and municipalities to impose excise tax on lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1—44-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 44-19. - Tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 44-20. - Tax due and payable. 
All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county shall be payable on or before December 20 of each year, unless further time is allowed, but in the event of adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, the city shall, within a reasonable time thereafter, as may be determined by resolution of the mayor and council, after receipt from the county of the adjustment information, refund any overpayments or bill for any underpayments. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-12) 
Sec. 44-21. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue; interest. 
(a)  For the collection of delinquent taxes, fees and other charges, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the procedure provided by state law governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available process and remedy. 
(b)  A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state or county taxes. 
(c)  The amount due on all delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) of this section, as well as any interest or penalty thereon, shall be listed as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(d)  Any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city clerk for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interests, fines or other revenue within three calendar months plus ten days after any payment is due; provided, that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the mayor and council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect, but only upon finding that the city clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all fi. fas. issued hereunder shall earn interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law and no penalty shall be charged except in lieu of interest. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 2-5-13) 
State Law reference— Administration generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-30 et seq.; interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
Secs. 44-22—44-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of counties and municipalities to impose excise tax on lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

Sec. 44-46. - Levied. 
There is levied and imposed an excise tax at the rate of five percent of the charge of the public for and upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodging, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity in the city operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or other place in which rooms, lodging, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. Said tax shall not include the sale or charges for any rooms, lodging, or accommodations furnished for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, or for the use of meeting rooms. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 44-47. - Due date; late filing and payment penalties. 
(a)  The excise tax levied under this article shall be paid monthly on the first day of each month. Operators shall pay the tax with such remittance form as prescribed by the city. Each operator shall remit the tax to the city clerk. 
(b)  A penalty of 25 percent per month shall be due for failure to pay the excise tax within ten days of the due date. 
(c)  Upon the failure to make a timely report and remittance by the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which such sales were made, the collection fee permitted operators under this article shall be forfeited. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 2) 
State Law reference— Filing of returns and payment of taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.2; failure, neglect or refusal to collect tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-59; making false or fraudulent return, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-60; failure or refusal to furnish return or supplemental return, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-61; failure to keep records or open records to inspection, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-62. 
Sec. 44-48. - Dealers' collection fee. 
Operators collecting said tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for in the amount of three percent in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 44-49. - Inspection of books and records. 
All books and records of each dealer shall be subject to inspection and audit by the mayor and city council or their designee to verify compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 2) 
State Law reference— Preservation of books and records and examination by governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.4. 
Sec. 44-50. - Tax is in addition to other business taxes. 
The excise tax provided for hereinabove shall be in addition to any license fee or occupation tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon operators within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 44-51. - Disposition of tax proceeds by city. 
Two-fifths of all proceeds from the hotel-motel excise tax imposed by this article shall be used to promote tourism as directed by the city council and the remaining three-fifths shall be used to promote industry and trade and other qualified purposes as directed by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 4) 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; off-road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq.; cities and counties authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, §§ 8-2-5, 8-2-15, 8-3-6) 
Secs. 46-2—46-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-21. - Uniform Rules of The Road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., known as the Uniform Rules of The Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-1-1; Ord. of 9-1973) 
Sec. 46-22. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 46-23. - Vehicle load cover required. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-1-3) 
Sec. 46-24. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in anywise controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-1-5) 
Sec. 46-25. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited. 
(a)  All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. 
(b)  Any person is prohibited from: 
(1)  Stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver; 
(2)  Engaging in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic; 
(3)  Needlessly "circling the block" or dawdling or making unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations; or 
(4)  Operating in any other manner to constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 46-26. - Tracked vehicles prohibited on streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any tracked or other vehicle having metal tracks or wheels upon the city streets. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-2-4) 
Secs. 46-27—46-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181; power of local authorities to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 46-56. - Speed detection device authorized. 
The law enforcement officers of the city are authorized to use speed detection devices as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; authority for use or speed detection devices by local law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2; requirements that local government obtain state permit, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Sec. 46-57. - Reduction of speed when speed hazards exist. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions and with due regard for the actual and potential hazards that exist. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street, road, highway or other avenues of travel, in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care and caution. 
(b)  If no special hazard exists, the speed of any vehicle shall be not less than the minimum limits or in excess of the maximum limits established herein. 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 46-58. - General speed limit established. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic and use thereof, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
(b)  Thirty miles per hour shall be the maximum speed on all streets or portions of streets within the city unless otherwise indicated in this division and by officially posted signs designating the maximum vehicular speed upon those streets as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-2-2) 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 46-59. - Speed zones established. 
The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
ON-SYSTEM 
State Route 43 from the south city limits (M.L. 9.99) 0.10 mi. north of County Road #74 to Elams Heights (M.L. 10.38), a distance of 0.39 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 43 from Elams Heights (M.L. 10.38) to Groves Avenue (M.L. 10.79), a distance of 0.41 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 43 from Groves Avenue (M.L. 10.79) to Goshen Street (M.L. 11.16), a distance of 0.37 mi. to be zoned 25 mph. 
State Route 43 from Goshen Avenue (M.L. 11.16) to State Route 43 By-Pass (M.L. 11.54), a distance of 0.38 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 43 from State Route 43 By-Pass (M.L. 11.54) to the north city limits (M.L. 12.05) 0.01 mi. south of County Road #313, a distance of 0.51 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 43 By-Pass from State Route 47 (M.L. 0.00) to Goshen Street (M.L. 0.42), a distance of 0.42 mi. to be zoned 25 mph. 
State Route 43 By-Pass from Goshen Street (M.L. 0.42) to State Route 43 (M.L. 0.87), a distance of 0.45 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 47 from the west city limits (M.L. 4.42) 0.61 south of Lincoln Street to a point 0.06 mi. south of Lincoln Street (M.L. 4.97), a distance of 0.55 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 47 from a point 0.06 mi. south of Lincoln Street (M.L. 4.97) to Elams Heights (M.L. 5.67), a distance of 0.7 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
State Route 47 from Elams Heights (M.L. 5.67) to the east city limits (M.L. 6.25) 0.05 mi. east of Sunrise Drive, a distance of 0.58 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
State Route 79 from State Route 43 (M.L. 0.00) to the north city limits (M.L. 0.28) 0.08 mi. north of Lilly Way, a distance of 0.28 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Signs to be erected by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
OFF-SYSTEM 
Dallas Street from Ward Avenue to Goshen Street, a distance of 0.4 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
Lillian Sims Avenue from Elam Street (State Route 47) to Ward Avenue, a distance of 0.30 mi. to be 35 mph. 
Lillian Sims Avenue School Zone from a point 0.15 mi. north of Elam Street (State Route 47) to Ward Street, a distance of 0.15 mi. to be zoned 25 mph from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
Lovelace Road from the west city limit to Murray Street, a distance of 0.26 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Lovelace Road from Murray Street to Washington Street (State Route 43), a distance of 0.82 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
Lovelace Road School Zone from a point 0.10 mi. east of the west city limit to First Baptist Street, a distance of 0.32 mi. to be zoned 25 mph from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
Murray Street from the north city limit to a point 0.54 mi. north of Lovelace Road, a distance of 0.50 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Murray Street from a point 0.54 mi. north of Lovelace Road to Lovelace Road, a distance of 0.54 mi. to be zoned 35 mph. 
Murray Street School Zone from a point 0.25 mi. north of Lovelace Road to Lovelace Road, a distance of 0.25 mi. to be zoned 25 mph from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
Sunrise Drive from Dallas Street to State Route 47, a distance of 0.78 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Sunrise Drive School Zone from Dallas Street to Ward Avenue, a distance of 0.20 mi. to be zoned 25 mph from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
Whiterock Road from the south city limit to Elam Street (State Route 47), a distance of 0.46 mi. to be zoned 45 mph. 
Signs to be erected by the City of Lincolnton. 
(Ord. No. 07-93-004, 9-9-1993) 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Secs. 46-60—46-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 46-77. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to protect the public safety in the use of the city's streets, to facilitate and expedite traffic and to protect the streets from unusual wear and tear. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-2-11) 
Sec. 46-78. - Trucks defined. 
As used in this division, the term "trucks" shall include only those motor vehicles which singly, or in tandem or combination of tractor and trailer shall have 18 wheels on the road surface and shall also include a motor vehicle (tractor) towing a mobile home. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-2-12) 
Sec. 46-79. - Use of truck prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Trucks are prohibited by this article from the use of any of the streets or highways of this city, except as allowed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The following shall constitute exceptions to the prohibited use of trucks on the streets and highways within the city: 
(1)  Trucks making a pickup or delivery to a specified point within the city. 
(2)  Trucks traveling on U.S. Highway No. 378, Georgia State Highway No. 79, Georgia State Highway No. 47, and Georgia State Highway No. 43, except on that portion of Georgia State Highway known as Peachtree Street. 
(3)  Trucks hauling wood products on or over Lovelace Road and returning to their point of origin. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, §§ 8-2-13, 8-2-14) 
Secs. 46-80—46-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING, STANDING AND LOADING 

Sec. 46-102. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 46-103. - Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city specifically designated by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 46-104. - Certain locations, certain days and hours—Parking prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-3-3) 
Sec. 46-105. - Same—Time limitations. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-3-4) 
Sec. 46-106. - Special purpose parking zones established; parking otherwise prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any locations on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs approved by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-3-5) 
Secs. 46-107—46-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 46-126. - Authority of police chief to designate and maintain. 
(a)  The police chief or a designee thereof, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(3)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(4)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(5)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; and 
(6)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The police chief or a designee thereof is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; and 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this chapter, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-1-4(a)—(c)) 
Sec. 46-127. - Conformity with state manual required. 
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-1-4(d)) 
Sec. 46-128. - Obedience required. 
All traffic shall obey and be directed by official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-2-3) 
Sec. 46-129. - Violation of traffic control devices constitutes Code violation. 
Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 8-1-4(e)) 
Chapter 48 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et seq.; municipal home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; public water systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq.; water supply, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-470; sewage and waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-29 et seq.; refusal by city or county to supply water because of indebtedness of prior owner, occupant, or lessee prohibited and limited liens for unpaid utility charges, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Disconnection of service. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater. 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. 
(b)  The city also reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnection a customer when the customer: 
(1)  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority. 
(2)  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process. 
(3)  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due. 
(4)  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(c)  In addition to the grounds for disconnection specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  A written notice, signed by the superintendent, shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes that violate this chapter. In the event that the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible person. 
(2)  The person notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the offending conditions. If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. 
(3)  If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the above notice and if circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the superintendent, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then he may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, art. 13) 
Sec. 48-2. - Administration. 
The city public works department shall administer all provisions of this Code regarding water and wastewater. Such department shall be under the supervision of the public works superintendent. 
Sec. 48-3. - Unlawful to tamper with meters or any parts thereof; diversion of service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to: 
(1)  Injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to a company, or to the city, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services; 
(2)  Intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; 
(3)  In any way interfere with the proper action of such company or the city; 
(4)  Intentionally divert any services of such company or the city; or 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of such company or the city, any service manufactured, sold, or distributed by such company or the city. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts referred to in this section or the person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of such improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 5-1-5) 
Secs. 48-4—48-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-21. - Meters. 
(a)  Every regular consumer of water shall be supplied with a meter by the city, which meter shall be under the exclusive control of the city, for which the consumer shall deposit an amount as determined by the mayor and council and filed in the city clerk's office. This amount shall be refunded by the city in the event that any consumer discontinues the use of city water, less all charges which may stand against that consumer. 
(b)  Water meters shall be located at the property line adjacent to a street or alleyway or at any other location as determined by the city. The person in whose name the service is rendered shall be responsible for water meter rents. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 5-1-1) 
Sec. 48-22. - Schedule of water and sewer rates. 
The schedule of water and sewer rates and connection fees, as set from time to time by the mayor and council, and including any delinquent penalties and special charges and fees, shall be kept current and maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 5-1-2) 
Sec. 48-23. - Deposit required; discontinuance of service for nonpayment; reinstatement of service. 
(a)  Unless waived by the city, each user of water supplied by the city waterworks system shall deposit with the city clerk an amount determined by the mayor and council as a water deposit. This amount shall remain on deposit in the city treasury as a guarantee for water meter rent. In the event that the customer fails to pay the water rent, then the city clerk shall apply the deposit towards liquidation of the amount due by the customer, and the water supply to his premises shall be disconnected. 
(b)  The city is required to give the water user at least three days' notice before discontinuing service for nonpayment of bills. Service shall be reinstated following discontinuance only when the delinquent account has been paid in full and upon payment to the city of a reinstatement fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 5-1-3) 
Sec. 48-24. - Must connect to water before occupying any building. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any building of any kind unless the same is connected with the water system of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person except an authorized employee of the city to connect with or tap any water main of the city, except with the specific authorization of the employee and under his supervision. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 5-1-4) 
Sec. 48-25. - Only authorized persons to use water from public hydrants. 
No person, except authorized city officers and employees, shall take water from any public hydrant, plug, street washer or drain cock. 
(Comp. Ords. 1998, § 5-1-6) 
Sec. 48-26. - Alternative self-inspection not permitted. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d)(1), relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, in lieu of inspection by the appointed city official, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(Ord. of 6-10-1996, § 1) 
Secs. 48-27—48-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LANDSCAPE WATERING RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 48-58. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation does not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
a.  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; 
b.  Feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; 
c.  The commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; 
d.  Producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable municipal ordinance and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of the property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 48-59. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this division. 
(b)  The police department shall be the enforcement authority for this division. The city or the county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2010, § 2) 
Secs. 48-60—48-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DROUGHT EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 48-77. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this division is to establish the policy for and enforcement of outdoor water use in compliance with the state law and regulations on outdoor water use during emergency conditions. 
(Ord. of 12-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 48-78. - Division effective only upon declaration of drought emergency. 
The provisions of this division shall be in effect when the official appointed by the city to enforce the provisions of this division declares a drought emergency, but only after the state environmental protection division (EPD) has declared a Drought Response Level Four. In the event a drought emergency is declared as provided in this division, this division shall take precedence over all other city water use regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-3-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 48-79. - Applicability. 
These rules apply to an entity, and its customers, permitted by the state environmental protection division (EPD) for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(Ord. of 12-3-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 48-80. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Environmental protection division (EPD) means an organizational unit of the state department of natural resources (DNR) that has responsibility for administration of state rules for outdoor water use promulgated by the state board of natural resources and set forth in Ga. Adm. Code. ch. 391-3-30. 
Owner means a person who owns real property or the person's employee or agent. 
Tenant means any person other than the owner who has possession or the right of possession of real property. 
(Ord. of 12-3-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 48-81. - Outdoor water use prohibited during drought emergency. 
During periods of drought emergency, and upon EPD declaration of drought response level four, no outdoor water use is allowed, other than as specifically otherwise provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 12-3-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 48-82. - Exemptions; exceptions. 
When a drought emergency has been declared following an EPD declaration of Drought Response Level Four, the following outdoor water uses and users are exempt from the outdoor water use prohibited provided in this division: 
(1)  Persons capturing and reusing cooling system condensate or storm water. 
(2)  Persons reusing bath or dishwater. 
(3)  Persons using water for purposes of irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(4)  Fruit and vegetable growers using water in conjunction with the commercial activities. 
(5)  Retail garden centers using water in conjunction with the commercial activities. 
(6)  Producers of food and fiber using water in conjunction with the commercial activities. 
(7)  Carwashes using water in conjunction with commercial activities. 
(8)  Commercial entities providing power washing as part of their commercial activities. 
(9)  Builders and other professionals using water as part of their commercial activities at construction sites. 
(10)  Commercial entities performing watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf as part of their commercial activities. 
(11)  Outdoor water use by professionally certified or licensed landscapers and sports turf landscapers, but only during installation of landscaping and 30 days following installation, and provided that professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for this exemption to apply. 
(12)  Outdoor water use by irrigation contractors but only during installation of irrigation systems and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments of such systems. 
(13)  Other activities essential to daily business enterprises. 
(Ord. of 12-3-2007, § 5) 
Sec. 48-83. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No owner or tenant shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions contained in this division. 
(b)  Every police officer, firefighter, and every water and sewer employee shall be authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this division. Such officers are hereby authorized to enter onto property for the purpose of inspection for compliance. If personal contact is made with the owner or tenant, the officer shall require immediate compliance. 
(c)  A first violation will result in the issuance of a written warning citation posted at the property where the violation occurred. 
(d)  Upon a second or subsequent violation, a citation shall be issued requiring an appearance in municipal court and shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 12-3-2007, § 6) 
Secs. 48-84—48-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system, which receives the lowest discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Cooking establishments means those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautï¿½ing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having, or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through said system. Said contracts shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Discoloration means a stain, spot, or tint that is obvious in appearance and occurs with increasing frequency and is different from the ordinary wastewater color or tint. This type of discoloration is caused by but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Fats, oils, and greases means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pre-treated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Grease trap or interceptor means a device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect solids that can settle, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the Lincoln County Board of Commissioners and their duly appointed assistants. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing process, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary sewage. 
Infiltration/Inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
Minimum design capability means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged into the public sanitary sewer. 
Municipality means the governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and sanitary sewer system within the city and adjacent areas of Lincoln County. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Non-cooking establishments means those establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving establishments. 
Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD 5 is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorous is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 20 mg/l, and the total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
ph means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Pit privy means a shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with a hinged flytight seat and lid. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch or (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with a sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out and a subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters as may be present. Referred to also as "wastewater." 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage, which may also be referred to as a "water pollution control plant" or "wastewater treatment plant." 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage, often used as synonymous with wastewater facilities, water pollution control facilities. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain , sometimes termed "storm sewer," means a drain or sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the public works director of the city or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtration as approved by the EPA and referred to as "nonfilterable residue." 
Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not benefit by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
User means the party who is billed, usually for sewer services, from a single connection; the term has no reference to the number of persons served (also called "customer"). 
User charge means the charge paid by each user to defray, at a minimum, the operating and maintenance cost of the sewer system. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Water pollution control facilities. See Wastewater facilities . 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, art. 1) 
Sec. 48-111. - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in title 40 CFR 403. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, art. 14) 
Sec. 48-112. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so. Detached garages and accessory buildings used for storage of tools and equipment are not required to have sanitary facilities. 
(e)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided, that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health department may be used. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, art. 2) 
Secs. 48-113—48-137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 48-138. - Permitted when public sewer not available. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not reasonably available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the rules and regulations of the city and the state department of human resources. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.1) 
Sec. 48-139. - Connection to public sewer required when available. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection to the public sewer shall be mandatory within 30 days after the private system has been cited by the health officer as a health hazard, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.5) 
Sec. 48-140. - Permit required; fee. 
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee for residential and for commercial buildings shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.2) 
Sec. 48-141. - Approval of superintendent required; inspection. 
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be conducted by the superintendent within 48 hours, excepting weekends and legal holidays, of receipt of applicant's written notice directed to the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.3) 
Sec. 48-142. - Compliance with state and local rules required. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all directives of the state department of public health and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.4) 
Sec. 48-143. - Restrictions based on lot size. 
No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 40,000 square feet. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.4) 
Sec. 48-144. - Discharge to natural outlet prohibited. 
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.4) 
Sec. 48-145. - Operation and maintenance standards. 
The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a proper sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. Pumping of septic tanks shall be carried out by licensed pumping contractors. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.6) 
Sec. 48-146. - Property with private water systems not to be connected. 
Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.7) 
Sec. 48-147. - Pit privy location restrictions. 
No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved. 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply. 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.9) 
Sec. 48-148. - Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system. 
(a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw, or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catchbasin, or other opening into the city sewer system the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided by this article. 
(b)  Permits. The superintendent is hereby authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the superintendent and under his supervision. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the superintendent, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
(c)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks as established by the city. A record shall be kept of such dumping and statements rendered at the first of each month. The amount of such statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within such ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.10) 
Sec. 48-149. - Conflicting regulations. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state department of public health or the city. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 3.8) 
Secs. 48-150—48-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 48-167. - Tampering with sewer apparatus without permit prohibited. 
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.1) 
Sec. 48-168. - When advance notice of connection required; permit application. 
(a)  Any person or business proposing a new discharge into the public sewage system or a greater than ten percent change in the volume or character of pollutants that are currently discharged into the system by that person or business shall notify the city at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. Proposed discharges greater than 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) shall be reviewed by the city during the planning phase of the project to ensure adequate capacity is available. 
(b)  Any person proposing those actions described in this section shall make application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as set by the city shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, §§ 4.2, 4.3) 
Sec. 48-169. - Cost to be borne by owner; indemnification of city. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, maintenance, and repair of the building sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.4) 
Sec. 48-170. - Separate sewer required for each building; exceptions. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The city will not be responsible for any property damage resulting from inadequate service line capacity, grade, or size for such single connection. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.5) 
Sec. 48-171. - Use of old building sewers requires approval. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.6) 
Sec. 48-172. - Applicable codes, rules and standards for construction. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city supervision: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. 
(2)  Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints. The superintendent may require sewer lines that may be exposed to damage by tree roots be cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the superintendent. 
(3)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(4)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(5)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(6)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(7)  Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C-564. 
(8)  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(9)  PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber O ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of the gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. 
(10)  Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the superintendent. 
(11)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the Y branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less and no properly located Y branch is available, the city shall at the owner's expense cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth (0.10) foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the superintendent. 
(12)  Each service line connecting to the public sewer shall have installed the appropriate clean-out structure at the right-of-way or easement limit. The private sewer service line shall then be installed with clean-outs located at every directional change and at intervals not to exceed 90 feet. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.7) 
Sec. 48-173. - Applicable codes, rules and standards for connection. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. All such connections shall be made gastight, watertight, and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.13) 
Sec. 48-174. - Elevation; placement restrictions. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building sewer line is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building sewer line shall be lifted by pumps or other approved means and discharged to the public sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.8) 
Sec. 48-175. - Surface runoff discharges prohibited. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.9) 
Sec. 48-176. - Notice that installation is ready for inspection; supervision of connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.10) 
Sec. 48-177. - Barricades required for excavations. 
All excavation for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.11) 
Sec. 48-178. - Availability of sewers and fees to be determined by city. 
The city will determine the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.12) 
Sec. 48-179. - Repair of service lines; cost to owner. 
If any individual sewer service line allows the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may require the owner to repair the sewer service line, charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property, and require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system until necessary repairs are completed and the entrance of infiltration and inflow is stopped. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 4.14) 
Secs. 48-180—48-196. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISCHARGE AND USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 48-197. - Surface, cooling and industrial process discharges prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on written approval of the superintendent and the state environmental protection division to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, §§ 5.1, 5.2) 
Sec. 48-198. - Certain chemical and obstructive discharges prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 5.3) 
Sec. 48-199. - Other harmful discharges prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius. 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum, oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit or 0 degrees Celsius and 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  All industrial discharges to the city sewer system that do not comply with the federal industrial pretreatment standards (40 CFR 403) and those industrial pretreatment standards developed by the state environmental protection division applicable to the user. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing taste- or odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with the applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions which cannot be removed by the treatment process), which consequently impairs color to the treatment plants effluent, thereby creating objectionable conditions in the receiving stream which interfere with the streams designated use. 
c.  Unusual BOD (above 300-mg/l), chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 5.4) 
Sec. 48-200. - Protection from damage. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or knowingly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, art. 7) 
Secs. 48-201—48-223. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FATS, OILS AND GREASES 

Sec. 48-224. - Purpose and intent. 
The scope and purpose of this article is to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases into the city sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 6.1) 
Sec. 48-225. - Interceptor maintenance, recordkeeping, and grease removal. 
(a)  Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as required by the superintendent or his designee. Grease interceptors shall be installed at the user's expense, when such user operates a cooking establishment. Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooking or cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments when they are deemed necessary by the health officer or superintendent for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease. 
(b)  No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from any grease interceptor to exceed 325 milligrams per liter, as identified by EPA Method 1664 or 275 milligrams per liter, as identified by EPA Method 413. 
(c)  All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and capacity approved by the superintendent or his designee and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning by the user and city inspection. 
(d)  All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less often than every 30 days. Users who are required to pass water through a grease interceptor shall: 
(1)  Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24 minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate, as predicted by the uniform plumbing code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles, with 20 percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified hereafter as a sludge pocket. 
(2)  Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as required, but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the user's expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor. 
(3)  Accept the following conditions: If any skimmed or pumped wastes or other materials removed from grease interceptor are treated in any fashion on-site and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an activity of and after said on-site treatment, the user shall be responsible for the attainment of the established grease numerical limit described in this subsection (d) on all discharges of wastewater from said grease interceptor into the city sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
(4)  Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to maintain said device such that attainment of the grease limit is consistently achieved. Consistent means any wastewater sample taken from said grease interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment described in this subsection (d). 
(5)  Understand and agree that the use of biological additives and automatic grease removal systems as a grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the health officer or superintendent. Any establishment using this method of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the trap's outlet, is consistently achieved. 
(6)  Understand and agree that the health officer or superintendent reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance, facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to, or modification or replacement of, such traps. 
(e)  If an establishment desires, because of documented space constraints, an alternative to an out-of-building grease interceptor, the request for an alternative location shall contain the location of city sewer main and easement in relation to available exterior space outside building and existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site. 
(f)  The user shall maintain a written record of trap maintenance and retain such record for three years. All such records will be available for inspection by the city at all times. 
(g)  No non-grease-laden sources are allowed to be connected to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service. 
(h)  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each grease trap chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, art. 6) 
Secs. 48-226—48-243. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES 

Sec. 48-244. - Discharge prohibited. 
The following are considered industrial wastes and as such shall not be discharged to a public sanitary sewer, a storm sewer or a natural outlet: 
(1)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment plant exceeds the limits established by the superintendent or the industry user's National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Pretreatment Permit for such materials. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent or the industry user's NPDES pretreatment permit as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(3)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent or the industry user's NPDES pretreatment permit in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(5)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions which cannot be removed by the treatment process), which consequently impairs color to the treatment plants effluent, thereby creating objectionable conditions in the receiving stream which interfere with the streams designated use. 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works, causing the effluent limitations of the discharge permit to be exceeded. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein. 
(6)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, §§ 12.1, 12.2) 
Sec. 48-245. - Action by superintendent. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 48-244 and that, in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plans and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws and the municipal discharge permit. 
(c)  Furthermore, such pretreatment installations must be consistent with and in compliance with the requirements of any state pretreatment permit issued to the industry user. The industry user shall provide the city with copies of the pretreatment permit and the monthly discharge monitoring reports upon request of the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 12.3) 
Sec. 48-246. - Sampling. 
Sampling of waters and wastes discharged to public sewers to ensure compliance with this article shall occur at the point of the connection to the public sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 12.5) 
Sec. 48-247. - Planning meeting for proposed discharges. 
A new industry seeking to locate in the city or existing industry users proposing to expand operations in the city shall notify the superintendent of its proposal to discharge water and waste to the public sewer. Following notification, a planning meeting shall be conducted by the city for all proposed discharges greater than normal wastewater. In the interest of the industry user, this planning meeting should be conducted by the city near the beginning of the planning phase. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 12.6) 
Secs. 48-248—48-272. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SEWER EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 48-273. - Areas serviced; discretion of city. 
Construction of sewer mains and appurtenances by the city shall be limited to areas within the city or those areas outside the city which are being served by city water or gas, or as may be requested by area citizens. Sewer extensions will only be made if it is financially feasible, in the sole discretion of the city. Extensions of sewer lines may be extended to property boundaries based on available funds and priorities established by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, §§ 10.1, 10.2) 
Sec. 48-274. - New subdivisions. 
Sewer systems in newly established subdivisions may be connected to the city sewage works provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The collecting system within the subdivision and the connecting pipes to the public sewer are designed by a registered professional engineer of this state and approved by all applicable agencies. 
(2)  An application for approval of the proposed works shall be submitted to the city prior to start of construction. 
(3)  The volume of the collected wastes from the proposed system shall not cause any part of the sewage works to become overloaded. 
(4)  All costs applicable to the proposed works shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(5)  Approval of the completed sewage works must be obtained from the superintendent before the city shall assume responsibility of ownership. 
(6)  All proposed extensions shall be public extensions and shall be approved based on that extension's conformance to the city's standards and specifications as promulgated in this article. Prior to acceptance, all as-built plans, property rights-of-way and easements, and certifications of the owner's engineer shall be filed with the city for formal acceptance. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 10.3) 
Secs. 48-275—48-296. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - USE RATES AND OTHER COSTS 

Sec. 48-297. - Sewer system connection subject to sanitary sewer fees for construction and improvement; costs of principal borne by system users. 
All property directly connected to the sewer system and served by sewage works shall be subject to fees in support of the construction, extension, and improvement of the public sanitary sewers, to be levied and collected in accordance with this division. The cost of principal and interest, either bonded or otherwise, shall be borne by those users connected to the system. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 11.1) 
Sec. 48-298. - Connection fee or buy-in assessment. 
All new users shall be required to pay a connection fee or a buy-in assessment at a rate determined to be proportionate to existing user costs of capitalization of the facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 11.1) 
Sec. 48-299. - Method of establishing use rates. 
(a)  The annual operating and maintenance cost of the sewer system shall be paid by the users of the system in proportion to their use. Charges for use of the system shall be based upon volume of wastewater discharged to the sewage works. 
(b)  The city shall establish a user rate in accordance with appropriate federal and state rules and regulations pertaining to the costs associated to the use of the sewer by residential, commercial, and individual users. 
(c)  The city shall, in establishing the rates referred to in this division, make specific reference to the sewer use rate structure in force at the time of any connection. The sewer use rate structure shall incorporate the requirements of 40 CFR 35.935-13. 
(d)  Rates provided for within this article shall be established by the mayor and council and may be changed from time to time as required. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, §§ 11.2—11.5) 
Sec. 48-300. - Hookup fee. 
Users intending to connect to the public sewer shall pay an initial hookup charge which shall be established by the city and may be changed from time to time as required. These hookup charges may be used for either pre-existing, current or future capital improvements. Hookup charges shall be payable in full prior to the start of construction for all additions, improvements to, and/or enlargements of existing buildings, or upon the start of the construction or installation of non-building or accessory structures directly and indirectly connected to the public sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, §§ 11.6, 11.7) 
Sec. 48-301. - Charges constitute lien on property and improvements. 
All sums payable to the city under this division shall be secured by a lien on all real property and improvements intended to be served by the connection for which the payment is due in the manner and to the same effect as taxes are a lien upon real estate and shall be further secured by a lien on any commercial equipment, the ordinary use and operation of which generates wastewater, and a lien on any and all furnishings, fixtures and equipment used in connection with the use and operation of such commercial equipment, to the same effect as taxes are a lien upon personal property. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, § 11.8) 
Secs. 48-302—48-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 48-321. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  While performing necessary work on private properties, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the property owner. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, art. 8) 
Sec. 48-322. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-13. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city as a result of said violation. 
(b)  In the event of violation of this article, the health officer or the city may verbally instruct the property owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the property owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or the city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The written order shall be mailed via certified U.S. mail to the property owner's last known address and additionally a copy of the written order shall be hand-delivered to the subject building or property. If no person is available to accept the order at the building or property, then it shall be posted at the primary entrance to the building or property. 
(c)  Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or the city pursuant to this article will constitute a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the state; provided further that compliance with this article is required notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued. 
(d)  The violation of any provisions of this article, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public nuisance, which is injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort, may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of a notice of violation of this article or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease, the owner or owners of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city council to present evidence challenging the validity of the city order. The owner may appear in person or by agent with or without an attorney. Said hearing demand must be filed with the city clerk within five days from receipt of the order being challenged. Upon receipt of a proper written demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time, and place for said hearing to be not less than 30 days from the date of filing said demand. The city's decision at said hearing will be a final decision subject to direct appeal to the county superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(g)  For the purposes of this article, the decisions of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health officer on any issue of sewage sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well being. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2008, art. 9) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE COMPILED ORDINANCES OF 1998 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Compiled Ordinances of 1998 that are included herein. Sections of the Compiled Ordinances of 1998 not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 