THE CODE OF TROUP COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: July 5, 2005  Effective: July 5, 2005 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of 
TROUP COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Patrick Crews  Chairman 
____________ 
Ellis P. Cadenhead—District 2  Lewis C. Davis, Jr.—District 3  L. Morris Jones, III—District 4  Richard English, Jr.—District 5  Commissioners 
____________ 
Tod Tentler  County Manager 
____________ 
Jerry Willis  County Attorney 
____________ 
Cheryl May  County Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of 
TROUP COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Tim Duffey  Chairman 
____________ 
Robert W. Davis  Richard English, Jr.  Julian Morris Jones, III  Kenneth M. Smith, Sr.  Commissioners 
____________ 
Michael J. Dobbs  County Manager 
____________ 
Jerry Willis  County Attorney 
____________ 
Stewart Mills  County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Troup County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1987 Code, as supplemented through July 2001, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Ron K. McLaughlin, Senior Code Attorney, and Robert McNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Edward L. Long, Jr., Assistant County Attorney, and Michael J. Dobbs, Assistant County Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Troup County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Troup County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Troup County, Georgia. 2005. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-01 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR TROUP COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Troup County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 78, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 7, 2004, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or imprisonment not exceeding 180 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 7, 2004, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately. 
Passed and adopted by the Troup County Board of Commissioners this 5th day of July, 2005. 

ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Adoption of Code; name. 
The codification of resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances passed by the board of commissioners is adopted as "The Code of Troup County, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Troup County Code." 
(Code 1987, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Incorporation of resolutions, etc. 
Any resolution, general resolution or ordinance not presently included in the Official Code of Troup County, Georgia, and passed subsequent to the preparation of such codification is automatically included and incorporated herein by reference. 
Sec. 1-3. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk to the board of commissioners, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or someone authorized by the clerk to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances which indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of this Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the board of commissioners. This copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine such copy and shall be considered the Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all resolutions and ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
General. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Board of commissioners and board. The terms "board of commissioners" and board shall mean the board of commissioners of Troup County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean The Code of Troup County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Commissioner. The term "commissioner" shall mean one or more members of the board of commissioners. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. and the county The terms "county" and "the county" shall mean the County of Troup, State of Georgia. 
County clerk. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the term "county clerk" shall mean the person employed by the board of commissioners to fulfill the duties of clerk of the board of commissioners as then defined. 
Day. The term "day" shall mean a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Joint authority. All terms giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such terms are used to grant authority to the board of commissioners. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" shall mean and denote applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of Georgia, the resolutions of the county, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
May. The term "may" is permissive. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is mandatory. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of Troup County" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical terms. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read as the term "and," and the term "and" may be read as the term "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal resolutions, ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of terms as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances or resolutions of the county. 
Person. The term "person" shall include a natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, club, company, business, trust and any other group acting as a unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Road and street. The terms "road" and "street" shall include all roads, streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this county which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the county clerk's office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Troup County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State and the state. The terms "state" and "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1987, §§ 1-2, 1-3) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1987, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1987, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - References to titles of officers, employees, public bodies. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board of commission of the county. 
Sec. 1-8. - Interpretation of language. 
All terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Sec. 1-9. - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the resolutions and resolutions of the county unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
(1)  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
(2)  Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(3)  Tenses. Terms used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Code 1987, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-10. - Acts by agent. 
When an act is required by resolution or ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by a designated agent. 
Sec. 1-11. - Causing, permitting, abetting or concealing prohibited act. 
Whenever in the resolutions or ordinances of the county any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
Sec. 1-12. - Construction of provisions. 
The provisions of the resolutions or ordinances of the county and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
Sec. 1-13. - Effect of repeal or expiration of resolution. 
(a)  The repeal of a resolution or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the resolution expired and shall not repeal the repealing clause of a resolution or revive any resolution or ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(b)  When a resolution or ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous resolution or ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1987, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-14. - Matters not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the resolution or ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following preexisting matters: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any resolution or ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any resolution or ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any resolution or ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation resolution or ordinance. 
(8)  Any resolution or ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any resolution or ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning resolution or ordinance. 
(11)  Any resolution or ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any resolution or ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative resolutions or ordinances of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any resolution or ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any resolution or ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
No such resolution or ordinance shall be construed to revive any resolution or ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent resolution or ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such resolutions or ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1987, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-15. - Provisions considered continuations of existing resolutions. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as resolutions or ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-16. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All resolutions or ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent resolutions or ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent resolutions or ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent resolutions or ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent resolutions or ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Troup County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1987, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-17. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of resolutions or ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest resolution or ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in resolutions and parts of resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the resolution or ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this resolution" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the resolution or ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of resolution or ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of resolution material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1987, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-18. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by resolution or ordinance or other official act of the board of commissioners. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-19. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-19. - General penalty; continuing violations; prosecution of violations; authority granted to court. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives the board of commissioners, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare, authorization to adopt resolutions and ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, violations of which resolutions and ordinances may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both. 
(b)  O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 gives jurisdiction over violations of county resolutions and ordinances to the magistrate court of the county. 
(c)  O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 is hereby incorporated as a part of the Official Code of Troup County, Georgia. 
(d)  Whenever in this Code or in any resolution or ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment, provided that not less than 120 days of any sentence of imprisonment shall be probated, or both, except as otherwise provided by general law. The fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(e)  Prosecution of violations of resolutions or ordinances of Troup County, Georgia are authorized and shall be upon: 
(1)  Accusation by the county attorney or such other attorney as the Troup County Board of Commissioners, by and through the county manager, shall designate; 
(2)  Citations issued by the Troup County Marshal or his designated officers; or 
(3)  Citations issued by the Troup County Building Official or his designated code enforcement inspectors for violations of chapters 6, 10, 14, 18, 30, 34, 38, 43, 46, 50, 66, 70 and appendices A—D of the Troup County Code. 
(f)  The judge of the magistrate court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the magistrate court the fines provided for in this section and as otherwise specifically set forth in the Code, the resolutions and ordinances of the county, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Suspend sentences to allow the payment of a fine or restitution to a victim, the performance of community service work in lieu of a fine or incarceration, or the completion of other conditions that relate to the underlying offense; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(g)  The judge of the magistrate court shall have full power and authority to issue executions and declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1987, § 1-8; Ord. No. 2018-03 , § I, 8-1-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-03 , § I, adopted Aug. 1, 2017, changed the title of § 1-19 from "General penalty; continuing violations; authority granted to court" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers an prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-23; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-20. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-14(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-14(3); any resolution or ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-14(4); the administrative resolutions and ordinance of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provision of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-14(13); construction board of adjustment and appeals, § 18-141 et seq.; elections, ch. 26; administration and enforcement of flood damage prevention, § 38-61 et seq.; historic preservation commission, § 42-31 et seq.; planning, ch. 58; county marshal, § 62-31 et seq.; administration and enforcement of solid waste disposal, § 70-2; utilities, ch. 78; administration of zoning regulations, app. A, art. XXIX, § 1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Records retention schedule. 
The records retention schedules for county governments as approved by the state records committee is hereby adopted as the records retention schedule for all county records stored in the county archives. 
(Code 1987, § 2-1) 
State Law reference— Records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99; approval of retention schedules, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-92. 
Sec. 2-2. - Workers' compensation; certain elected officials to be covered. 
Certain elected officials of the county shall be covered under the county's workers' compensation policy. While performing their elected duties, the board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, magistrate judge, state court judge, solicitor, tax commissioner, clerk of court, and coroner shall be covered under the state workers' compensation laws. 
(Code 1987, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-3. - Smoking in county buildings and motor vehicles. 
The interior of all county buildings and motor vehicles shall be smoke free so that no one shall smoke any tobacco product within the confines of such buildings or motor vehicles. 
(Code 1987, § 2-6) 
Cross reference— Buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18. 
Secs. 2-4—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Petitions to board of commissioners; contents and form. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby adopts the following requirements for the submission of petitions to the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Clearly state the purpose of the petition, whether for or against the matter being represented; 
(2)  Contain a detailed description of the purpose of the petition for the benefit of those signing and those receiving the petition; 
(3)  Include a certification by the person circulating the petition that those signing the petition are fully aware of the purpose of the petition; 
(4)  Have the complete name and address, for future reference, of all those signing; 
(5)  Submit to the board of commissioners in ample time for review before the actual meeting at which time the proposal is to be reviewed. 
(b)  Such petitions shall be in substantially the following form: 
PETITION 
DATE________ 
1.  The purpose of this petition is to express an opinion _______ the _______ on property located at _____ _____ _____ 
2.  The proposal for which this petition is being circulated is as follows: _____ _____ _____ _____ 
3.  I hereby certify that this petition has been fully explained to the signers and that the signers are fully aware of its purpose and no remuneration or coercion was used in obtaining their signatures, and that each person signed their own signature. 

 
(Code 1987, § 2-20) 
Secs. 2-32—2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 

Sec. 2-51. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Code 1987, § 2-25) 
Sec. 2-52. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the board then in office. It is the duty of the chairman to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairman if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairman with the approval of the commissioners present. 
(Code 1987, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-53. - Voting majority. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a minimum of three commissioners present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. 
(Code 1987, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-54. - Abstentions. 
A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest which would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Code 1987, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-55. - Chairman. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairman must enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by and the board of commissioners. The chairman shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chairman may not introduce motions or second a motion except that the chairman may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session as authorized by section 2-67. The chairman is not required to vote except to break a tie. 
(Code 1987, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-56. - Vice-chairman. 
The board shall select a vice-chairman from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairman shall fulfill the duties of the chairman if the chairman is not in attendance. If the chairman and the vice-chairman are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as temporary chairman of the meeting until either the chairman or vice-chairman is present at the meeting. 
(Code 1987, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-57. - Agenda. 
(a)  The county manager, with the advice of the chairman and the commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. Any commissioner may request an item be placed on the agenda by notifying the county manager at least three business days before the board meeting. With the chairman's approval, such items will be placed on the agenda. The chairman maintains the right to allow exceptions to the three-day advance notice as deemed appropriate or necessary. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners, and others as appropriate, at least one business day before every board meeting. 
(b)  Members of the public may also request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda. To be considered, however, this request must be submitted in writing to the county manager and received at least three business days before the meeting. With the chairman's approval, such items will be placed on the agenda. 
(c)  The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. A new subject not on the agenda that requires attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. 
(d)  A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Code 1987, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-58. - Minutes. 
(a)  The clerk of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the board meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the commissioner who proposed each motion, the commissioner who seconded each motion and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
(b)  The board must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairman and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-59. - Order of business. 
All regular board meetings should follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Opening. 
(2)  Pledge of allegiance. 
(3)  Approval of minutes. 
(4)  People to address the board. 
(5)  Special business. 
(6)  Public hearings. 
(7)  Committee reports. 
(8)  Manager's reports. 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1987, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-60. - Decorum. 
(a)  All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairman and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner may not speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairman. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)  The chairman shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairman can rule on the question or he can allow the board to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(Code 1987, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-61. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public comments. All members of the public who wish to address the board must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the county manager at least three business days before the board meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments which must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. 
(2)  Public participation on agenda items. By concurrence of a majority of the members present, the board may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. Anyone wishing to speak at any board meeting must be recognized by the chairman before addressing the board. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals who violate any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairman or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairman. 
(4)  Public hearings. The board may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board, Hearings may be held at any time, as scheduled, during a meeting of the board or at such other places and times as the board may determine. The public hearing should be closed by motion, second and majority vote, before any official action shall be taken. 
(Code 1987, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-62. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for board meetings. 
(Code 1987, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-63. - Amendments to rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county manager three business days before a regular meeting of the board. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all board members. All amendments require a four-fifths vote of the board to be adopted. 
(Code 1987, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, § 2-64, which pertained to regular meetings, and derived from the 1987 Code, § 2-39, has been removed. See § 2-65 for the latest legislation passed. 
Sec. 2-65. - Regular meetings, special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
In accordance with local act, the board of commissioners shall hold at least one regular meeting each month at the Troup County Government Center located at 100 Ridley Avenue on the first Tuesday of each month, or if this day falls on a legal holiday, on the next succeeding day which is not a holiday. Other regular meetings may be cancelled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county by the chairman for any reason. Special meetings may be scheduled by the chairman or at the request of two commissioners. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be cancelled, or held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 2-39.1) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, the title of § 2-65 has been changed from "Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 2-66. - Emergency meetings. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the county board of commissioners as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Code 1987, § 2-39.2) 
Sec. 2-67. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the board may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the board is devoted in part to matters with the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. 
(b)  No executive session shall be held, except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the clerk of the board of commissioners at the direction of the chairman. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Code 1987, § 2-39.3) 
Sec. 2-68. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a four-fifths vote of the board. Rules governing quorum (section 2-51), voting methods and requirements (section 2-53 and section 2-54), the notification to commissioners of meetings (sections 2-65 and 2-66) and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(Code 1987, § 2-39.4) 
Sec. 2-69. - Committees. 
The chairman may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board of commissioners, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration unless authorized by appropriate action by the board of commissioners to do so. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairman. 
(Code 1987, § 2-39.5) 
Sec. 2-70. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
(Code 1987, § 2-39.6) 
Secs. 2-71—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; county manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; reserved. 

Sec. 2-101. - Office created; appointment; ineligibility of board member. 
There is hereby created the office of county manager. The county manager shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the board of commissioners. No member of the board shall be appointed county manager or acting county manager during the term of office for which such member was elected or for a period of one year thereafter. 
(Code 1987, § 2-40; Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 1(6.1(a)), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-102. - Compensation as fixed. 
The county manager shall be paid an annual salary to be fixed by the board of commissioners. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall conduct periodic performance evaluations of the county manager, report upon the same to the board, and, unless otherwise determined by the board, may make adjustments to the county manager's compensation. 
(Code 1987, § 2-41; Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 1(6.1(b)), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-103. - Qualifications. 
The county manager shall be chosen by the board of commissioners solely upon the basis of the person's executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to the person's actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office as set forth in section 2-104. 
(Code 1987, § 2-42; Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 1(6.1(c)), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-104. - Duties generally. 
The county manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the county government. Such manager shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the proper administration of all affairs of the county, except as otherwise provided by law. Specific duties, powers and responsibilities shall be as follows: 
(1)  To appoint, hire, engage, enter into employment contracts, remove and provide for the terms and conditions of severance incidental to employment separation, and discipline all officers, and employees of the county whom the board of commissioners has been heretofore empowered to appoint and discharge, except the county attorney, county physician and county auditor, whose employment and service shall be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  To see that all ordinances, resolutions and regulations adopted by the board are enforced and duly carried out in accordance with the directions of such board. 
(3)  To exercise administrative control over all departments or divisions of the county over which the board or manager has heretofore exercised such control, or that may hereafter be created. 
(4)  To attend all meetings of the board of commissioners, except those executive sessions dealing with the county manager's employment, with the right to take part in the discussion; provided such manager shall have no vote before the board. 
(5)  To examine at regular intervals, not to exceed 30 days, the accounts, records and operations of the office of the board of commissioners and to keep the board advised of the financial condition and future needs of the county and to make such recommendations on the financial planning of the county as such manager deems necessary for the efficient operation of the county. 
(6)  To prepare and submit to the board of commissioners an annual budget. 
(7)  To appear before the board at any time the board requires to make such reports as the board deems necessary. 
(8)  To execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond, payable to the commissioners, to be approved by the board, conditioned upon the faithful performance of such manager's duties, the amount therefor to be determined by the board. This requirement may be satisfied by inclusion of the county manager within the coverage of any blanket bond issued to Troup County as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 45-4-11 with coverage of no less than $100,000.00. 
(9)  To make or provide for the purchases of goods and services on behalf of the county as provided in section 2-105. 
(10)  To confer with and assist other public agencies, such as the county health department, department of family and children services and other agencies, whose missions are not under the direct control and supervision of the board of commissioners, but who may depend upon appropriations of the board for their continued operation. 
(11)  To recommend compensation which is not preempted by state law of county employees lawfully employed by the county government and to implement such compensation as may be approved in the county budget. 
(12)  To act as a liaison between the board of commissioners and the department heads or employees of the county. 
(13)  To see all legislation, programs, regulations or plans promulgated and required by the state or federal government are duly carried out and complied with in accordance with such legislation, programs, regulations and plans. 
(14)  To devote his or her full time to the office and hold no other office or employment while so engaged. 
(15)  To perform such other duties as may be required of such manager by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 2-43; Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 1(6.1(d)), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-105. - Purchases and contracts. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall make all purchases on the basis of competitive bids when, in its discretion, it deems it practicable to do so or when required by state law of general application. 
(b)  The county manager shall be authorized to execute any contract for the purchase of goods and/or services on behalf of the board; provided, however, that in no event shall the county manager be authorized to make any purchase or enter into any contract, other than an employment contract, expending in excess of $25,000.00 without the prior consent of a majority of the duly qualified members of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 2-44; Ord. No. 2003-04, § I, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 2(15), 1-7-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 2(15), adopted Jan. 7, 2014, changed the title of § 2-105 from "Purchasing; disbursing money; construction and maintenance of roads; correctional institution" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 2-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 1(6.1(d)(7), (8), (14), adopted Jan. 7, 2014, superseded the provisions of former § 2-106, which pertained to reports; bonds, and derived from the 1987 Code, § 2-45. See § 2-104. 
Sec. 2-107. - Removal. 
The county manager may be removed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners; provided, however, that at least 30 days before such removal shall become effective, the board of commissioners shall, by majority vote, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for removal. The county manager may, within ten days, reply in writing to the preliminary resolution listing the reasons for removal and also request a hearing before the board. After such hearing, if one is requested, and after full consideration, the board of commissioners may terminate such manager's duties, and, unless otherwise provided by way of written employment agreement, shall cause to be paid to such person, forthwith, any unpaid balance of salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of the preliminary resolution, at such manager's current rate of compensation. 
(Code 1987, § 2-46; Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 1(6.1(e)), 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-108. - Temporary county manager. 
The board of commissioners may designate some qualified person to act as temporary or interim county manager in the extended absence (more than 30 calendar days) of the county manager, provided that in the absence of a person acting as county manager, or temporary or interim county manager, the chairman of the board shall be vested with all the rights, duties and authority of the county manager. 
(Code 1987, § 2-47; Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 1(6.1(f)), 1-7-2014) 
Secs. 2-109—2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-131. - [County issued credit cards]. 
(a)  Intent and scope . This section is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county issued government credit cards. 
(b)  Definitions . 
(1)  Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county issued government credit card. 
(2)  Card administrator means the credit card administrator designated by the Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
(3)  County means Troup County and/or the board of commissioners. 
(4)  County credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
(5)  Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
(6)  User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county credit card. 
(c)  Designated elected officials . The Troup County Board of Commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this section or for any purchases that are not authorized by this section. 
(d)  Card administrator . The board of commissioners shall designate a county credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)  Manage county issued credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this section, county procurement ordinances and policies, county credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(e)  Use of cards . 
(1)  Authorized purchases . County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this section, the county credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the county and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per day: $500.00 
The user may exceed the daily limit must be reported in writing to the card administrator or county manager within three business days. 
(2)  Unauthorized purchases . County credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county credit card user agreement. 
(3)  Receipts and documentation . Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(4)  Public records . All receipts and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(f)  Review of purchases and audit . Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of county issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)  Review of purchases . All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: 
Monthly statements with attached receipts will be reviewed by the CFO, purchasing director or the county manager. 
(2)  Audits . The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(g)  Violations . 
(1)  An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county issued credit card in violation of this section or the user agreement. 
(2)  In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this section may result in: 
a.  A warning; 
b.  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county credit card; or 
c.  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01 , §§ I—VII, 12-1-2015; Ord. No. 2016-02 , §§ I—VII, 1-19-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-01 , §§ I—VII, adopted Dec. 1, 2015, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-131 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-132—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES, SALES AND DISPOSITION OF COUNTY PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, adopted Sept. 18, 2017, repealed div. 2 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 2-151—2-166 pertained to purchases and sales, and derived from the 1987 Code, §§ 9-20—9-35; Ord. No. 2003-04, §§ II—XVIII; Ord. No. 2011-01 , § I, adopted Oct. 19, 2010; Ord. No. 2014-03 , § 1(15), adopted Jan. 7, 2014; and Ord. No. 2014-07 , §§ I—III, adopted June 17, 2014. 

Sec. 2-151. - Board of commissioners. 
The Troup County Board of Commissioners shall adopt rules for regulating purchases by the county and it shall be the duty of all its employees to comply with said rules and be governed thereby. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-152. - County manager. 
The Troup County Manager shall appoint a purchasing director and shall have the independent authority to make purchases and contracts as provided herein and in article III of chapter 2. Whenever approval of the board of commissioners is required and it has duly approved the purchase, sale, lease or other disposition of real or personal property or a contract for services, either the chairman or the vice-chair of the board of commissioners or the county manager may execute all documents necessary to consummate the approved agreement and transaction on behalf of the county. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-153. - Purchasing director. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of purchasing director of the county. The purchasing director shall be appointed by the county manager. 
(b)  The purchasing director shall be appointed upon the basis of such person's administrative qualifications, with special reference to such person's actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office as hereinafter set forth. 
(c)  The purchasing director shall be bonded in an amount to be determined by the board of commissioners, payable to the county, and conditioned upon the faithful performance by the purchasing director of all official duties and upon the faithful accounting to the county for all goods and money that may come into said purchasing director's hands. The purpose of said bond shall be to indemnify and hold harmless the county against any losses or claims which may arise as a result of the acts of the purchasing director. The premium on the bond shall be paid by the county. The bonding requirement set forth herein may be satisfied by the procurement of a blanket bond issued in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 45-4-11. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the purchasing director to: 
(1)  Review consistent with the authority provided herein and the purchasing rules and regulations adopted by the Troup County Board of Commissioners all purchases of supplies, materials and services over $500.00 on behalf of the county and all contracts. The terms "materials" and "supplies" shall include such items of personal property as are normally used and consumed during the current year, and for which a general appropriation has been made, and shall include, but not be limited to, the purchase of automotive equipment, machinery, items required under construction contracts or other purchases of material of a permanent or semi-permanent nature. 
(2)  Exercise sound discretion in the best interest of the county when quality of goods and services as well as price are involved in any purchasing decision. 
(3)  Explore opportunities for cooperative purchasing and, in furtherance thereof, shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans as permitted by Georgia law when such plans would be in the best interest of the county. 
(4)  Maintain a permanent inventory of all county property having a value of $5,000.00, or more. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-154. - Purchasing authority thresholds. 
(a)  The purchasing director shall have authority to make purchases of materials, supplies and services on behalf of the county when the purchase price of said materials, supplies and services does not exceed $15,000.00 and when, in such director's sound discretion, it is determined by such director that such purchases are in the best interest of the county. In all purchases where quality of goods and services as well as price are involved, the purchasing director shall exercise sound discretion in making the purchases which are in the best interest of the county. 
(b)  Purchases of materials, supplies and services on behalf of the county when the purchase price of said materials, supplies and services is between $15,000.00 and $25,000.00 shall be made by the purchasing director only after obtaining the written approval of the county manager or his designee. 
(c)  Department heads or their designee may make purchases of materials, supplies and services on behalf of the county when the purchase price of said materials and supplies does not exceed $5,000.00. 
(d)  Except as provided herein or in rules for regulating purchases duly adopted by the board of commissioners, no official, officer or employee of the county shall purchase for or on behalf of the county any material or supplies, goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind or character or services other than through the county manager or purchasing director, and no voucher, check or other methods of payment shall be honored by the county except as provided herein. This subsection does not apply to "emergency purchases" as hereinafter described. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-155. - Purchase on competitive bid or proposal. 
(a)  Unless otherwise expressly provided for in this section, all purchases greater than $500.00 of materials, supplies and services shall be made on the basis of competitive bids or proposal whenever it is practicable to do so. Unless the rules for regulating purchases adopted by the board of commissioners provide to the contrary, the determination as to the practicality of obtaining competitive bids/proposals and the form and nature of the competitive bid/proposal process shall be in the discretion of the purchasing director for purchases greater than $500.00 that do not exceed $15,000.00 and the county manager for purchases between $15,000.00 and $25,000.00. 
(b)  Purchases of materials, supplies and services on behalf of the county when the purchase price of said materials, supplies and services exceeds $25,000.00 shall be made on the basis of competitive bid or proposal after the same have been advertised in the official organ of the county or by electronic means on the county internet website or another internet website identified by the county. Provided, however, that the requirements set forth in this subsection shall not apply to (1) an item which has been identified as a part, part replacement, component, or state or federal surplus property or state and/or federal contract purchases made of items and equipment; (2) where a state and/or federal contract number has been assigned by the state purchasing director; (3) indefinite quantity construction services offered through the Georgia Department of Administrative Services; (4) purchases from other government agencies or at public auction; (5) contracts for professional services, which for purposes of this article are services from an independent contractor or consultant in an occupation which requires exceptional qualifications by education and experience in a particular field or discipline to perform a specialized service; (6) purchases where the board of commissioners has in its sound discretion determined that utilizing a competitive bid or proposal is impractical under the circumstances. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to "emergency purchases" as hereinafter described. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-156. - Emergency purchases. 
In all cases where there is imminent threat to public health, safety and welfare and the need for any material or supplies, goods, merchandise, or services to prevent and/or mitigate harm from the same, the department requesting the emergency purchase shall write on its requisition to the purchasing director the words, "For Emergency Purposes," and when a requisition so marked is received by the purchasing director it shall be the purchasing director's duty to give immediate attention to the same. In the event an emergency should arise after office hours which requires immediate action on the part of the department involved for the protection of the best interest of the county, or should a like situation arise on a Sunday or holiday, the purchasing director or county manager shall be contacted and approval given if the emergency purchase exceeds $25,000.00, and if the emergency purchase exceeds $100,000.00 the county manager and commission chairman must approve the expenditure, and any purchase necessary shall be made by the department head in charge, and such purchase reported to the purchasing director without delay on a purchase requisition. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-157. - Sale of real property. 
(a)  Public sale required. Disposition of real property owned by the county shall be conducted by public sale in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3, or as otherwise provided by state law. 
(b)  Exceptions to public sale. The following transactions shall not be governed by subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  A redemption of real property acquired by county under tax deed. 
(2)  A grant of easement or license. 
(3)  A grant or conveyance of right-of-way or for other transportation purposes. 
(4)  A conveyance to any other unit of government. 
(5)  A conveyance of recreational set-aside property to a homeowner's association in the manner permitted by state law. 
(6)  A lease that constitutes a usufruct under state law. 
(7)  Any other conveyance not required to be by public sale pursuant to state law. 
(c)  Procedures. Except as otherwise specifically provided by state law, the county shall not dispose of any real property unless the board of commissioners has declared such real property to be unserviceable/surplus. Other than dispositions governed by subsection (a) of this section or by specified provisions of state law, any disposition may be made at public or private sale, upon such terms as the board of commissioners shall deem to be in the county's best interest. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-158. - Sale of surplus real property by real estate broker. 
Real property, specifically properties which are remnants of land from total takes on county road projects, may be disposed of by sale by real estate broker in accordance with state law, O.C.G.A. §§ 32-7-4 and 32-7-5. 
(1)  Requirements for real estate brokers. Real estate brokers must be licensed in accordance with state law, O.C.G.A. § 43-40-1 et seq. 
(2)  Declaration of surplus property. Property is declared surplus by the county board of commissioners in a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(3)  Notification to former or subsequent owner. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4, the former or subsequent owner is notified in writing of intent to sell and has the first right to purchase the property at the fair market value price. If the former or subsequent owner waives this right and fails to exercise the right of acquisition within 30 days, then adjoining property owners are notified that the property will be sold by a licensed real estate broker who has a place of business located in Troup County or by competitive sealed bid. 
(4)  Advertising and listing of property. Commencing at the time of the listing of the property as provided in O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4, the county shall publicly advertise once a week for two weeks in the legal organ of the county the property and the name of the broker, if any, handling the property. If listed with a broker, the property shall be listed for a period of at least three months. Property cannot be sold for less than fair market value excluding any commission fee. If property does not sell during the listing time, the county may renegotiate the commission to a lower fee, extend the exclusive agreement with the real estate broker or recommend to the board of commissioners that disposal be by competitive sealed bid or public auction. 
(5)  Approval of sale. All sales of properties shall be approved by the board of commissioners at a regular scheduled public meeting in which public comment is allowed regarding such sale. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-159. - Disposition of personal property. 
(a)  Declaration of unserviceable or surplus property. The board of commissioners shall determine whether personal property with an original unit purchase cost of $10,000.00 or more can no longer be used advantageously by the county and has therefore become unserviceable or surplus. The purchasing director is delegated the authority to determine whether personal property with an original unit purchase cost of less than $10,000.00 can no longer be used advantageously by the county and has therefore become unserviceable or surplus. 
(b)  Disposition. 
(1)  The disposition of unserviceable or surplus personal property with an original unit purchase cost of $10,000.00 or more must be approved by the board of commissioners and may be sold by public sale, sealed bidding, spot bidding or any other means deemed most advantageous to the county under the particular circumstances as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  The disposition of unserviceable or surplus personal property with an original unit purchase cost of $10,000.00 or less shall be approved by the purchasing director and may be sold by public sale, sealed bidding, spot bidding or any other means deemed most advantageous to the county under the particular circumstances as determined by the purchasing director. 
(3)  A sale to a private person shall be for the highest net purchase price reasonably obtainable by the county. A sale to another unit of government shall be for a fair and reasonable purchase price that need not be as high as the purchase price obtainable from a private person. 
(4)  If the residual value of an item of personal property is determined by the purchasing director after reasonable inquiry to be $100.00 or less, the property may be disposed of by the purchasing director in such manner and for such consideration, which need not be monetary, as the county manager deems most advantageous to the county under the circumstances. 
(5)  If the residual value of an item of personal property is determined by the purchasing director after reasonable inquiry to be $100.00 or less, the property may be provided to a retiring employee by the county manager in recognition of their retirement and years of service to Troup County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 2-160. - Leases of county-owned real property. 
(a)  The board of commissioners may offer to lease county-owned real property if: 
(1)  The sale of the real property is not in the best interest of the county but the real property is not currently being used to be best advantage of the county. 
(2)  The real property has been newly acquired but not immediately put to use by the county, and may reasonably be leased on a month-to-month or short-term basis. 
(b)  A lessee's interest under any lease executed under this section shall constitute a usufruct only. 
(c)  Where county-owned real estate is to be leased for nonpublic use, public notice of the availability of the real property shall be published once in legal organ and on the county website, soliciting inquiries and offers. The notice shall include as part of the solicitation the requirement that improvements to the real estate be insured for the county's benefit at the lessee's expense. The solicitation shall also describe any restrictions to be placed on the use of the real property. The county manager shall report to the board of commissioners all offers to lease the real estate and shall make recommendations as to which offer is in the county's best interest. The board of commissioners shall approve the offer that it deems to be in the best interest of the county. Such approval shall constitute authority for the chairman to execute a lease and any instruments on behalf of the county necessary to accept and effectuate the offer. 
( Ord. No. 2018-06 , § I, 9-18-2017) 
Secs. 2-161—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COURTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-201—2-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDIGENT DEFENSE SERVICES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, adopted February 1, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Art. V, Div. 2, §§ 2-226—2-230 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-226. - Application for indigent defense services. 
Each person lacking the financial ability to pay for legal representation in his or her defense in criminal proceedings in and before the State Court of Troup County, Georgia, and desiring that the county provide such services to him or her, shall submit an application to the county requesting indigent defense representation and setting forth the specifics supporting their need for such indigent representation. 
The application shall be completed and submitted to the court administrator upon intake at the jail or at the court administrator's office or at any state court appearance on a form approved by the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 2-227. - Application fee. 
Each applicant for indigent defense services shall pay an application fee of $50.00 (or the maximum fee allowed by O.C.G.A. § 15-21A-6, as the same may be amended) to the court administrator of the county. Such fee must be paid either at the time the application is submitted or at the time the representation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-03, § 2, 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 2-228. - Waiver. 
The fee required by section 2-227 may be waived only upon order of the presiding judge scheduled to hear the case in which applicant is seeking a waiver of the application fee. The judge may order a waiver of the fee only upon a finding by the court that the defendant is unable to pay the fee or that paying the fee would cause hardship to the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 2005-03, § 3, 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 2-229. - Transfer of funds. 
Within 15 days after the end of each month, the court administrator shall remit the total of all application fees collected pursuant to this division to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2005-03, § 4, 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 2-230. - Separate account. 
The board of commissioners shall maintain all funds remitted to it pursuant to this division in a separate "Indigent Defense Services Account" and funds from such account shall be expended only for the purpose of providing legal representation to indigent defendants in and before the State Court of Troup County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2005-03, § 5, 2-1-2005) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section I(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2014-02 , adopted Nov. 5, 2013, repealed ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-4, 6-26—6-32, 6-52—6-58, 6-90, 6-109—6-114, 6-142—6-144, 6-172, 6-198—6-214, 6-237, 6-300—6-302, 6-323—6-331, 6-353—6-365, 6-391—6-396, and enacted a new ch. 6 as herein set out. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-06, § I(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 1, 2009. 
Cross reference— Smoking in county buildings and motor vehicles, § 2-3; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; standards for building construction, § 38-121 et seq.; historical preservation, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; solid waste disposal, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Necessity of regulations. 
In accordance with the laws of the state, it is necessary and expedient for the county to exercise its police powers to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations in regard to the sale, tax and control of packaged malt beverages and/or wine, as well as the sale for consumption on the premises of malt beverages and/or wine, in the unincorporated areas of the county. The business of manufacturing, distributing, selling, handling, and otherwise dealing in or possessing malt beverages and/or wine, as well as the business of selling malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises, is declared to be a privilege, not a right, and such privilege shall not be exercised in the county except as licensed under the terms of this chapter. This chapter does not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the drink or otherwise for consumption on the premises. Such sale of distilled spirits by the drink or otherwise for consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. Except as otherwise specifically provided for herein, this chapter does not permit the sale of any alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises of the licensee. Licensing shall be solely for the unincorporated areas of the county. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever means processed. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, liquors, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
Authorized catered function means a function in the unincorporated portions of the county for which an event permit has been issued by the county. 
Bed and breakfast home means a residential structure occupied as principal residence by the owner(s) of record wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast only is provided to guests for compensation. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a building or dwelling unit, not necessarily owner-occupied, that offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for four or more guest rooms for compensation provided. 
Charitable organization means a nonprofit organization created for charitable purposes, which has received and maintained approval from the United States Internal Revenue Service as a bona fide section 501(c)(3) organization. 
Church means a building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Farm winery means a winery which makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in the state and: 
(1)  Is located on premises, a where minimum of 20 percent is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries, or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery; or 
(2)  Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of 20 percent of the agricultural produce used in its annual production. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises, possesses a valid occupational tax certificate, and meets all Troup County Environmental Health regulations. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, the term "brandy." 
Gallon and wine gallon means a United States gallon of liquid measure equivalent to the volume of 231 cubic inches or the nearest equivalent metric measurement. 
Golf course means a tract of land publicly or privately owned that is a minimum of two acres designed and laid out for playing the game of golf, and improved with tees, greens, fairways, hazards, practicing and playing and driving range and may include a club house with dressing rooms, dining facilities, professional shop and meeting space. 
Host means the person who organizes the catered event and who will be responsible, along with the licensed alcohol beverage caterer, for compliance with the rules set forth in this chapter. In the event that the host is an organization rather than an individual, the organization will designate one individual who will be the host for the purposes of this chapter. 
Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker, or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
License means the authorization by the board of commissioners to engage in the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine, either in unbroken packages not for consumption on the licensed premises (also referred to hereinafter as a "package license") or for consumption only on the licensed premises (also referred to hereinafter as a "pouring license"). 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed by the state to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 3, ch. 4, art. 2, O.C.G.A. ch. 5, art. 2 , or O.C.G.A. ch. 6, art. 2. 
Licensed location means the place where a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer maintains its principal place of business within the county. 
Licensee means any person who has been issued a license by the board of commissioners to engage in the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages not for consumption on the licensed premises (also referred to hereinafter as a "package licensee") or for consumption only on the licensed premises and not for resale (also referred to hereinafter as a "pouring licensee"). 
Lounge means a separate room where malt beverages and/or wine are served by the drink which is either connected with or part of a restaurant (as defined herein) and operated in conjunction therewith and under the same management as the restaurant operations. Lounges shall not be permitted. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. Manufacturer also means; in the case of malt beverage, any brewer; in the case of wine, any wine maker. 
Meal means the delivery and service of food in individual portions or by means of a self-service buffet to individual patrons of a place of business. The service of food to a patron shall not constitute a meal if payment for same is combined with payment of a cover charge or entrance fee or if payment for same is in fact merely ancillary to the service of malt beverages and wine. All meals must be prepared in the place of business for which the license is issued. 
Minor means any person under the age of 21 years, or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 or by other state laws. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other entity, group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Place of business means the premises described in the license issued pursuant to this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, a "place of business" shall consist of one physical building and shall not include any adjacent structures that are not physically attached to the premises by heated and cooled space. Two or more separate, detached structures may not be combined to meet the requirements of this chapter. Outdoor patios or decks which are completely enclosed by a fence or wall and are accessible only through an enclosed building shall be considered as a part of a place of business. 
Premises means the location where the licensee is authorized to sell malt beverages and/or wine. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the county at least one year immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 100 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly or semiannual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofit purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals at least five days a week for its members and guests. Such club shall also be an organization which has received and has maintained approval from the United States Internal Revenue Service as a bona fide section 501(c)(3) organization. The building of such club shall be air-conditioned. To qualify as a private club under this chapter, no member or officer, agent or employee of the club may be paid, or directly or indirectly receive, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the club to its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. No license shall be issued to any location or maintained at any location that does not have adequate on-premises parking as required by the then applicable parking regulations of the board of commissioners. 
Restaurant means any public or private place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the general public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations. Such place shall be air-conditioned and contain adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity for at least 50 people, and have employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its patrons. At least two distinct and separate meals per day shall be served at least five days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating or renovation. The serving of such meals and food shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of malt beverages and/or wine to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
School means a building, publicly or privately owned, which is used for teaching or giving instruction in any subject to pupils of the school. The term "school" shall not mean a private residential dwelling in which a child receives home schooling from a parent or other person. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine manufacturer by providing samples of such wine or malt beverage to the public and for the sale of such wine or malt beverage at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine or malt beverage can be given complimentary or for a fee. 
Wholesaler means any person who sells malt beverages and/or wine to other wholesale or retail dealers, or licensees. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Incorporation of federal and state law and regulations. 
The federal and state statutory laws and/or regulations relating to the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages within the state and the United States of America are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-4. - Sale on election days. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the sale of alcoholic beverages on local election days is hereby authorized and permitted so long as such sales are in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-5—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE, LICENSEE AND PREMISES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-26. - State law compliance. 
All pertinent state laws and regulations shall be complied with by any licensee under this article as a condition of having that license. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-27. - Hours and days of sale. 
Except as may be otherwise provided herein, any person licensed under this article may sell malt beverages and wine on days as prescribed by applicable state law governing hours and days of sale. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-28. - Health and fire standards. 
Licensees under this article shall meet and continue to meet all health and fire regulations applicable to their business and location. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-29. - Purchase invoices. 
Each licensee under this article shall maintain copies of all purchase invoices for malt beverages and wines at his place of business and have same available for examination by county officials at any time during normal working hours. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-30. - Public drinking or consumption of alcohol. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages while on or in a public area or way or upon any county-owned property unless such consumption is during a permitted special event pursuant to article VI of chapter 66 of this Code and pursuant to an event permit as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be or appear to be in an intoxicated condition upon any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own, other than by invitation by the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterous or indecent behavior or acts, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Cross reference— Roads and streets, ch. 66. 
Sec. 6-31. - Possession of open container while operating a motor vehicle. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Open container means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  Possession. No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle or as a passenger in a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this section, an open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator or occupant of a vehicle if the container is not located in a locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. A container shall not be considered open if it remains sealed in its original container and condition. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 74. 
Sec. 6-32. - Inspection. 
It shall be the duty of the sheriff or other constituted authorities to inspect all establishments licensed pursuant to this article periodically to determine that no violations hereof exist. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-33—6-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS 

Sec. 6-52. - Age requirement. 
No package license or pouring license shall be granted to any person or partnership unless the person or all partners or members shall be at least 25 years of age, shall be of sufficient mental competence to execute a contract under the laws of the state, and has/have been a resident of the state for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. In the event a corporation should be an applicant and said corporation has not been incorporated and/or allowed to do business by the secretary of state for said one-year period, then the incorporator of said corporation and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock of said corporation shall all have been residents of the state for one year prior to filing an application for such license. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-53. - Sworn statement. 
The applicant shall make a sworn statement of the applicant's qualifications according to the provisions of this chapter and shall place the same on file with the building official before any license is issued. ( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-54. - Ineligibility—County officials; county employees; county board members. 
No officials or employees of the county, or member of the board of commissioners shall be eligible to receive a package license or pouring license. However, any private club is not automatically disqualified from receiving a retail consumption pouring license because such club is organized or owned by or operated by one or more members of the board of commissioners and/or employees thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-55. - Same—Prior criminal record. 
No applicant who has a conviction of or has pled nolo contendre within the previous ten years of the date of application to a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be granted a license if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with the laws and regulations of the federal or state governments, or the laws and regulations of the county. No license shall be granted to an applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law for a criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with the laws and regulations of the federal or state governments, or the laws and regulations of the county. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-56. - Same—Previous denial. 
Any applicant denied a license shall be prohibited from applying for another license for a period of one year from the filing date set forth on the application. Any partnership, company, corporation, trust or other entity in which an individual applicant is a member, shareholder, director or officer, or in which such entity acts as a surrogate for such applicant, shall also be subject to the prohibition contained in this section. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-57. - Corporate and partnership applicants. 
(a)  If the applicant is a partnership or limited liability company, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. 
(b)  If the applicant is a corporation, the manager of the proposed licensed premises must be qualified to obtain a license and must make a sworn statement of these qualifications. A corporate license applicant shall appoint and designate to the board of commissioners an agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of the state. If no such designation is made, the board may serve or notify the applicant or license holder at any address of the applicant or license holder known to the board. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-58. - Adequate participation. 
A license may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-59—6-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE APPLICATION 

Sec. 6-90. - Guidelines. 
Application for a license shall be made on forms furnished by the board of commissioners according to the following guidelines: 
(1)  All license applications shall be presented in person to the building official. 
(2)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2, as a prerequisite to the issuance of an initial license only, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation, which shall search the files of the state crime information center for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. The state bureau of investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the board. 
(3)  All licenses shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and renewed no later than December 31 of that year. 
(4)  All licensees shall be required to obtain and maintain and produce upon request by the building official, his/her designee, or any law enforcement officer a current State of Georgia license as well as meet all requirements for a Troup County license. 
(5)  Please see chapter 10 articles III, IV and V for additional regulations regarding alcoholic beverages as they pertain to entertainment centers, amusement centers and billiard rooms. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-91—6-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PREMISES 

Sec. 6-109. - Separate license. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business, as defined herein. 
(b)  In addition, each pouring license granted will enable the licensee to sell the malt beverages and wine for consumption only in the areas of the premises allowed by state statutory laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-110. - Building compliance. 
(a)  The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with all ordinances of the board of commissioners, rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the statutory laws of the state. Upon completion, the proposed building shall be subject to final inspections and approvals by the building inspector and fire marshall. 
(b)  Each applicant for a license shall attach to his or her application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(c)  Licensees shall provide on the premises for which the license is issued adequate sanitary toilet facilities as required by the health and building codes, and the building shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-111. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church and not less than 200 yards from any schoolyard or college campus, and not less than 100 yards from any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center. The distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  Any business approved prior to these distance requirements being adopted may continue to renew their business license provided the business is not vacant more than six months provided the business does not fail to operate upon the premises pursuant to a valid alcohol license for more than six months. Businesses that are vacant for more than six months without a valid alcohol license shall reapply and shall meet all distance requirements as set out in subsection (a). 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-112. - Inspections. 
The business premises of the licensee shall be made available for inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-113. - Days of operation. 
No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any malt beverages and/or wine: 
(1)  At any time other than as allowed in sections 6-325 and 6-365 of this chapter; or 
(2)  At any time in violation of a state statutory law, state rules or regulations, local ordinance or regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 2014-06 , § I, 6-3-2014) 
Sec. 6-114. - Gambling. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, lotteries, or tickets of chance therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensee's place of business or any room adjoining the same, owned, leased, or controlled by the licensee; provided, however, that the sale of state lottery tickets in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-1 et seq., shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-115—6-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DENIAL OF LICENSE 

Sec. 6-142. - Grounds. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, in its discretion, may consider any and all relevant and extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, circumstances are such that the granting, suspension or revocation of the license would or would not be in the best interest of the general public, then such circumstances may be grounds for the denial of the application. 
(b)  Any misstatement, false statement, or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for the denial of the application for license issuance or revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-143. - Notice of denial. 
The board of commissioners shall give notice in writing to the applicant of any decision to grant or deny an application. The notice shall provide a summary of the reason(s) for the decision. Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-144. - Denial hearing. 
(a)  Whenever the board of commissioners shall deny an application for a package license or pouring license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of receipt of such notice of the denial to request a hearing before the board. If a hearing is requested, the following information shall be given to the applicant, in writing, by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing date: 
(1)  The date, time and location of the hearing, said hearing date not to be more than 20 days from the date of said written notice; 
(2)  A written statement of the reason for the proposed denial of the application; 
(3)  A list of witnesses, if any, the board of commissioners expects to testify or offer evidence in favor of the denial of the application; and 
(4)  Notice of the applicant's right to attend the hearing, to present evidence and testimony, to assert any defense of the application, to confront and cross examine anyone who would testify in favor of denial of application and to have an attorney present to represent the applicant. 
(b)  Any decision denying an application shall set forth the reason for such action in writing, which shall be delivered by regular mail to the applicant's address set forth in the application. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-145—6-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE 

Sec. 6-172. - Transferability. 
(a)  No package or pouring license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location, and in the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender said license to the board of commissioners. Under no circumstances will the license fee be refunded to the holder. 
(b)  All holders of licenses issued under this section shall, within six months after the issuance of such license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such period shall serve as a forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-173—6-197. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DUTIES OF LICENSEE 

Sec. 6-198. - Management and operation. 
The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted and shall be responsible for all violations of this chapter by the licensee's agents and employees. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-199. - Purchase of malt beverages and wine. 
No licensee shall buy or arrange to buy or in any way cause the transfer of any malt beverages and/or wine except from a licensed wholesaler. A licensee under this chapter shall take delivery only at the licensed place of business from a licensed wholesaler by the State of Georgia and/or Troup County. or licensed common carrier acting for a licensed wholesaler. A licensee shall comply with all other requirements, including, without limitation, those set forth at Chapters 560-2 (Ga. Comp Rules and Regs. 560-2-1 et seq., Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division) and 560-8 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 560-8-1 et seq., Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division—Malt Beverages, Wine, Tobacco) of the Georgia Administrative Code, as well as the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-200. - Inventory of malt beverage and wine. 
A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of malt beverages and/or wine at any place except the licensed place of business, and within the licensed place of business the storage area for malt beverages and/or wine shall be immediately adjacent to and attached to the retail area or area of consumption. No licensee shall enter into any type of arrangement whereby malt beverages and/or wine ordered by the licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-201. - Display of license. 
A license issued under this chapter shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which it was issued. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-202. - Condition of premises. 
(a)  All premises used for the sale and/or consumption of malt beverages and/or wine, and/or for the storage of malt beverages and/or wine, shall be kept in a sanitary condition, shall be kept in full compliance with the regulations of the county health department, and shall comply in all respects with the county building codes and all applicable fire, health and other safety standards. 
(b)  All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by the health department, all county fire departments, the building inspector, and all authorized law or code enforcement officers to determine if the premises are in compliance with all county, state and federal rules, regulations, laws and codes. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-203. - Telephone. 
A licensee shall maintain on the premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-204. - Violent or disorderly history. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person with a criminal record for violence or disorder to frequent the licensed premises or loiter on the premises. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-205. - Prostitution. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person to frequent the licensed premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-206. - Police reports. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report to the sheriff's office at the earliest possible time any known incident of a criminal nature that occur on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to willfully withhold from the sheriff any information pertaining to any crime that may have occurred on the licensed premises. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-207. - Criminal acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any criminal act to be committed on the licensed premises. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-208. - Compliance with laws. 
In addition to the rules and regulations set out in this chapter, each licensee under this chapter shall comply with all statutory laws of the state, all federal statutory laws, and all rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages and/or wine in the state; and any violation of same shall subject said licensee to suspension or revocation of his or her license and also may subject said licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances of the county. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-209. - Production of records. 
In conjunction with any license application or any license issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this chapter, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the board of commissioners shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or licensee. Said subpoena right shall be had for the purposes of auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this chapter, proving or disproving violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-210. - Copy of chapter. 
All licensees shall keep a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there about compliance with the terms hereof. Each licensee and the licensee's agents selling packaged malt beverages and/or wine, or selling for consumption on the premises malt beverages and/or wine, shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of the licensee's agents and employees which are in violation of this chapter, the statutory laws of the state, and/or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-211. - Posting of warnings. 
(a)  All licensees shall post in a conspicuous place in his or her establishment a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF BEER AND WINE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE STRICTLY PROHIBITED." 
(b)  All licensees shall post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "WARNING: DRINKING BEER AND WINE DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS." 
(c)  Package licensees shall post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF BEER AND WINE ON SUNDAYS OTHER THAN BETWEEN THE HOURS OF 12:30 P.M. AND 11:30 P.M. STRICTLY PROHIBITED." 
(d)  Pouring licensees shall post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "SERVICE OF BEER AND WINE ON SUNDAYS OTHER THAN BETWEEN THE HOURS OF 12:30 P.M. AND 12:00 MIDNIGHT STRICTLY PROHIBITED." 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 2014-06 , § II, 6-3-2014) 
Sec. 6-212. - Prohibited sales. 
No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any malt beverage and/or wine to any person who is confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional facility, prison camp, penitentiary or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or the agent or employee. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-213. - Lock and key. 
All malt beverages and/or wine shall be under lock or fully covered by opaque material during those hours when their sale is not permitted except in the event of an emergency or under the direction of a law enforcement official, county official or his or her designate. All malt beverages and/or wine owned or possessed contrary to the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be contraband and shall be seized by the proper authorities. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-214. - Containers. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents or employees to add to the contents of a container or to refill empty containers or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any malt beverage and/or wine. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-215—6-236. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-237. - Employee list; employment requirements. 
(a)  Every licensee under this chapter shall maintain at all times on the premises for which the license has been issued a list of all persons currently employed by such licensee at such premises, which list shall show the current full legal name, alias, date of birth, current address, current home telephone number and social security number of each employee. 
(b)  The employee list shall be available during reasonable hours for inspection by any law enforcement officer or county official or his or her designee. If so required by such person, an employee must submit to a fingerprint identification and criminal history check. Every licensee shall cause each of the licensee's employees during the hours of his or her employment to be identified by a conspicuous label or badge upon which shall appear the employee's first name. 
(c)  No person under 21 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed under this section. No holder of a pouring license shall employ, require or permit a person under 21 years of age to sell or take orders for malt beverages and/or wine. However, persons under 21 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries and drugstores that are licensed to engage in the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages and not for consumption on the premises may sell or handle malt beverages and/or wine which are sold pursuant to and in compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ on the premises any person who, in the preceding ten years, has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state or who has been convicted of a crime outside the state which would be a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-238—6-267. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - MINORS 

Sec. 6-268. - Sale or possession of malt beverages and/or wine prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase malt beverages and/or wine or for any other person to purchase malt beverages and/or wine for a minor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain malt beverages and/or wine to which the minor is not legally entitled. 
(c)  No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sale of malt beverages and/or wine to minors. 
(d)  No person shall allow anyone under 21 years of age to loiter about the premises of the licensee or possess any alcoholic beverage. This provision shall not apply to employees over the age of 18 years eligible for subject employment under the laws of the state. 
(e)  Any violations of the provisions of this division shall constitute a misdemeanor and the offender, upon being found guilty, shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor, and by possible loss of license and fine. 
(f)  The prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  In the minor's home with parental consent. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-269—6-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - VIOLATION AND DUE PROCESS 

Sec. 6-300. - Violations. 
(a)  Any violation of one or more provisions of this chapter shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-19, and shall be tried in the magistrate court as set forth in section 1-19. 
(b)  In addition to any punishment for violating this chapter, any such violation may subject a licensee to the revocation or suspension of his or her license, as set forth in sections 6-301 and 6-302. 
(1)  Any revocation or suspension based upon a violation of this chapter will subject the licensee to a reinstatement fee between $500.00 and $1,000.00, to be determined in the discretion of the board. 
a.  This reinstatement fee is nonrefundable and must be paid prior to the reinstatement of any license issued under this chapter. 
b.  No new license shall be issued to a licensee whose previous license was revoked or suspended until the reinstatement fee is paid. 
c.  Payment of the nonrefundable reinstatement fee does not guarantee the reinstatement or issuance of a license, but is instead a condition precedent to the consideration of reinstatement or issuance by the board. 
(2)  In addition to any other punishments or civil penalties set forth herein, any revocation or suspension based upon a violation of this chapter, may subject a licensee to the forfeiture of all stock of malt beverages and wine. 
(3)  The following suspension and revocation guidelines apply to a licensee who violates this chapter by selling or allowing the sale at his or her establishment of beer and/or wine to an ineligible individual under this chapter (including, but not limited to, a minor), sells during hours and/or days on which sales of beer and/or wine are prohibited under this chapter, and/or sells without a valid license, whether suspended, revoked, or not yet issued: 
a.  For a first offense within the previous five years, a 30-day suspension of his or her license and a reinstatement fee of $500.00. 
b.  For a second or subsequent offense within five years of a first offense, the revocation of his or her license for the remainder of the year, a reinstatement fee of $1,000.00, and forfeiture of all stock in malt beverages and wine. 
c.  These guidelines in subsections (1) and (2) above are those a licensee can expect to receive as a minimum, although the board will make the final decision in each instance and has the right to impose differing suspensions, revocations, and reinstatement fees. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-301. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the package sale of malt beverages and/or wine, or the sale of the same for consumption on the premises, in the unincorporated areas of the county without first complying with the rules and requirements set out in this chapter. Any license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The making of any false statement on an application for a license issued hereunder; 
(2)  A violation of the rules and regulations set out in this section and/or the laws and/or regulations of the United States and/or the state and/or the county; 
(3)  The failure to have the financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned; 
(4)  Default in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the county; 
(5)  Cancellation, suspension or revocation of a state malt beverage and/or wine license; 
(6)  Any violation of this section; or 
(7)  For any other legal and sufficient cause. 
(b)  In addition to the above-listed grounds for suspension or revocation, any pouring license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for a failure to meet the food/alcohol percentage requirement set in section 6-355 in any one calendar quarter. 
(c)  Any action taken by the board of commissioners to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder shall not preclude and may be in addition to any fines and prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and/or ordinances of the county, the state, and/or the United States and forfeiture of all stock of malt beverage and wine. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-302. - Due process. 
(a)  Whenever the board of commissioners wishes to take any action to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the board shall provide ten days' written notice, by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee prior to taking such action. The notice shall set forth the reasons for such action. The licensee shall have ten days from the date of receipt of such notification of such action (as set forth on the aforesaid receipt) to request a hearing before the board. Said notification shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the board by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  If a hearing is requested, the following information shall be given to the licensee, in writing, by regular mail to the licensee's last known address, at least ten days prior to the hearing date: 
(1)  A written copy of all charges or reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation; 
(2)  The date, time and location of the hearing, said hearing date to be not more than 20 days from the date of said written notice; 
(3)  A list of witnesses, if any, the board expects to testify or offer evidence in favor of the suspension or revocation; and 
(4)  Notice of the licensee's right to attend the hearing, to present evidence and testimony, to assert any defense, to confront and cross examine opposing witnesses, and to have an attorney present to represent the licensee. 
(c)  All decisions suspending or revoking a license shall set forth the reason for such action in writing, and shall be delivered to the licensee at his or her last known address by regular mail. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-303—6-322. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PACKAGE SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq., 3-6-60 et seq. 

Sec. 6-323. - Off-premises consumption. 
Malt beverages and/or wine sold pursuant to a package license granted under this chapter will be for consumption only off the premises of the licensee. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-324. - Annual license fee. 
The annual fee for a license shall be as per the schedule maintained in the office of the county building official and shall be paid after acceptance and approval of the application by the board of commissioners, but prior to the issuance of such license. The fee shall be paid either in cash or by bank certified check. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they were granted. Licenses applied for after July 1 of each calendar year shall be prorated as per the schedule posted in the building and zoning department. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-325. - Regulations. 
(a)  No licensee shall sell or deliver any malt beverages and/or wine to any person except in the licensee's place of business. A licensee shall be permitted to load purchased goods in a customer's vehicle when the sale physically takes place and monies have been exchanged inside the place of business. A licensee may have a drive-in window and may deliver packaged malt beverages and/or wine through such window. Said drive-in window must be visible from the nearest street. "Curb service" type sales and sales to customers in vehicles parked in the parking area of the place of business are prohibited. 
(b)  No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any malt beverages and/or wine at any times except between 6:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(c)  No person shall sell or possess for the purpose of sale, any malt beverages and/or wine where such person does not have a license from the board of commissioners to sell or possess for sale such malt beverages and/or wine. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 2014-06 , § III, 6-3-2014) 
Sec. 6-326. - Location and relocation. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49, no license shall be granted to any person authorizing the location of a new retail package liquor licensed place of business or the relocation of an existing retail package liquor licensed place of business engaged in the retail package sales of distilled spirits within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-327. - Wholesale permits. 
Any wholesale distributor in malt beverages and wine licensed by the state or the agent of such licensed wholesale distributor may be granted a permit to distribute such malt beverages and wine in the county, upon application for such permit to the building official, and upon the presentation of evidence satisfactory to said county that the applicant understands and will comply with all terms and conditions and provisions of the chapter governing the package sale of malt beverages and wine in the county, as said chapter may be amended including, but not limited to, those under which malt beverages and wine licenses are issued, and upon payment of an annual fee of $100.00 for malt beverage wholesale distributors pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43, a fee of $200.00 for wine wholesale distributors and a fee of $300.00 for wholesale distributors of both beer and wine. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-328. - Malt beverage taxes; distributor reports. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 and O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81, there is hereby levied upon wholesale malt beverages distributors a tax on malt beverages as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, shall be at a rate of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons, and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  When malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the board of commissioners a report itemizing all purchase invoices for malt beverages sold to each licensee in the county, on or before the tenth day of the month following such purchase. Said invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-329. - Wine taxes; exemptions; reports. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60, there is hereby levied on the first sale or use of wine by the package a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the time rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Each month the first purchaser or user shall furnish to the board of commissioners a report itemizing each first purchase or use during the month. The report shall be furnished before the tenth day of the month following the month reported. The report shall show the amount of excise tax paid during the reported month. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-70 and O.C.G.A. § 3-6-71, no tax shall be levied by the board with respect to: 
(1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state or under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside this state for resale or consumption outside this state; or 
(4)  Wines which contain less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-330. - Financial responsibility. 
Any applicant for a license must show financial responsibility to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners. Financial statements must be submitted with each completed application as prescribed by the board. Any applicant who becomes licensed must maintain a minimum of $1,000.00 stock of goods while said license is held by said licensee. The stock shall be subject to inventory audit at the discretion of the board. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-331. - Transportation. 
(a)  All malt beverages transported or delivered to a licensee shall be packaged in the following manner, to-wit: seven-ounce, eight-ounce or 12-ounce sealed containers packaged four, six or 12 per package; 16-ounce sealed containers packaged six per package; 24-ounce sealed containers packaged only by the full case; 32-ounce sealed containers packaged only by the case; and draft beer in sealed containers which contain one-half barrel (15½ gallons), one-quarter barrel (seven and three-quarter gallons) or any other size as draft beer is normally sold, transported and delivered in sealed containers within the state. 
(b)  All wine transported or delivered to a licensee shall be packaged in containers specified in the standards of fill for wine prescribed by the Department of the Treasury of the United States for wines shipped in interstate commerce. The federal regulations relating to standards of fill for wine are adopted and incorporated by reference into this subsection. Wines manufactured and produced in the state shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection to the extent that they are exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-6-28, as amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-332—6-352. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq., 3-6-60 et seq.; local government may authorize issuance license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq. 

Sec. 6-353. - Unlawful sales without license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises without first complying with the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter. It shall be unlawful in any case for any person to sell or offer to sell any malt beverage and/or wine for consumption on the premises without first complying with this chapter. It shall be unlawful in any case for any person to sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  A bed-and-breakfast home or inn may serve wine and/or malt beverages to its overnight guests without a license under this chapter so long as: 
(1)  The cost of the guests' lodging and meals exceeds the cost of alcohol provided; and 
(2)  No alcohol is provided to guests not staying at the bed-and-breakfast. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to knowingly or intentionally allow drinking of contents of alcoholic beverage on premises where sold without a license for consumption on the premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
Sec. 6-354. - Additional application requirements. 
(a)  No malt beverages and/or wine shall be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises except under a pouring license granted by the board of commissioners. Application for such license may be made only on behalf of restaurants and private clubs located within the unincorporated areas of the county, and shall be made on forms provided by the board. 
(b)  Any application for a pouring license hereunder for a private club shall contain certified copies of all documents necessary for the board to ascertain that the applicant meets the requirements of a private club as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  All applicants for a pouring license must show financial responsibility. The board may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. The form of the application shall be set by the board, and must be fully completed by the applicant and filed by the applicant with the building official. 
(d)  All pouring license applicants must be persons operating at the proposed licensed place of business a "restaurant" or "private club" as defined in this chapter. No lounges shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-355. - Food service requirements. 
Any sale of a food or beverage containing any malt beverage and/or wine shall be deemed to be a sale solely of a malt beverage and/or wine. A sales ratio of food sales to alcohol sales equal to or greater than 50 percent shall be maintained in order to meet the requirements for a pouring license. The fact that the sale of food during any calendar quarter is equal to or greater than the sales of malt beverages and/or wine shall not be conclusive that the licensee is meeting the requirements of operating a restaurant as defined in this chapter. However, the failure of the food sales to equal or exceed the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be prima facie evidence that the establishment is not meeting the definition of a restaurant. Any restaurant that sells malt beverages and/or wine shall have a food service permit issued by the Troup County Health Department. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-356. - On-premises consumption. 
No licensee may sell malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-357. - Annual license fees. 
The annual fee for a malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be as per the schedule maintained in the office of the county building official and shall be paid after acceptance and approval of the application by the board of commissioners but prior to the issuance of such license. The fee shall be paid either in cash or by bank-certified check. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they were granted. Licenses issued after July 1 of each calendar year shall be prorated according to the schedule posted in the building and zoning department 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-358. - Malt beverage taxes. 
(a)  Where malt beverages are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container as tap or draft beer, there is levied a state excise tax on malt beverages of $10.00 on each container sold containing not more than 31 gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 31 gallons. 
(b)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers other than barrels or other bulk containers, a state excise tax of $0.045 per 12 ounces shall be collected, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts shall be collected. 
(c)  There is levied a state excise tax on all such beverages in excess of 576 ounces or two standard cases of 12-ounce size or the equivalent thereof or one, seven and three-quarter-gallon keg or barrel of such beverages, said tax being levied at the rate of taxation of $0.045 per 12 ounces. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall impose an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more that 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any malt beverages on which such taxes have not been paid. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-359. - Wine taxes. 
(a)  There is levied and imposed on the first sale, use or final delivery within this state of all table wines a state excise tax in the amount of $0.11 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  There is imposed upon the importation for use, consumption, or final delivery into this state of all table wines a state import tax in the amount of $0.29 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is levied and imposed on the first sale, use or final delivery within this state of all dessert wines a state excise tax in the amount of $0.27 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  There is imposed upon the importation for use, consumption, or final delivery into this state of all dessert wines a state import tax in the amount of $0.40 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(e)  There is hereby levied by the board of commissioners an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate for any fractional parts of a liter. 
(f)  The taxes imposed on wine shall not be levied on any wine sold to established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only, or for any wine exempt from taxation under the Constitution of the United States, or for any wine sold to persons for resale or consumption outside this state. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any wine on which such taxes have not been paid. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-360. - Soliciting. 
No retail licensee shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guests of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any malt beverage and/or wine, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his or her establishment or to his or her agent or manager to solicit for himself or herself or for others, the purchase by the patron of malt beverage and/or wine. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-361. - Delivery. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make delivery of any malt beverage and/or wine except inside of the premises or area licensed for the sale thereof. It shall be unlawful for any such licensee to sell malt beverages and/or wine for consumption off the premises. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-362. - Promotions. 
No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of malt beverages and/or wine: 
(1)  The giving away of any ticket, token or any other item that can be exchanged for any malt beverage and/or wine upon the purchase of any other malt beverage and/or wine; 
(2)  The sale of two or more malt beverages and/or wine for a single price, or the sale of one serving of malt beverage and/or wine with a ticket, token or any other items redeemable for a subsequent serving of malt beverage and/or wine. Also prohibited hereunder is the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-363. - Prohibited acts. 
No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring onto the premises one or more alcoholic beverages purchased elsewhere, nor shall any such licensee authorize or permit any patron or customer to take out of the premises one or more alcoholic beverages. No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises except a law enforcement officer or other person authorized by federal or state law to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises, nor shall the licensee act as a keeper, bailee or custodian of any kind of deadly weapon or firearm for any customer or patron. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-364. - Clearing service areas. 
All licensees shall remove or cause to be removed from the area of the premises utilized by the customers or patrons all malt beverages and/or wine within one-half hour after the time for last call specified in section 6-366[sic]. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-365. - Hours. 
No malt beverage and/or wine may be served before 8:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday, or on Sunday at any time other than between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 2014-06 , § IV, 6-3-2014) 
Secs. 6-366—6-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CATERING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local government has authority to issue an off-premises license allowing alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function, O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-391. - Off-premises alcoholic beverage catering license. 
(a)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who holds a valid license from the county to sell: 
(1)  At a fixed location within the county, malt beverages or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises; or 
(2)  By the package for consumption off the premises; may be issued an off-premises license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute malt beverages and/or wine at an authorized catered function. 
(b)  Application for an off-premises license as provided herein shall be made to the building official upon forms to be prepared and approved by the board of commissioners. Applications will be decided according to the same rules and guidelines set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  The annual fee for an alcoholic beverage caterer's license shall be $100.00 annually for each licensed location. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-392. - Event permits. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by the county. In order to distribute malt beverages and/or wine at an authorized catered function, an alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by the county shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply for an event permit. The application shall include: 
a.  The name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, including the name of the specific representative of the caterer who will be responsible for, and present at, the catered function; 
b.  The date of the event; 
c.  The address of the event; 
d.  The time of the event; 
e.  The licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; and 
f.  The name, address and phone number of the host of the catered function. No event permit fee shall be charged. 
(2)  Provide satisfactory reports to the state revenue commissioner on forms provided by that department, stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the commissioner. 
(3)  Maintain original local event permits and documents required by the state revenue department in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(4)  Comply with all laws and ordinances regulating the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages, and no permit will be issued to any alcohol beverage caterer on probation or with a suspended license. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by other jurisdictions. In order to distribute malt beverages and/or wine at an authorized catered function, an alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by a subdivision of the state other than the county shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply for an event permit. The application shall include: 
a.  The name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, including the name of the specific representative of the caterer who will be responsible for, and present at, the catered function; 
b.  The date of the event; 
c.  The address of the event; 
d.  The time of the event; 
e.  The jurisdiction issuing the alcoholic beverage caterer's license; 
f.  The licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; 
g.  A photocopy of the alcoholic beverage caterer's license; and 
h.  The name, address and phone number of the host of the catered function. 
(2)  Pay an event permit fee of $10.00; 
(3)  Pay local excise taxes that will be levied on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the county by the caterer, as calculated under this article, within 15 days of the conclusion of the catered event; 
(4)  Provide satisfactory reports to the state revenue commissioner on forms provided by that department, stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the commissioner; and 
(5)  Maintain original local event permits and documents required by the revenue department in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(c)  Charitable organizations. 
(1)  Charitable organizations, as defined in this chapter, may serve malt beverages and/or wine at authorized catered functions without an alcoholic beverage catering license, so long as the qualified charitable organizations apply for an event permit. The application shall include: 
a.  The name of the charitable organization; 
b.  The name of the caterer; 
c.  The date of the event; 
d.  The address of the event; 
e.  The time of the event; and 
f.  The name, address and phone number of the host of the catered function. 
(2)  A charitable organization serving alcoholic beverages under this subsection is limited to 12 event permits per calendar year. 
(d)  Issuance of event permits. The issuance of event permits is an administrative function of the county, and the county is permitted under this article to request additional information from the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer and/or host of the catered event in deciding whether to issue an event permit. However, no event permit will be issued: 
(1)  Where the requirements set forth under subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section have not been met; 
(2)  Where the host or the alcoholic beverage caterer has violated any of the prohibitions set forth in section 6-393; or 
(3)  To licensed alcoholic beverage caterers, where the total cost of alcohol at a catered event will exceed the total cost of food at an event. This subsection does not apply to qualified charitable organizations or to holders of a special event permit issued pursuant to article VI of chapter 66 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-393. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a food caterer to distribute or sell malt beverages and/or wine off the premises of the food caterer's business without a license issued pursuant to this section. This subsection shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter which may require a food caterer who has a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises of the food caterer's business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer licensed under this article to distribute malt beverages and/or wine off premises except in connection with an authorized catered function within the scope of the event permit for that function. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for anyone, including licensed alcoholic beverage caterers, to distribute distilled spirits in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute malt beverages and/or wine at any time other than as allowed in section 6-113 of this chapter. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. It is the intent of this subsection to prevent any person employed by such caterer, or any other employee, to knowingly violate any prohibitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, relating to furnishing alcoholic beverages to, and the purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by, a person under 21 years of age. 
(f)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment up to one year. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 2014-06 , § V, 6-3-2014) 
Sec. 6-394. - Exemptions. 
Nothing contained in this article is intended to prohibit anyone from hosting private functions within the county where the host provides alcohol to guests free of charge. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-395. - Compliance with this chapter. 
In addition to the requirements set forth herein, all licensed alcoholic beverage caterers performing alcoholic beverage catering services in the county are required to comply with all of the provisions of article III of this chapter that are not inconsistent with this article. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-396. - State law. 
All licensed alcoholic beverage caterers performing alcoholic beverage catering services in the county are required to comply with all state laws, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-20 et seq., 3-5-20 et seq., 3-6-20 et seq., and 3-11-1 et seq., and all regulations promulgated by the state department of revenue including, but not limited to, Ga. Admin. Code § 560-2-10 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-397—6-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FARM WINERIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-421. - License required. 
(a)  No entity shall engage in the business of a farm winery of any kind in the unincorporated area of the county without first obtaining a license therefore under this chapter and a license to operate a farm winery issued by the board of commissioners. It shall also be unlawful for any entity to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license except at tasting rooms licensed as provided herein. 
(1)  Certain alcoholic beverages may be sold by a farm winery in the unincorporated area of the county under a license granted by board of commissioners upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter and by state law. 
(2)  All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and the state law. 
(3)  Any holder of a license for a farm winery issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain a farm winery license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, county licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(b)  A farm winery which is qualified and licensed by the state shall be allowed to manufacture wine or to distribute such wine at wholesale and at retail at its tasting room, an application with copies of its license and permits from the state, along with the license fees and other requirements as hereinafter set out. A farm winery may also sell at retail in packages or for consumption on the premises or at additional licensed tasting rooms wine manufactured by other wineries. 
(c)  Retail sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises licenses shall require that all consumption be at the farm winery site or approved tasting rooms, which includes wedding or dining facilities associated with the farm winery. 
(d)  In addition to the license for the farm winery operation, the board of commissioners may, upon application, issue additional licenses to the farm winery as to malt beverages as follows: 
(1)  Retail package dealer who sells malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, in unbroken packages at retail only and not for resale. 
(2)  Retail consumption dealer who sells malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, for consumption on the premises to consumers and not for resale. 
(e)  The board of commissioners may also issue a farm winery license for additional tasting rooms on or off the primary premises if the additional tasting room(s) are owned or leased by the primary farm winery owner and said rooms have been licensed by the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-422. - Grandfathering of current state licensed farm wineries. 
For the initial year of application of the new county regulations concerning farm wineries, which begins November 5, 2013, farm wineries within the county licensed by the state prior to November 5, 2013, shall be allowed to continue their current operations that existed prior to November 5, 2013, while the operator goes through the licensing process required herein if said initial completed application is filed by May 30, 2014. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-423. - License fees. 
(a)  The first license at the primary farm winery site shall cost $200.00, which shall cover the operation of the farm winery under the state farm winery laws. In addition to the primary farm winery operation, the farm winery may apply for the following license: 
(1)  To sell wine or malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, in unbroken packages on the farm winery premises at retail and not for resale, which license fee shall be an additional $50.00; 
(2)  To sell at retail wine or malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, for consumption on the farm winery premises to consumers, which license fee shall be an additional $50.00. 
(b)  For each additional tasting room location on the primary farm winery premises, there shall be an additional license fee in the amount of $100.00 per additional tasting room. 
(c)  For a licensed entity to obtain an additional license for a tasting room owned or leased by the licensed entity and which is located off of the primary farm winery premises, there shall be an additional license fee in the amount of $100.00 for each such off-site locations. 
(d)  The board shall not prorate the annual license fee for partial year issuance, except that any license issued on or after July 1, shall be 50 percent of the annual rate. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-424. - Days and hours of sale. 
Farm wineries operate during such days and hours as provided by the Farm Wineries Act, as amended, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-425. - License categories. 
The alcoholic beverage licenses issuable under article II of this chapter are: 
(1)  Farm wineries; 
(2)  Tasting rooms of farm wineries; 
(3)  Retail package dealer who sells malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, in unbroken packages at retail only and not for resale; 
(4)  Retail consumption dealer who sells malt beverages, including but not limited to beer, lager and stout, for consumption on the premises to consumers and not for resale. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-426. - Revocation of state license. 
(a)  A copy of the current state license shall accompany all renewals of licenses. Failure to present a valid copy of a current and valid state license will result in a refusal to renew the license. 
(b)  When the state revokes an alcoholic beverage permit or license issued under this chapter, that action shall automatically revoke the county license without any further action on the part of Troup County. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-427. - Location restrictions. 
No entity may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage, nor shall the board of commissioners issue a license, to any location: 
(1)  Where an adult entertainment establishment (see definition of adult entertainment establishment in article III of the Troup County Zoning Ordinance) operates or within 500 feet of the property line of another adult entertainment establishment; or 
(2)  Where the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of any land use control ordinance of the county; or 
(3)  Where the granting of a license would constitute a violation of state law or local regulations; or 
(4)  Where the location thereof would be contrary to the public interest and welfare of the community. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Sec. 6-428. - Excise taxes. 
Farm wineries shall be required to meet the requirements of article III, section 6-329 and article IV, subsection 6-359(e). 
( Ord. No. 2014-02 , § I(Exh. A), 11-5-2013) 
Secs. 6-429—6-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SOCIAL HOSTING AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY MINORS 

Sec. 6-451. - Definitions. 
(a)  An "alcoholic beverage" shall be as defined in section 6-2 of article I of this chapter. 
(b)  A "gathering" is defined as the assembly of three or more individuals at one location that includes at least one individual who is underage and who is not the child of the person responsible for the property. 
(c)  A "social host" is a person who: 
(1)  Knows or reasonably should know that a gathering will occur on property owned or controlled by that person; 
(2)  Knows or reasonably should know that alcoholic beverages will be at the gathering; and 
(3)  Knows or reasonably should know that one or more underage person will be present at the gathering. 
(d)  An "underage person" is any person under the age of 21 years. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 6-452. - Prohibited activities and duties of social host. 
(a)  No social host shall allow a gathering to occur or continue if an underage person at the gathering obtains, possesses, or consumes any alcoholic beverage and the social host knows or reasonably should know that an underage person has obtained, possesses, or is consuming alcoholic beverages at the gathering. 
(b)  Every social host shall take reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any underage person at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to (i) controlling access to alcoholic beverages, (ii) prohibiting and preventing access to alcoholic beverages by any underage person, (iii) verifying the age of persons at the gathering, (iv) supervising the activities of underage persons at the event, and (v) remaining on the property during the gathering. 
(c)  If a social host determines or has reason to believe that an underage person has consumed an alcoholic beverage before or during the gathering, then the social host shall make reasonable efforts to terminate the gathering including, but not limited to, contacting law enforcement to report the suspected underage consumption. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if a responsible person (1) gives timely notice to a law enforcement official of the discovery of alcohol at the gathering or (2) reasonably supervises the activities of persons under the age of 21 at the event and prohibits and prevents access to alcoholic beverages by any person under the age of 21. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 6-453. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be punished by a fine of $200.00 for the first offense. 
(b)  Any person who violates this article a second time shall be punished by a fine of $500.00. 
(c)  Any person who violates this article a third or subsequent time shall be punished by a fine of $1,000.00 and shall be required to perform not less than 100 hours of community service. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 6-454. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parent while present in the parent's household. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to any situation for which state or federal law establishes an exception or exemption. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 6-455. - Repealer. 
All resolutions or ordinances or parts of resolutions or ordinances and any part of the Troup County Code currently in effect in conflict with the terms of this article are hereby repealed, but any resolution or ordinance that may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out or making effective the intent, purpose, and provisions hereof is hereby adopted as a part hereof. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § I, 3-21-2017) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses, taxes and regulations, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— State licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 17, 2009, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 10-31—10-41, 10-61—10-95, and 10-121—10-134 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1987, §§ 5-20—5-22, 5-24, 5-25, and 5-28. 

Sec. 10-31. - Rationale and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the county. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is neither the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
Note: The United States Supreme Court has held that the First Amendment protects non-obscene, sexually explicit materials and entertainment. Notwithstanding, the court has stated that government may regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to eliminate or control the adverse secondary effects caused by these businesses. These adverse secondary effects include, but are not limited to, crime, sexually transmitted diseases, urban blight, declining property values, and lower quality of life. Enactment of legislation regulating sexually oriented businesses must be supported by factual findings of adverse secondary effects made by the enacting body. 
Case law annotations: Courts normally review content-based restrictions on speech under "strict scrutiny" review, and require government to show a "compelling state interest" for the restriction. However, the Supreme Court has stated that, because restrictions on sexually explicit speech are justified without reference to the content of the regulated speech, the proper level of review is whether the regulation is narrowly tailored to a substantial government interest. See County of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, 475 U.S. 41, 48 (1986); United States v. O'rien, 391 U.S. 367, 377 (1968). Here, the substantial government interest is combating adverse secondary effects. If the ordinance targeted the speech itself, the test would be strict scrutiny, a burden almost impossible to meet. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the commissioners, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 124 S. Ct. 2219 (June 7, 2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, GA, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, GA, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2000); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F.3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); and other cases, including: Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Sewell v. Georgia, 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982 (1978) (sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas—1986; Indianapolis, Indiana—1984; Garden Grove, California—1991; Houston, Texas—1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona—1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee—1999-2003; Minneapolis, Minnesota—1980; Los Angeles, California—1977; Whittier, California—1978; Spokane, Washington—2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota—1994; Littleton, Colorado—2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma—1986; Dallas, Texas—1997; Greensboro, North Carolina—2003; Amarillo, Texas—1977; New York, New York Times Square—1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the county board of commissioners finds that: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on property values, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from certain land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses and the surrounding area, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes harm that the county has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the county's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the county's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the county. The county finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
(4)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. See e.g., "Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography," (1986) at 377. 
(5)  Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution, increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity. See e.g., Barnes v. Glen Theatre, 501 U.S. 560, 583 (1991). 
(6)  Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of drug-dealing and drug use. See e.g., Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053, 1056 (9th Cir. 1986). 
(7)  Alcohol consumption in adult establishments increases the likelihood of crime, illegal drug use, and illegal sexual activity, and encourages undesirable behavior that is not in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare. See, e.g., Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. County of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306, 1309 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's Ltd. v. County of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993, 996 (11th Cir. 1998), cent. denied, 529 U.S. 1052, 146 L. Ed. 2d 459, 120 S. Ct. 1553 (2000). 
(8)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(9)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of sexually oriented businesses. Further, such licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the county. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(10)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on the premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult establishments. 
(11)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity. 
(12)  It is desirable, in the prevention of crime and the spread of communicable diseases, to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct this article is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(13)  The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention to this article. 
(14)  The barring of such individuals from operation or employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of five years for a previous felony conviction serves as a deterrent to further criminal conduct, and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(15)  The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of this county will be promoted by enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(16)  The findings noted in subsections (b)(1)—(15) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
Administrator means the county zoning administrator. 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically-controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following items: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
A principal purpose means that the commercial establishment: 
(1)  Has a substantial portion of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items; 
(2)  Has a substantial portion of the wholesale value of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items; 
(3)  Has a substantial portion of the retail value of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items; 
(4)  Derives a substantial portion of its revenues from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration of said items; 
(5)  Maintains a substantial section of its interior business space for the sale or rental or said items; or 
(6)  Regularly features said items, and prohibits access by minors, because of age, to the premises or the portion of the premises occupied by said items, and regularly advertises itself as providing "adult," "xxx," "triple-x," "x-rated," "sex," "sexual," "pornography," "porn," or "erotic" material on signage visible from a public right-of-way. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
Adult motel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, other photographic reproductions, or live performances which are characterized by the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and which advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any on- or off-premises advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Agent of county means an authorized person of The county designated by each department to include, but not limited to the following: building inspection, sheriff's department, marshal's department, heath department or fire department. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a "sexually oriented business" by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
Commissioners means the board of commissioners of County, Georgia. 
Consideration means the payment of money or the exchange of any item of value for any other item of value or promise including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The right to enter the premises, or any portion thereof; 
(2)  The right to remain on the premises, or any portion thereof; 
(3)  The right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter or to remain on the premises, or any portion thereof; or 
(4)  The right to a membership permitting the right to enter or remain on the premises, or any portion thereof. 
County means Troup County, Georgia. 
Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a fulltime, parttime, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Influential interest means any of the following: (1) the actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business, or (2) holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Licensed day care center means a facility licensed by the State of Georgia, whether situated within the county or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Licensee shall mean a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In [the] case of an "employee," it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Live sex act shall mean any act whereby one or more persons engage in a live performance or live conduct which includes or contains "specified sexual activity" as defined herein. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operate or cause to operate shall mean to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. 
Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person shall mean individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant to section 10-35 of this article. 
Regularly means and refers to the consistent and repeated doing of the act so described. 
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This definition does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing, and 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
Sexual device means designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs. This definition shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall this definition be construed to include commercial establishments that do not restrict access to any portion of their premises because of age. 
Sexual encounter center shall mean a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling, tumbling or other forms of physical contact between persons of the opposite sex or same sex when one or more of the persons is semi-nude or nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an "adult arcade," an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store," an "adult cabaret," an "adult motel," an "adult motion picture theater," a "semi-nude model studio," a "sexual device shop," or a "sexual encounter center." 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activity means: 
(1)  Any of the following specified crimes for which less than five years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
a.  A sexual offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 (rape); § 16-6-4 (child molestation); § 16-6-22.1 (sexual battery); § 16-6-22.2 (aggravated sexual battery); or § 16-6-8 (public indecency); 
b.  A prostitution-related offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-9 (prostitution); § 16-6-10 (keeping a place of prostitution); § 16-6-11 (pimping); or § 16-6-12 (pandering); 
c.  An obscenity offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 (distributing obscene material), provided that, consistent with the decision in This That And The Other Gift And Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002), a conviction for advertising obscene materials enumerated in subsection (c) of the statute shall not be considered a specified criminal activity; 
d.  A controlled substance offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30; § 16-13-30.1; § 16-13-30.2; or § 16-13-31; 
e.  A racketeering offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 14-14-4; 
f.  A location restriction offense as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; 
(2)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; 
(3)  Any Georgia municipal/county ordinance violation based upon any of the crimes set forth above in subsections (1)a. through f., inclusive; or 
(4)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, fondling, masturbation or sodomy, or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in (1) above. 
Substantial means at least 35 percent of the item(s) or floor space of a structure or business. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room shall mean the room, booth, or area where a patron of sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-33. - Classification. 
The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcade; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Semi-nude model studios; 
(7)  Sexual device shops; 
(8)  Sexual encounter centers. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-34. - License required. 
(a)  Any sexually oriented business shall have an approved operator's and an employee license for each employee. 
(b)  Violation of any provision within this section shall be subject to section 1-19 of the Code and possible revocation of all licenses. 
(c)  A separate application and operator's license shall be required for each sexually oriented business classification as set forth in section 10-33. 
(d)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or county permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business operator or employee license. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-35. - License required (operator's license). 
(a)  It shall be unlawful: For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business operator's license issued by the building inspection, planning and zoning department pursuant to this article. 
(b)  An application for a sexually oriented business operator's license must be made on a form provided by the county. The application must be accompanied by a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The diagram shall be professionally prepared and must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Prior to issuance of an operator's license, the premises must be inspected by the health department, building department, and zoning department. Prior inspection by the health department and building department shall be required only when the provisions set forth in sections 10-52 and 10-53. 
(c)  If a person who wishes to own or operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, all corporate officers must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant. 
(d)  Applications for an operator's license, whether original or renewal, must be made to the building inspection, planning and zoning department by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be submitted to the building inspection office of the county during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by an agent of the county. The following information shall be provided on the application form: 
(1)  The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the applicant(s); 
(2)  The applicant's social security number and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number; 
(3)  The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state: 
a.  The sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and 
b.  Submit the required registration documents; 
(4)  Whether the applicant has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 10-32, and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each; 
(5)  Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another county or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant is or has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a sexually oriented business ordinance whose business license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation; 
(6)  Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another municipality or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses; 
(7)  The single classification of license, as found in section 10-33, for which the applicant is filing; 
(8)  The telephone number of the establishment or number to reach the applicant if the establishment does not yet have a telephone; 
(9)  The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be located; 
(10)  If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the establishment for which the business license is sought, and the date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the business license is sought; 
(11)  If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the business license). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of the business license, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same; 
(12)  If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in section 10-53. 
(e)  Each application for an operator's license shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment of the application fee in full; 
(2)  If the establishment is a Georgia corporation (either nonprofit or for profit), a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; 
(3)  If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto; 
(4)  If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto; 
(5)  If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto; 
(6)  Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed; 
(7)  If the persons identified as the fee owner of the tract of land in subsection (6) is not also the owner of the sexually oriented business, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owner or proposed owner of the sexually oriented business to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the sexually oriented business; 
(8)  A site plan, professionally drawn by a registered engineer or land surveyor within must be submitted 30 days prior to application depicting the property lines. The site plan shall show any existing sexually oriented businesses within 1,500 feet of the property; and the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, public park or recreation area within 1,500 feet of the property. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time, an application is submitted; 
(9)  The requirements of subsections (e)(2)—(8) shall not apply to a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished to an agent of The county with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-36. - Employee license requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually oriented business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such employee by The county as defined in section 10-32 pursuant to this article. 
(2)  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such person by pursuant to this article. 
It shall be a defense to subsection (a)(2) if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises. 
(b)  An application for a sexually oriented business employee license must be made on a form provided by the county. 
(c)  All applicants for a license must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such information reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the county to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under this article. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the date the application deemed completed. 
(d)  Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services in a sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal application must be submitted to the building inspection, planning and zoning department for each employee. Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the application fee in full. The county shall supply application forms. Applications must be submitted to the building official of the county during regular working hours. Each applicant shall be required to give the following information on the application form: 
(1)  The applicant's given name, and any other names by which the applicant is or has been known, including "stage" names and/or aliases; 
(2)  Age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Height, weight, hair color, and eye color; 
(4)  Present residence address and telephone number; 
(5)  Present business address and telephone number; 
(6)  Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver's license, or other state-issued identification card information; 
(7)  Social Security number; and 
(8)  Proof that the individual is at least 18 years old. 
The personal information provided in this subsection shall be confidential, and shall not be disclosed to the public except to the extent required by state or federal law. 
(e)  Attached to the application form for any license under this article shall be the following: 
(1)  A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the sheriff's department. The sheriff's department shall perform requested finger printing within three business days of such request. Any fees for photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(2)  A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application and shall include whether such applicant, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, has ever had any license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name under which the license was sought and/or issued, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
(3)  A statement whether the applicant has, within the past five years, been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 10-32, and if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
(f)  Every application for a license under this article shall contain a statement under oath that: 
(1)  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct, and 
(2)  The applicant has read the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-37. - Issuance of license—Operator. 
(a)  If application is made for a sexually oriented business operator's license, the building official of the county shall submit an application for hearing before the county board of commissioners within 30 days of receipt of the certified complete application. The county board of commissioners shall approve or deny submitted operator license applications. The application may be denied based on other standards as defined herein and/or if one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  An applicant is under the age of 18 years; 
(3)  An applicant has been denied a license by the county to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked or suspended within the preceding 12 months; 
(4)  An applicant is overdue in payment to the county for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to the sexually oriented business for which license is sought, or the property on which the sexually oriented business is located or will be located; 
(5)  An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 10-32; 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the health department, building department, and zoning department as being in compliance with all other applicable laws and ordinances; 
(7)  The license fee required under this article has not been paid; 
(8)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with one or more of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (d), if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business, and the section 10-33 classification for which the license is issued. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(c)  If so required under other sections of this article, the health department, building department, and zoning department shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the completed application by the building inspection, zoning and planning office. The certification shall be promptly presented to building official, zoning administrator or zoning technician in order to forward application to board of commissioners for final approval. Failure of an appropriate department to timely certify its inspection shall not be grounds for refusing to issue a license within the mandatory time period prescribed in subsection (e). 
(d)  A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification, as set forth in section 10-33 
(e)  In the event that an agent of the county determines that an applicant is not eligible for a sexually oriented operator's license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 30 days of the receipt of the completed application by the county. The applicant may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this article. 
(f)  An applicant may appeal an initial denial of the operator's application to move forward in the process to the county board of commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal with the building inspection, zoning and planning department within ten days after service of notice upon the applicant of the decision to deny the application. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The building inspection, zoning and planning office may, within 15 days of service upon him of the applicant's memorandum, submit a responsive memorandum to the county commission. After reviewing such memoranda, as well as the building official's written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the building official, the county commission shall vote either to uphold or overrule the county's decision. Such vote shall be taken within 21 calendar days after the date on which the building inspection, zoning and planning department receives the notice of appeal. Judicial review of a denial by the county commission may be made pursuant to section 10-45. 
(g)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (d) shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by an agent of the county that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 10-33, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within 30 days of the certified complete application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section 10-40. 
(h)  A business existing and operating as a sexually oriented business at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall have 75 days in which to comply with the licensing provisions required in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-38. - Issuance of license—Employee. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complete application for a sexually oriented business employee license, an agent of the county shall refer the application to the appropriate county departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application. The application process shall be completed within 30 days from the date of the completed application. An application may be approved by the building official of the county provided that an operator's license has been issued. The building official shall not approve an employee license if one or more of the following findings is true. 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 10-32; 
(4)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this article; or 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the county within two years of the date of the current application. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (a), if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. While engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business premises, an employee shall, at all times, possess the license in such manner as to be available for immediate inspection upon lawful request. 
(c)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (a) shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by an agent of the county that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 10-32, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within 30 days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as posted in the building inspection, zoning and planning department pursuant to section 10-40. 
(d)  A business existing and operating as a sexually oriented business at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall have 75 days in which to comply with the licensing provisions required in this article. Employees of an existing sexually oriented business shall have 60 days in which to comply with the licensing provisions required in this article 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-39. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for an operator's license under this article shall give notice that an application is going before the board of commissioners for final approval. The notice shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the board of commissioners in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published. 
(b)  The first advertisement shall not appear more than 30 days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be at minimum, a ten-point font capital and lower case, and published as a display advertisement, not in the legal notices section. The advertisement need not appear on the same day as regularly published legal advertisements. 
(c)  The notice shall contain the classification of the purposed business as set forth in section 10-33, a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant. The date, time and place of hearing, and also a statement that any objections to the issuance must be made at, or prior to, the time of hearing and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the building inspection, zoning and planning office on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(d)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign stating the following: 
"Sexually oriented business license applied for. Any objection to this application must be made at, or prior to,___o'clock a.m. on the___day of_______20___, at (address), which is the date and time of hearing. Objections made prior to the hearing shall be in writing." 
The sign shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property that adjoin or adjoins the location to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The lettering on the sign shall be readable from the public street. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of the initial consideration by the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-40 - Fees. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business operator's license, whether new or renewal, is as posted in the building inspection, zoning and planning department. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business employee license, whether new or renewal, is as posted in the building inspection, zoning and planning department. These fees are to be used to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-41 - Inspection. 
(a)  The county shall regularly inspect the premises of the sexually oriented business in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the county marshal's department, sheriff's department, building department and/or health department dispatched to inspect the premises at any time the establishment is open for business. Such inspection shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Visual assessment of the activities conducted in areas to which patrons have access or are allowed access; 
(2)  Requests for inspection of the license required under this article; and 
(3)  Requests for identification of those individuals who reasonably appear to be under the age of 18. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee who violates this article is subject to revocation of license if he/she refuses to promptly permit such lawful inspection of the premises. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-42. - Expiration of license; denial of renewal. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 10-35. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date. When application is made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the building official denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-43. - Suspension. 
(a)  A license shall be suspended by the building official for a period not to exceed 30 days if it is determined that the licensee or an employee of such licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; 
(2)  Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business while intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances; 
(3)  Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  With knowledge, permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(b)  A licensee may appeal the suspension of a license to the county commission in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection 10-37(f), or may seek direct judicial review pursuant to section 10-45. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-44. - Revocation. 
(a)  A license shall be revoked if a cause of suspension in section 10-43 of this article occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  A license shall be revoked if it is determined that: 
(1)  A licensee gave materially false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee was convicted of a "specified criminal activity" on a charge that was pending prior to the issuance of the license; 
(3)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises; 
(5)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted prostitution on the premises; 
(6)  A licensee has, with knowledge, operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(7)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the licensed premises; 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the county or state for any taxes, fees, fines, or penalties relating to the sexually oriented business or the premises thereon; 
(9)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person under 18 years of age to enter or remain in the establishment; 
(10)  A licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to a nonlicensee of the establishment; or 
(11)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person or persons to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  When a license is revoked, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a license for one year from the date revocation became effective. A licensee may appeal the revocation of a license may seek direct judicial review pursuant to section 10-45. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-45. - Judicial review. 
Within 21 days of a denial of an initial or renewal application by an agent of the county and/or county commission, or suspension or revocation of a license by an agent of the county or his designee, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review by direct appeal or mandamus in any court of competent jurisdiction, state or federal. The action shall then be reviewed by the court for a prompt judicial determination. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-46. - No transfer of license. 
(a)  A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application and set forth in the operator's license. 
(b)  An operator's license shall not be transferable from either one location to either a separate parcel or a different location on the same parcel. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-47. - Location restrictions. 
Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in any commercial adult district provided that: 
(1)  The sexually oriented business may not be operated within: 
a.  One thousand five hundred feet of a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
b.  One thousand five hundred feet of the following: A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education school, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school ground, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
c.  One thousand five hundred feet of the following: A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, skating rink, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the unincorporated county which is under the control, operation, or management of the county park and recreation authorities or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
d.  One thousand five hundred feet of the property line of a lot zoned for any type of residential use or devoted to a residential use as defined in the zoning code; or 
e.  One thousand five hundred feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(2)  A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business that is classified in accordance with section 10-33 of this article. 
(3)  For the purpose of this article, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises [subsections] (1)(a)—(e). 
(4)  For purposes of subsection (3), the distance between any two sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-48. - Nonconforming uses; amortization. 
(a)  Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, that is in violation of the location or structural configuration requirements of this article shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed six months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,500 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operated at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(b)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, synagogue, or regular place of religious worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day care center, public park, or residential district within 1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This section applies only to the renewal of a valid business license, and does not apply when an application for a business license is submitted after an operator's license has expired or has been revoked. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-49. - Additional regulations—Adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the enterprise is an adult motel, as that term is defined in section 10-32. 
(b)  It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b), the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(d)  Violation of subsection (b) shall be subject to the penalty as set forth in section 10-63. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-50. - Same—Escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be subject to the penalty as set forth in section 10-63. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-51. - Same—Nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits a misdemeanor if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to the public view or visible by any other person. 
(c)  A person commits a misdemeanor if the person appears in a state of nudity, or with knowledge, allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-52. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article and cause for possible revocation of operator's license for a person who, with knowledge and intent, appears in person in a state of nudity in a sexually oriented business. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person was in a restroom not open to the public view or visible by any other person, or if the person was an employee in a dressing room not open to the public or within the public view. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article and possible cause for revocation of operator's license for a person who, with knowledge and intent, appears in person in a semi-nude condition on the sexually oriented business premises, unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article and possible cause for revocation of operator's license for an employee, while semi-nude on the sexually oriented business premises, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article and possible cause for revocation of operator's or employee's license for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch a semi-nude employee or the clothing of a semi-nude employee, while said employee is on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-53. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction, that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall be required and each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale. The building official may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since said diagram was prepared. Certifying a previously approved diagram that proves to be false after visual inspection of the premises shall result in the suspension of a license until such time as diagram is submitted that is in conformance with this section. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the building official or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) remains unobstructed at all times. No doors, walls, partitions, curtains, merchandise, display racks, or other object shall obstruct from view of the manager's station any portion of the premises to which patrons have access. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1). 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(9)  No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(10)  No opening of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no more than one person at a time occupies a viewing booth or room, and to ensure that no person attempts to make an opening of any kind between the viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, each business day, inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a)(1)—(14) commits a misdemeanor if he/she, with knowledge, fails to fulfill that duty. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-54. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The establishment is a part of a commercial multiunit center; and 
(2)  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multiunit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multiunit center. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-55. - Signage. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other county ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such display surface shall: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 64 square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length. 
(c)  Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
(d)  Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display surface shall: 
(1)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(2)  Not exceed 20 square feet in area; 
(3)  Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width; and 
(4)  Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise. 
(f)  The provisions of subsection (b)(1) and subsection (c) shall also apply to secondary signs. 
(g)  Any violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalty as set forth in section 10-63. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-56. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business is prohibited. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalty as set forth in section 10-63 and reason for revocation of license. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-57. - Persons younger than 18 prohibited from entry; attendant required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of 18 years from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license, or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalty as set forth in section 10-63 and reason for revocation of license. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-58. - Sexual encounter centers. 
(a)  The board of commissioners makes the following specific findings with respect to sexual encounter centers that include live sex acts: 
(1)  The operation of a sexual encounter center for the purposes of providing the opportunity to engage in, or the opportunity to view, live sex acts is declared to be a disorderly house and a public nuisance per se, which should be prohibited; 
(2)  The operation of a sexual encounter center including live sex acts contributes to the spread of sexually transmitted diseases; and 
(3)  The operation of a sexual encounter center including live sex acts is inimical to the health, safety, general welfare and morals of the inhabitants of unincorporated [Troup] County, Georgia. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain a sexual encounter center which includes live sex acts. 
(c)  Operation of a sexual encounter center that includes live sex acts is a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of the County Magistrate Court. 
(d)  The county building official and/or zoning administrator may apply upon behalf of the county to the magistrate court for an order permitting the county to abate violations of this section. 
(e)  After notice to the operator of a sexual encounter center including live sex acts, the magistrate judge shall conduct a hearing and take evidence as to whether a sexual encounter center including live sex acts is being operated in violation of this section. 
(f)  If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the magistrate judge determines that a sexual encounter center including live sex acts is being operated in unincorporated [Troup] County, Georgia in violation of this section, an order shall be entered authorizing the county to abate the violation by closing the business. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the operator of the sexual encounter center including live sex acts and mailed to the owner of the property upon which the sexual encounter center is located. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any conduct that is otherwise exempted under this article or to the nonobscene presentation, showing or performance of any play; drama, or ballet in any theater; concert hall; fine arts academy; school; institution of higher education or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of sex for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. This section applies whether or not it is a nonprofit or for profit business enterprise. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-59. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays. No sexually oriented business shall open for business or remain open for business on Sunday or any legal holiday recognized by the state. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-60. - Exemptions. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the state, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, movies rated G, PG, PG-13, or R, NC-17, by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), or live theatrical performances with serious artistic, social, or political value, that depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, are expressly exempted from regulation under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-61. - Notices. 
(a)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the building official or any other county office, division, department or other agency under this article to any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States Mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change that has been received by the building official. Notices mailed shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States Mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the building official or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the establishment. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given to the building official by any person under this article shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the building official. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish notice to the building official, in writing, of any change of residence or mailing address. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-62. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid operator's license, or in violation of section 10-44, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-63. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalty or penalties as set forth in section 1-19 of the Code. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this chapter shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate, and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-64. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations issued by the county and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the Magistrate Court of County, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 
(c)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-65. - Severability clause. 
In the event any court having jurisdiction shall declare any chapter, section, subsection or portion of this article unconstitutional or void, for any reason, all other articles, sections or subsections or parts not so declared unconstitutional or void shall remain in full force and effect and shall be enforceable. 
( Ord. No. 2009-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-17-2009) 
Secs. 10-66—10-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT CENTERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement center means an establishment primarily engaged in the commercial operation of jukeboxes, mechanical amusement devices, or similar type equipment as an amusement and recreational service to the general public. An amusement center shall be considered any establishment, which has five or more mechanical amusement devices for commercial operation on the premises. 
Jukebox means any machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into a slot, crevice, or other opening, or upon the payment of a price in any manner, operates or may be operated, for the emissions of songs, music or similar amusement. 
Mechanical amusement device means any machine, contrivance or device which may be activated or which is permitted to function by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or upon the payment of a price in any manner and which is operated for amusement only, and does not give or offer to give in any manner any form of payoff, prize or reward; a pool or billiard table is excluded from this definition. 
(Code 1987, § 5-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 10-172. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any amusement device use in the home of the owner thereof and operated solely for personal noncommercial use. 
Sec. 10-173. - Possession, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within licensed premises. 
No person holding a license for operation of an amusement center under this article shall permit the possession, sale, offer for sale, or consumption of any alcoholic beverage within or on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1987, § 5-7(a)) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 10-174. - Proximity to church or school. 
No person shall operate an amusement center within 300 feet of the nearest property line of a church or public or private primary or secondary school. 
(Code 1987, § 5-7(b)) 
Sec. 10-175. - Hours of operation. 
No person shall operate an amusement center other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Monday through Saturday, and 1:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Code 1987, § 5-7(c)) 
Sec. 10-176. - Gambling. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling device or machine in violation of the laws of the state or of the United States of America, or to authorize, license or permit to be on the premises any machine or mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or which is in any way contrary to the laws of the state or of the United States of America. 
(Code 1987, § 5-7(e)) 
Secs. 10-177—10-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-201. - Required. 
The operation of an amusement center within the county shall be unlawful unless an application shall be made and a license therefor issued, pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 5-2) 
Sec. 10-202. - Application. 
Any person desiring to secure the issuance of a license for the operation of an amusement center shall make application to the business license department for issuance of a license, and such application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address, age and date and place of birth of the applicant; 
(2)  Any prior convictions of the applicant or violation of any municipal, county, state or federal laws, except parking violations; 
(3)  The place where the amusement center is to be licensed and operated; and 
(4)  The length of time applicant has been a resident of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 5-3) 
Sec. 10-203. - Investigation of applicant. 
The sheriff shall make an investigation to ascertain if the applicant is of good moral character and shall investigate the proposed location of such amusement center and, upon completion of such investigation, shall recommend either approval or disapproval of such application, and submit the findings of such investigation and the recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 5-4) 
Sec. 10-204. - Consideration of application; issuance. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, at its next regular meeting after receiving the investigation report of the sheriff, shall consider the application, the investigation and recommendation of the sheriff and determine whether the license shall be issued or shall be refused. 
(b)  Upon approval by the board of commissioners, a license shall be issued to the applicant for the operation of an amusement center at the location revealed in the application for license upon a payment of the license fee provided in section 10-47. 
(Code 1987, § 5-5) 
Sec. 10-205. - Revocation. 
The county expressly reserves the right to revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, if the licensee shall directly or indirectly permit the operation of an amusement center contrary to the provisions of this article, the other ordinances of the county or the laws of the state or of the United States of America. If, after issuance of a license, the county desires to revoke such license, written notice thereof shall be given to the licensee, such notice to specify the violation with which the licensee is charged, and shall specify a date and time and place at which a hearing upon such revocation shall be heard. The licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be based upon evidence submitted at such hearing. 
(Code 1987, § 5-6) 
Secs. 10-206—10-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POOL OR BILLIARD ROOMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 

Sec. 10-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue, and shall include all forms of the games known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards" and "English billiards." 
Poolroom and billiard room mean any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of pool or billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
(Code 1987, § 5-39) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 10-242. - License. 
(a)  Required. The operation of a poolroom or billiard room within the county or within any municipality lying within the county shall be unlawful unless an application shall be made and a license therefor issued, pursuant to the provisions of this article and the other provisions of this Code and laws. 
(b)  Qualifications of applicants. The qualifications for any license applicant pursuant to this article shall be the same as those qualifications as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-3, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Application. Any person desiring to secure the issuance of a license for the operation of a pool room or billiard room shall make application in the office of the county business license department and such application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address, age and date and place of birth of the applicant; 
(2)  Any prior convictions of applicant or violation of any municipal, county, state or federal laws, except parking violations; 
(3)  The place where the poolroom or billiard room is to be licensed and operated; and 
(4)  The length of time applicant has been a resident of the county. 
(d)  Filing of affidavit, surety bond and transfer of ownership of licensed billiard room or poolroom. Every application for a license issued pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by an affidavit and bond as required in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-5, as the same may be amended from time to time. Any transfer of a licensed billiard room shall likewise be subject to the requirements of such state law. 
(Code 1987, §§ 5-40—5-43) 
Sec. 10-243. - Requirements of operation. 
Any poolroom or billiard room licensed pursuant to this article shall be subject to and operated in accordance with the requirements of state law as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1987, § 5-44) 
Sec. 10-244. - Sale or use of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises, served, or allowed to be used in or on the premises of any poolroom or billiard room located in the unincorporated area of the county or any place operated in connection therewith. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises, served, or allowed to be used in or on the premises of any poolroom or billiard room located within any municipality in the county except as allowed under the provisions of state law found in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-12, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, however, it shall be lawful to sell alcoholic beverages at retail on the premises in which a pool or billiard table is located, provided that the owner and/or manager of such retail establishment takes the steps necessary to ensure that the alcoholic beverages sold are not consumed on the premises. 
(Code 1987, § 5-45) 
Secs. 10-245—10-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-281. - Declaration of policy. 
The county board of commissioners does hereby declare that a license for an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment or other similar establishment shall not be granted until an application has first been submitted to the county board of commissioners as set forth in this article and that the license shall not be granted if the applicant has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude unless it appears to the satisfaction of the county board of commissioners that the licensed premises will be operated in a lawful manner, in which case the board of commissioners may, in their discretion issue such license. 
(Code 1987, § 5-56) 
Sec. 10-282. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Entertainment I establishment, means any establishment which for profit holds dances with music provided by either mechanical or live means and in which establishment a location is specified and designated for dancing. 
Entertainment II establishment, means any establishment, other than an adult dancing establishment or previously defined in this Code, wherein music is provided as a part of a for-profit enterprise but in which dancing is not normally expected to occur and in which no designated area is provided for dancing. This shall include, but not be limited to, music concerts and supper club operations. The presence and use of a juke-box or karaoke machine shall not, in and of itself, render an establishment an entertainment II establishment subject to the provisions of this Article so long as such presence and use is incidental to the operation of the establishment and no separate fee or charge is made based upon such presence or use. 
(Code 1987, § 5-57; Ord. No. 2008-04, § I, 5-20-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 10-283. - License. 
(a)  Application. Every person making application for a license to engage in the business of operating an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment or other similar establishment shall make application to the county board of commissioners and the application shall contain: 
(1)  The name and residence of the applicant and the length of his residence within the state; 
(2)  The address and place for which such license is desired; 
(3)  The name of the owner of the premises upon which the business licensed is to be located; 
(4)  A statement that the applicant intends to carry on the business for himself or under his immediate supervision and direction; and 
(5)  A statement that the applicant is of good moral character and has never been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
The application must be verified by the applicant before a notary public or other person duly authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(b)  Fees. Each entertainment I establishment subject to the terms of this section shall pay an annual fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county business license department. Each entertainment II establishment subject to the terms of this section shall pay an annual fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the county business license department. If an establishment's activities can be considered to constitute both an entertainment I and entertainment II establishment, it shall pay an annual fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the county business license department. 
(c)  Investigation of applicant. 
(1)  The sheriff shall make an investigation to ascertain if the applicant is of good moral character and shall investigate the proposed location of such. Upon completion of such investigation, the sheriff shall recommend either approval or disapproval of the application and submit his investigation report and recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
(2)  After receiving an application for the issuance of an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment license, the building official for the county will conduct an investigation for the purpose of determining whether the proposed location complies with both church and school boundaries. Further, the building official will be responsible for giving the proper notice requirements as specified in this section for the holding of a public hearing as well as having a sign placed on the property at least 15 days prior to the holding of a public hearing indicating that an application has been made for the issuance of an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment license. 
(d)  Consideration of application; issuance. 
(1)  After receiving the investigation report of the sheriff, the board of commissioners shall hold a first public hearing on all applications for entertainment I or entertainment II establishments. Notice of the time and place shall be published at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The notice shall include the name of the applicant and the location of the property where the entertainment I or entertainment II establishments or other similar establishment is to be located. A sign showing that an application has been made for the issuance of an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment license shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing at the designated time, and members of the public shall have an opportunity to appear and express any concerns or objections relating to the application. No vote on the application will be taken by the board of commissioners at this initial public hearing. 
(3)  At the second scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners following the initial public hearing, a second public hearing on the application shall be held. The application shall be read and members of the public shall again have an opportunity to appear and express any concerns or objections relating to the application. At the conclusion of this second public hearing, the application shall be considered by the board of commissioners and a determination shall be made as to whether the license shall be issued or denied. 
(4)  Upon approval by the board of commissioners, a license shall be issued to the applicant for the operation of an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment at the location revealed in the application for license upon a payment of the license fee provided in section 50-47 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Applications for entertainment I and entertainment II establishment licenses shall not be submitted more than once in a 12-month period, unless the applicant can show that the conditions upon which denial was based have substantially changed. The mere fact that a change in ownership or management, in and of itself, shall not be considered as a substantially changed condition. 
(Code 1987, §§ 5-58—5-60) 
Sec. 10-284. - Unlawful acts on licensed premises. 
(a)  No person will be allowed to sell malt beverages or wine in the operation of an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment or other similar establishment without complying completely and fully with the provisions regulating alcoholic beverages contained in chapter 6 of this Code. 
(b)  No person holding a license for the operation of an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment or other similar establishment shall permit the consumption of any malt beverages or wine within or on the licensed premises unless the operator is in a legitimate restaurant business which has been approved and licensed by the state and permitted by the county health department. For the purposes of this section, the term "restaurant" is defined as a place where the serving of full-course meals to the public is its principal business and is more than a place where short-order sandwiches and snacks are sold, and the business must have the capacity to seat a minimum of 50 people inside the premises. 
(c)  No person shall operate an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment or other similar establishment within 300 feet of the nearest property line of a church or public or private primary or secondary school. 
(d)  No person shall operate an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment or other similar establishment other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight. Further, such a business operation is prohibited from operating on Sunday. 
(Code 1987, § 5-61) 
Sec. 10-285. - Revocation of license. 
The county expressly reserves the right to revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article if the license shall directly or indirectly permit the operation of an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment contrary to the provisions of this article, the other ordinances of the county or the laws of the state or of the United States of America. If, after issuance of a license, the county desires to revoke such license, written notice thereof shall be given to the licensee, such notice to specify the violation with which the licensee is charged, and shall specify a date and time and place at which a hearing upon such revocation shall be heard. The licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be based upon evidence submitted at such hearing. 
(Code 1987, § 5-62) 
Sec. 10-286. - Penalties for violation of article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating an entertainment I or entertainment II establishment or other similar establishment without first obtaining a license therefor. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-19 of this Code. 
(Code 1987, § 5-63) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 17, 2006, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 14-1—14-11, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1987, §§ 6-1—6-10. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animals means any domesticated animal which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of such property unattended or uncared for. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered abandoned which shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of such animal unattended and without food and water for any period of time sufficient to create a danger to the health of such animal. 
Aggressive dog or animal, vicious dog or animal, or potentially aggressive or vicious dog or animal means any dog or other animal that: 
(1)  Has caused physical injury to humans or domestic animals without provocation, whether on public or private property; 
(2)  Because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has the propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, bite, or injure humans or domestic animals without provocation; 
(3)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after it has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or 
(4)  Causes reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or threatening to attack such person. 
(5)  For purposes of this definition and article, an animal which is defending itself or its owner or keeper from attack shall be deemed to have been "provoked." 
Animal means any domesticated or wild creature, including fowl, fish and reptiles. 
Animal at large means any animal not under restraint and off the property of its owner. 
Animal control department means the department established by the board of commissioners charged with enforcing the provisions of this article. 
Animal under restraint means an animal controlled by a leash or lead; an animal while off the property of the owner at "heel" beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands; an animal while on the property of the owner in the presence of a competent person and obedient to that person's commands; an animal confined on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets; an animal in a building or fenced area within the property limits of its owner or keeper. 
Animal shelter means any premises designated by the board of commissioners for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals found in violation of this article and for unwanted animals. 
Cage means a facility designed to incarcerate a specific species of animal within a limited area. 
Domesticated animal means any animal, bird, or reptile, of any species, which is owned, kept, harbored or maintained as a household pet, for food production, or for other purposes. 
Fenced area means any area enclosed by a fence of such height and strength as to reasonably prevent an animal from leaving such area. 
Kennel pet shop means any building or area used for the keeping, breeding, buying, selling, exhibiting and/or boarding of wild or domesticated animals commercially. 
Nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Is an abandoned or stray animal; 
(2)  Is a female dog or cat running at large when in heat; 
(3)  Is an unlicensed and untagged dog or cat; 
(4)  Engages without provocation in incessant or untimely barking or other noise making in such a manner as to reasonably disturb any person or neighborhood. For purposes of this definition and article, an animal which barks as the result of the intentional and unauthorized actions of persons other than the owner or custodian of the animal shall be deemed to have been "provoked;" 
(5)  Destroys property belonging to others; 
(6)  Habitually chases passing persons or vehicles; 
(7)  Is a vicious animal; or 
(8)  Causes unsanitary conditions. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping, selling or harboring any animal. 
Permit means an application form provided by the health department which must be completed and approved by the health department for the purpose of obtaining a county business license to commercially keep, breed, buy, sell, exhibit or board animals. 
Shelter means any type of sound structure which provides cover and protection from the wind, rain, heat and cold. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2010-01 , § I, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 2011-04 , §§ I, II, 5-17-2011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 14-2. - Animal control department. 
(a)  Created; staffing. There is hereby created the county animal control department which shall have primary responsibility for animal control in the unincorporated areas of the county. Such department shall be staffed by such employees as may be deemed feasible and appropriate from time to time by the board of commissioners, taking into account the need for such employees and available budgetary resources. 
(b)  Responsibility and duties. The animal control department shall have the following responsibilities and duties: 
(1)  Be responsible for the operation of any animal control shelter which may be established by the board of commissioners and the performance of such duties and the keeping of such records related to animal control and welfare as the board of commissioners may require. 
(2)  Cooperate with the health department in the enforcement of rabies control regulations and animal control directives. 
(3)  Cooperate with the county humane society. 
(4)  Pick up and impound animals which are in violation of this article. 
(5)  Prosecute in the county magistrate court, as well as any appeals therefrom, any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2010-01 , § II, 7-7-2009) 
Sec. 14-3. - Animal shelter. 
The board of commissioners may construct or otherwise create or designate an animal shelter for the purpose of caring for and disposing of animals impounded by the animal control department in accordance with this article and for receiving unwanted animals. The board of commissioners may also contract with any person, including, any other governmental entity or agency, for the creation or operation of such an animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006) 
Sec. 14-4. - Rabies inoculation. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat within the unincorporated limits of the county unless such animal has been vaccinated against rabies in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state department of human resources and the county department of health. 
(b)  The owner or custodian of such dog or cat shall retain in such person's possession a certificate of vaccination or other written proof that such animal has been given a current vaccination. 
(c)  The owner or custodian of any such dog shall also be responsible for obtaining a numbered vaccination tag furnished or approved by the state department of human resources at the time of such vaccination, which shall be affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times the dog is off the premises of the owner. Cats and dogs while the same are on the premises of the owner, are not required to wear a rabies tag, but the owner shall have written proof of current vaccination. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove a vaccination tag from any animal without the consent of the owner or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2011-04 , § III, 5-17-2011) 
State Law reference— Rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-5. - Report of animal bites; confinement of animal. 
Any person bitten by or discovering or reasonably suspecting any domestic animal to be suffering with rabies shall immediately report such fact to the department of health, giving the name and address of the owner or custodian of such dog. It shall be the duty of the owner or custodian of such animal to confine such animal in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state department of human resources and the county department of health. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006) 
Sec. 14-6. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Causes. The animal control department shall be authorized to take possession of and impound any of the following: 
(1)  Any dog running at large or free from restraint without a current vaccination tag. 
(2)  Any wild dog. 
(3)  Any abandoned animal or domestic animal the ownership of which is unknown. 
(4)  Any animal having rabies or reasonably suspected of having rabies if the owner or custodian of such animal refuses or fails to confine such animal as required by applicable rules, regulations or laws. 
(5)  Any domestic animal in heat running at large or free from restraint other than within the limits of the property of the owner or custodian of such dog. 
(6)  Any domestic animal which is running at large or free from restraint other than within the limits of the property of the owner of such animal. 
(7)  Any animal in which the condition or the treatment of the animal is causing unnecessary pain and suffering. 
(b)  Disposition of animals. Any dogs or other animals impounded by the animal control department pursuant to this article may be disposed of in a humane manner as detailed in the following subsections: 
(1)  Animals delivered to the animal shelter by their owners residing within the limits of the unincorporated areas of the county shall be made available for adoption immediately. If not adopted, the animals shall be euthanized at the end of a ten-day (240-hour) period. 
(2)  Animals delivered to the animal shelter by persons other than their owners residing within the limits of the unincorporated areas of the county are to be retained for a period of four days (96 hours) as a redeeming period and an additional six days (144 hours) as an adoption period. The first four days (96 hours) shall be sufficient time for owners to redeem an animal. The six additional days (144 hours) shall be a period for adoption. 
(3)  The euthanizing of sick, injured or vicious animals shall be at the discretion of the director of the animal shelter. The date and time that the sick, injured or vicious animal is euthanized shall be at the discretion of the animal control department or the person in charge of the shelter. 
(c)  Redemption. The owner or lawful custodian shall be entitled to claim and obtain possession of any impounded dog or other animal at any time before the expiration of such period upon compliance with the vaccination requirements of this article and payment of all applicable fees. Any animal impounded under this section may be reclaimed as provided in this section upon the payment by the owner or the custodian of any fee which may be imposed, from time to time, by the board of commissioners by resolution. In addition, the owner or lawful custodian shall pay the cost of any required vaccinations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006) 
Sec. 14-7. - Animal roaming free. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to: 
(1)  Fail to keep their animal from running at large or under restraint; 
(2)  Fail to confine their animal having rabies or reasonably suspected of having rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006) 
Sec. 14-8. - Nuisance animals. 
In addition and supplementary to any other requirements and prohibitions of this article or this Code, it shall be unlawful and deemed a public nuisance and separate violation for any owner to: 
(1)  Fail to keep their female dog or cat from running at large or under restraint when in heat. 
(2)  Fail to keep their dog from engaging in incessant or untimely barking or other noise making in such a manner as to reasonably disturb any person or neighborhood. It shall not be a violation of this subpart if the owner or custodian of the dog shows by clear and convincing evidence that the incessant or untimely barking complained of was caused or substantially contributed to by the intentional acts of third parties. 
(3)  Fail to keep their animal from destroying property belonging to others. 
(4)  Fail to keep their animal from habitually chasing passing persons or vehicles. 
(5)  Fail to keep their animal from causing unsanitary conditions. 
(6)  Abandon any domesticated animal within unincorporated Troup County, Georgia. 
(7)  Fail to prevent their animal from becoming a nuisance animal as defined in section 14-1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2010-01 , § III, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 2011-04 , § IV, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 14-9. - Aggressive, vicious, or potentially aggressive or vicious dogs. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of any dog or other animal known by such person to be aggressive, vicious or potentially aggressive or vicious shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any aggressive, vicious or potentially aggressive or vicious animal, or anyone having any such animal in his possession or custody, to ensure that such animal is kept under restraint, as prescribed in subsections (d), (e) and (f) of this section and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, custodian, or harborer, and it is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, locked pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended so that children are prevented from entry and to prevent the animal from escaping. 
(c)  For owners of an aggressive, vicious or potentially aggressive or vicious animal which lives out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the animal must be humanely confined inside a locked pen or kennel of adequate size. The kennel or pen must have secure sides that set securely into the ground or onto a concrete pad. The gate to the kennel must be locked when the animal is unattended. This enclosure shall provide protection from the elements. 
(d)  An aggressive, vicious or potentially aggressive or vicious animal shall not be upon any street or public place except when securely restrained by a leash not more than six feet in length and humanely muzzled and in the charge of a competent person. 
(e)  Whenever outside of its enclosure, as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, but on the owner's property, an aggressive, vicious or potentially aggressive or vicious animal must be attended by the owner or custodian and restrained by a secure collar, muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and on a leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(f)  No aggressive, vicious or potentially aggressive or vicious animal shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied while unattended by the owner or custodian to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building outside of its primary enclosure. 
(g)  A warning sign (e.g., beware of dog) shall be conspicuously posted denoting an aggressive, vicious or potentially aggressive animal on the premises. 
(h)  Failure to keep any aggressive, vicious or potentially aggressive or vicious animal confined or under restraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(i)  In the event any person is cited for and convicted of a violation of this section, the animal shall be registered with the Animal Control Department. The annual fee for the registration shall be $500.00. The animal shall be registered annually so long as it is located in unincorporated Troup County. At the time of registration and annually thereafter when the registration is renewed, an animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner and make investigation as may be necessary to verify that the animal is confined as provided in this section and that the owner, keeper, responsible person or custodian is in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(j)  In the event any person is cited for and convicted of a violation of this section and the animal is further determined by the Magistrate Court to be of a breed, size, predisposition, temperament or nature so as to be capable of causing serious and permanent physical injury, the Magistrate Court shall be authorized to order the person owning or controlling or in possession of the animal to maintain as an additional registration requirement either (1) a policy of insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the animal against liability for personal injuries inflicted by the animal; or (2) a surety bond in the amount of $50,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state and payable to any person injured by the animal. 
(k)  Violation of the registration requirements of this section shall be punishable as provided in chapter 1, section 1-19 of the Code of Troup County, Georgia, and each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, violation of the registration requirements of this section shall subject the unregistered animal(s) to seizure and impoundment by the Animal Control Department. Any animal so impounded shall be retained for ten days, during which time the owner may reclaim the animal upon proof of compliance with this section, proof of vaccination requirements of this article, and payment of the redemption fee and/or cost of any required vaccinations as provided in subsection 14-6(c) of this article. If the owner of the impounded animal is known, such owner shall be notified of the impoundment. Should the owner fail to reclaim the animal within ten days from impoundment, the animal shall be euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2011-04 , § V, 5-17-2011) 
Editor's note— Section V of Ord. No. 2011-04 , adopted May 17, 2011, changed the title of § 14-9 from "Vicious dogs" to "Aggressive, vicious, or potentially aggressive or vicious dogs." 
Sec. 14-10. - Restraint of animals. 
(a)  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this code section, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Leash or lead means a rope, chain, cord, strap or webbing, cable or similar device that is attached to an animal's collar or harness for purposes of restraining the animal and is held by or attached to a competent person. 
Swivel means pivoting hardware that can be used in a trolley system to attach a cable run to a tether or a tether to an animal's collar or harness in order to minimize twisting and tangling of the tether. 
Tether means a rope, chain, cord, strap or webbing, cable or similar device that is attached to an animal's collar or harness for purposes of restraining the animal. 
Trolley system means a method of restraining an animal which utilizes a cable run, swivel and tether attached to an animal's collar or harness. 
(b)  No animal may be restrained by tether in such a manner as to subject it to unreasonable pain, stress or risk of tangling and choking. 
(c)  The only manner that any dog may be physically restrained outdoors, other than by leash or lead or fenced area, shall be by a trolley system in which the tether: 
(1)  Is attached to a properly fitting collar, which may not be a choke collar, pinch collar, prong collar or similar device, or harness worn by the dog; and 
(2)  Is ten feet in length or five times the length of the dog, measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the base of its tail, whichever is greater. 
( Ord. No. 2018-11 , § I, 11-21-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-11 , § I, adopted Nov. 21, 2017, repealed § 14-10 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 14-10 pertained to tethering of animals, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 17, 2006. 
Sec. 14-11. - Humane care of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, maim, tease, torture, abuse or kill any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deprive any animal of shelter which shall protect the animal from the elements. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deprive any animal of necessary medical attention when the animal is in a condition in which failure to provide medical attention would result in death or unreasonable pain or suffering. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deprive any animal of sufficient food and water as often as the feeding habits of such animal require to prevent dehydration, starvation or a significant risk to the animal's health from lack of food or water. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the county for the purpose of harming any domesticated animal. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to release or leave any animal on any private or public property with the intention of abandoning such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006) 
Sec. 14-12. - Penalties for violation. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable by and subject to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-19 of the Code of Troup County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § I(Exh. A), 11-17-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
Secs. 14-13—14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-04, § II(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 17, 2006, set out provisions intended for use as Art. II, §§ 14-13—14-15. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. II, §§ 14-26—14-28. 

Sec. 14-26. - Implementation of state law. 
This article shall be known and may be referred to as the Responsible Dog Ownership Ordinance of Troup County. It is the intention of the board of commissioners of Troup County by the adoption of this article to fully implement the provisions of the Responsible Dog Ownership Law adopted and approved by the General Assembly of Georgia on May 3, 2012, and made effective, for enforcement purposes on July 1, 2012, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § II(Exh. A, § 14-13), 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2013-01 , § I, 7-17-2012) 
Sec. 14-27. - Animal control board for dangerous and potentially dangerous dog control. 
The Troup County Animal Control Board for Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dog Control created by resolution of the county board of commissioners dated February 15, 2011, shall hear and determine the matters provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23. The membership and terms of members of the Troup County Animal Control Board for Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dog Control shall be as is provided from time to time by the board of commissioners. The animal control board for dangerous and potentially dangerous dog control shall meet once each January and at any other time during the year that the county dog control officer may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § II(Exh. A, § 14-14), 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2010-01 , § IV, 7-7-2009; Res. No. 2011-13 , 2-15-2011; Ord. No. 2013-01 , § II, 7-17-2012) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2011-13 , adopted Feb. 15, 2011, changed the title of § 14-27 from "Animal control board" to "Animal control board for dangerous and potentially dangerous dog control." 
Sec. 14-28. - Dog control officer. 
The position of Troup County Dog Control Officer as created by resolution of the Troup County Board of Commissioners dated October 4, 1988, shall be continuously filled by an individual appointed by the county manager to fill such position. Such individual shall carry out the duties and responsibilities of the dog control officer as provided in the Responsible Dog Ownership Law of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § II(Exh. A, § 14-15), 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2013-01 , § III, 7-17-2012) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Secs. 14-29—14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL KEEPING, SALE OR DISPLAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly, Article II. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-41. - Jurisdiction of article provisions. 
This article shall apply to the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 6-20) 
Sec. 14-42. - Interpretation of article provisions. 
This article is not intended to annul any state or federal law, or other agreement between parties. However, where this article imposes a greater restriction upon the owner or permittee, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Code 1987, § 6-21) 
Sec. 14-43. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall possess, buy, sell or display, commercially, any animal without a permit therefor from the county. 
(b)  Exemptions. The occasional buying or selling of horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, and other domesticated animals (including dogs and cats) as an accessory to a normal farm operation shall be exempt from the provisions of this article requiring a permit. 
(c)  Information furnished with application. The applicant, when applying for a permit, shall furnish the health department with a list of the kinds of animals to be kept, handled or exhibited, with the estimated maximum number included at any one time. 
(Code 1987, §§ 6-22—6-24) 
Sec. 14-44. - Care of animals. 
In all establishments operated under a permit under this article, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  All animals must be supplied with sufficient, good and wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of such animals require. 
(2)  All animals and animal quarters shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained. 
(3)  Proper shelter and protection from the weather shall be provided and maintained for all animals at all times. Animals must not be overcrowded, nor exposed to excessive heat or cold. Quarters shall be draft free. Proper temperature for the well-being of the animals shall be maintained at all times. 
(4)  Animals shall not be without care and attention by the permittee. 
(5)  The permittee shall use every reasonable precaution to ensure that animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any person or by any means. 
(6)  The permittee shall not maintain, nor permit to exist, any condition that is or could be, injurious to the animals. 
(7)  Animals which are worked, kept for sale or exhibited shall be healthy and in good condition of flesh. 
(8)  Animals which are enemies by nature, of other animals, or are temperamentally unsuited, shall not be quartered with such other animals, nor so near thereto as to cause fear in any such animals, or to cause any animal to be abused or tormented. 
(9)  Animals shall be maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape. The permittee assumes full responsibility for recapturing any animal that escapes from such person's premises. The permittee shall take all reasonable precautions to protect the public from the animals and the animals from the public. 
(10)  Working animals shall be given proper rest periods. 
(11)  Animal bedding shall be sufficient in size and quantity, and good quality and kept clean. 
(12)  Sick or diseased animals shall be isolated from healthy animals at all times, and so segregated that the illness or disease shall not be transmitted to another animal. 
(13)  The permittee shall maintain a register of the names and addresses of persons from whom animals are received and to whom animals are sold, traded, or given. 
(14)  The permittee shall furnish to the marshal's office and to the health department the names, addresses and telephone numbers of a responsible person who has access to applicant's place of business and can be reached in an emergency at any time outside of business hours. 
(15)  Animals in cages or behind windows or in any other location shall have protection from direct sunlight and excessive heat. Shaded areas shall be provided for all animals. 
(16)  The permittee shall operate the business so as to eliminate excessive or untimely noise and offensive odors from animals. 
(17)  The permittee shall notify the owners of boarded animals when such animals refuse to eat or drink, causing them to lose flesh, or when such animals are injured, or become weak or ill. 
(Code 1987, § 6-25; Ord. No. 2010-01 , § V, 7-7-2009) 
Sec. 14-45. - Pet shops. 
The following provisions shall apply to pet shops: 
(1)  No sick or injured animal shall be maintained on the premises, sold, or offered for sale. 
(2)  Every effort shall be made to ensure that unweaned or weak animals are not sold, offered for sale, nor given away. 
(3)  Every person maintaining a pet shop shall display in a location that is visible and legible from outside such building a notice of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of responsible persons who have access to applicant's place of business and can be reached in an emergency at any time outside of business hours. 
(4)  The owner of the pet shop shall register a name for emergency contact with E 911. 
(Code 1987, § 6-26) 
Sec. 14-46. - Caged birds. 
The permittee shall display and keep birds in cages under the following conditions: 
(1)  Each bird confined in a cage shall have room to exercise freely and shall have perch space without excessive crowding. 
(2)  Sick, injured and dead birds shall be removed from cages. 
(Code 1987, § 6-27) 
Sec. 14-47. - Fish. 
The permittee shall display and keep fish in bowls or aquariums with adequate amounts of water to keep fish in a healthy condition. 
(Code 1987, § 6-28) 
Sec. 14-48. - Animal acts; pet shows; dog and cat shows and exhibitions. 
The following provisions shall apply to animal acts, pet shows, cat shows, and exhibitions: 
(1)  The permittee shall not display any animal whose condition is contrary to public decency. 
(2)  No animal shall be exhibited under conditions that may be cruel or injurious to the animal. 
(3)  No animal bearing evidence of malnutrition, ill health, or having been kept in an unsanitary condition, shall be exhibited. 
(Code 1987, § 6-29) 
Sec. 14-49. - Animal rental, stables, markets and similar pursuits. 
The following provisions shall apply to animal rental, riding academies, livery stables, boarding stables, pony rides, horse markets, mule markets, and other such pursuits: 
(1)  No animal shall be worked, used or rented when in an overheated, weakened, exhausted or crippled condition, or if diseased, ill or otherwise unfit for duty. 
(2)  Animals shall be healthy, strong, and in good flesh. 
(Code 1987, § 6-30) 
Sec. 14-50. - Keeping wild animals. 
The following provisions shall apply to the keeping of wild animals: 
(1)  The permittee shall assume full responsibility for safekeeping and for recapturing any animal that escapes from such permittee's premises. 
(2)  The permittee shall make adequate provisions and safeguards for the protection of the public. 
(3)  The permittee who applies for a permit to keep and display wild animals for educational purposes shall have available printed information concerning the animal displayed, its habits, etc., for distribution or conduct lectures concerning the animal displayed, or have adequate and explanatory signs carrying information prominently displayed near the exhibit. 
(Code 1987, § 6-31; Ord. No. 2010-01 , § VI, 7-7-2009) 
Sec. 14-51. - Circuses. 
The following provisions shall apply to circuses: 
(1)  All animals exhibited must be strong, healthy, and in good flesh. No sick, injured, or crippled animal may be exhibited or worked. 
(2)  All wild or dangerous animals must be so quartered and reasonable precautions taken to protect the public from such animals and the animals from the public. 
(3)  The permittee assumes full responsibility for safekeeping and for recapturing any animal that escapes. 
(Code 1987, § 6-32) 
Sec. 14-52. - Rodeos. 
The following provisions shall apply to rodeos: 
(1)  The applicant, when applying for a permit, shall furnish the animal control department with a detailed diagram of the area, showing location of chutes, catch chutes, and pens, and a list of all proposed events and acts and a copy of the rules and regulations which will govern the conduct of the contestants and events. All of such information will be reviewed by the zoning appeals/planning board of the county before a permit is issued. 
(2)  Any tack, equipment, device, substance or material that is or could be injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty is prohibited. 
(3)  No animal which is unfit to perform the work intended may be used. 
(4)  Chutes must be so constructed as to prevent injury to stock. The arena must be free of rocks, holes and all obstacles. 
(Code 1987, § 6-33) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Smoking in county buildings and motor vehicles, § 2-3; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; standards for building construction, § 38-121 et seq.; historical preservation, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; solid waste disposal, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means any structure used for the habitation or assembly of humans or animals or any structure used for the manufacturing, assembly, storage or sale of goods. The term "building" shall include any addition to an existing building in such manner as to increase its capacity for the habitation or assembly of humans or animals or for the manufacture, assembly, storage or sale of goods. 
Building code means the Standard Building Code, Standard Gas Code, Standard Mechanical Code and Standard Plumbing Code, and National Electrical Code. 
Building official means an official appointed by the county manager who shall individually work through his designee, issue construction permits and inspect the workmanship of all construction within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Construction means the erection, repair (except as excluded), location or relocation of any building. 
Owner means a property owner, lessee, renter, or an authorized contractor or authorized employee. 
Sanitary sewer system means any system used for the disposal of human, animal, manufacturing or commercial wastes and/or byproducts. 
Utilities means gas, electric, water, or sanitary sewer services provided by a public or private organization. 
Water system means any system used to supply potable water for human consumption. 
(Code 1987, § 7-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 18-2. - Dumping of construction and/or agricultural rubbish and debris. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to dump and/or bury construction and/or landscaping waste, debris, etc. on any lot upon which a residence is to be constructed in the unincorporated area of the county when such building lot is 1.5 acres or less in size. 
(Code 1987, § 13-10) 
Sec. 18-3. - County comprehensive address assignment and display guide. 
(a)  [General outline.] Building and location address numbers are to be assigned by Troup County Mapping and displayed by occupants and property owners as set forth herein. This section contains the general outline for the regulation of address number assignment and display. Procedures and specifications shall be provided in the county comprehensive address numbering and display guide to be available along with all applications and relevant fees in the county planning and zoning office. 
(b)  General address assignment regulations. The following are minimum guidelines for assignment of addresses. Specific policies and procedures shall be included in the Comprehensive Address Numbering and Display Guide available in the offices of planning and zoning. 
(1)  The county mapper shall be responsible for the approval and assignment of all addresses. 
(2)  Addresses for locations on roadways in common with neighboring jurisdictions should be coordinated to provide a logical and seamless address sequence along all roadways and to ensure no duplication of addresses in the county regardless of jurisdiction. 
(3)  The county mapper assigns new addresses that will be consistent with both the existing adjacent addresses and the county-wide numbering grid. 
(4)  Once addresses are assigned and all required documents have been submitted and approved by the county mapper, an addressing notice is prepared that is distributed to various departments and agencies (assessor's office and county communications/911) as well as many outside service providers (post office, utilities, etc.). 
(5)  Addresses shall be assigned in arabic numerals and english alphabet. 
(6)  All addresses are assigned one whole number for every ten feet; no fractional addresses are allowed (i.e., ½, etc.). Only zero lot line and single-family attached style developments, such as townhomes shall allow sequential numbering. 
(7)  Generally, addresses are assigned left to right, and with odd numbers on the left side of thoroughfares and even numbers on the right side of thoroughfares. 
(8)  Addresses are assigned only for developed property. For major subdivisions, addresses are assigned after the approval of the preliminary development plan and after an application for address assignment is submitted. All other addresses are assigned following the submission of an address assignment application with an approved building permit. 
a.  Applications shall be submitted to the county mapper in accordance with the policy guide, forms and fees created to administer this section. 
b.  Applications and addressing schemes submitted for approval to the county mapper by surveyor, engineers or other registered design professionals shall be submitted in paper formats to be legible. The county mapper shall receive all major subdivision plats electronically. 
(9)  No single parcel shall have more than one primary address. Where multiple structures exist on a single parcel of land, "root" building numbers shall be used along with suite or unit numbers where applicable. 
(c)  General address display regulations. The following are general guidelines for display of addresses. Specific policies and procedures shall be included in the Comprehensive Address Numbering and Display Guide (guide) available in planning and zoning. 
(1)  Only addresses assigned by the county mapper shall be displayed. 
(2)  Addresses shall be displayed as assigned in arabic numerals. 
(3)  Addresses should be contrasting in color to the background. Reflective lettering is encouraged for residential addresses, and may be required for certain other address types. 
(4)  Residential addresses should be displayed at the roadside adjacent to the driveway on, in order of priority: 
a.  Both sides of the structure's mailbox if adjacent to the driveway, 
b.  On a two-sided sign dedicated to the display of the address. 
(5)  If no road frontage or driveway from public right of way, then the address shall be placed within one foot of the access right-of-way or easement at the public road. 
(6)  Residential address numbers will be a minimum of four inches on all federal, state and local roads and highways and a minimum of three feet on all subdivision roads. Minimum heights shall be included in the guide. 
(7)  Nonresidential structures shall use road side and structure display as appropriate determined by development type. Nonresidential address sizes shall be determined by various factors to include location, use scale and visibility, but set forth in the guide. 
(8)  Additional standards may apply for rear-loaded, multi-family, shopping center, campus and other nontraditional or intensive development configurations. 
(9)  The chief building inspector shall enforce the address display guidelines of this section. For new construction or additions, the address display shall be approved prior to the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy (CO). 
(d)  Road naming and signing. Road names are assigned and accepted as well as road signing in accordance with the subdivision regulation of the county. Road naming and signing policies, guidelines, and procedures shall be included for informational purposes in the guide and expanded where necessary. 
Generally, the policies shall include: 
(1)  Street/road types and abbreviations should be consistent with the U.S. Post Office recognized abbreviations. 
(2)  The county mapper is solely authorized to include compass directional points (North, South, East, West, Northwest, etc.) in road names. Compass directional point words may be included in road and subdivision names when in conjunct with another word to create a single word (i.e., "Northpointe," "Southwood"). 
(3)  Road names may include english characters only. 
(4)  Initials may not be included in road names, except for memorial purposes and as specifically accepted by the county board of commissioners. 
(5)  Memorial or honoraria road names may be created by the board of commissioners. A memorial or honoraria name does not change the official road name or address of any property along that stretch of road or highway. 
(6)  Road names may be reserved as part of a preliminary plat submission and renewed annually for up to a three-year period. Longer reservation periods may be granted for planned unit developments [and] other large scale developments. Large scale developments are typically identified as those requiring a development of regional impact study. The board of commissioners may identify and reserve road names indefinitely. 
(7)  Official names of existing roads may be changed by the board of commissioners upon the report and recommendation of the county mapper and the county 911 director. Official names of existing roads may be changed only when the board of commissioners determines in its discretion that the change is necessary as the result of: 
a.  Duplications and/or confusing similarities between road names that may interfere with the accurate dispatch of emergency vehicles or postal delivery; 
b.  Road construction that has resulted in the extension of a road to another road so that both roads are joined in such a manner that both roads may be considered one road; or 
c.  One road having two commonly used names or where portions of what appears to be the same road has two or more names. 
(e)  Amendments. Guidelines shall provide for procedures to amend address assignments and road names by the county mapper, board of commissioners or property owners. 
(f)  Compliance and enforcement. 
(1)  The chief building official shall be the enforcement officer charged with enforcing the portions of this regulation relating to the display of addresses. 
(2)  Numbering or display discrepancies noted by emergency personnel shall be reported to the E-911 director who will coordinate with the county mapper or chief building official as appropriate. 
(3)  Citizen and visitor reports of apparent inappropriately displayed addresses, numbering discrepancies, or errors in third-party maps may be reported to the building inspections office for investigation and corrective action, if any. 
(4)  Preexisting structures. At the determination of necessity, the chief building official may compel a property owner of a structure in existence prior to the adoption of this section to properly display the address signage for a property. Upon the failure of the property owner to comply, the chief building official may take the following action: 
a.  Fine the property owner $25.00 for each notification of failure to properly display signage, not to exceed one notification per month for a maximum of six notifications. 
b.  Upon failure of order to place proper signage, the chief building official may install signage, subsequently bill the property owner for the cost of production and installation of the sign plus a processing fee not to exceed $10.00. An additional $10.00 late fee may be charged for every 30 days the unpaid balance is not satisfied. If, after 90 days the complete bill is unpaid, the county may place a lien on the property for the entire amount of the outstanding balance of the bill to include all fines, fees and charges. 
(5)  Appeals for address number location or relocation may be addressed to the chief building official who will coordinate with E-911 and emergency response officials for consideration, but whose determination will be final. 
(g)  Variances. The county board of commissioners may authorize a variance from these guidelines when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the county board of commissioners shall make the findings required below. No variance shall be granted unless the board finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property that the strict application of the provisions of these guidelines would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
(2)  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; 
(3)  That the circumstances giving rise to the need for the variance are peculiar to the parcel and are not generally characteristic of other parcels in the jurisdiction of these guidelines; and 
(4)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is located. 
( Ord. No. 2009-05 , §§ I—VII, 11-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2012-03 , §§ I, II, 10-18-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05 , §§ I—VII, adopted Nov. 4, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 18-3 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 18-4—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to adopt codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Adopted. 
The latest edition of the Georgia State Construction Codes, together with all appendixes thereto, as both may be adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced as the county code on such matters. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, § I, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-32. - Purpose and scope of article. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. The state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(b)  Code declared remedial. 
(1)  Generally. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as "service systems." 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan under the requirements of the construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(c)  Scope. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
b.  Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
c.  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
d.  Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
e.  Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
f.  Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewer system. 
g.  Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
h.  Energy. The provisions of the CABO Model Energy Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
i.  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling. The provisions of the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one-family or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
j.  The Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of the Unsafe Building Abatement Code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(2)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(3)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(4)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(5)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, §§ 1.1—1.3, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-33. - Building department. 
(a)  Generally. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department, and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The board of commissioners shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by section 18-141, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of the same. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 50-18-70—50-18-76. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act, required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 1.4, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-34. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes, provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 1.5, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-35. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 1.6, 6-19-2001) 
Cross reference— Historical preservation, ch. 42. 
Secs. 18-36—18-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 18-61. - Authority. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 2.1, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-62. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 2.2, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-63. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 2.3, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-64. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 2.4, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-65. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the unsafe building abatement code. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 2.5, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-66. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 2.6, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-67. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided that any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided that the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 2.7, 6-19-2001) 
Secs. 18-68—18-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 18-91. - Building permit and mobile home permit. 
(a)  Contents of application; plan; approval; lapse. 
(1)  Each application for a building permit or mobile home permit shall be accompanied by a site plan indicating such information as may be needed to present an accurate record of the existing conditions and proposed uses including, but not limited to, property lines, rights-of-way, easements, structures, soil conditions, terrain and parking areas. 
(2)  A construction drawing shall be submitted when required by the building official, and, where applicable, a plan meeting the requirements of the county soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations shall be submitted. 
(3)  Before issuing a building permit or mobile home permit, the building official shall forward copies of the application to the health department, the zoning administrator, and other departments for which approval is necessary. Upon favorable approval of all concerned, the building official may issue a permit. Permits shall become invalid if construction is not begun within six months of the date of issuance. 
(b)  Fees. Fees for building permits are to be governed by the schedule in the state construction codes adopted in section 18-31. Fees not specified in the state construction codes shall be specified by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Issuance prerequisite to issuance of water system, sewer system and pipes permit. Permits shall not be issued for the construction and installation of a water system, sewer system, utility, driveway or culvert pipe when the same are being utilized in connection with any building or mobile home or any addition thereto without first having made application for and received a permit for such building or mobile home from the building official. 
(d)  Denial until compliance with law. A violation of the zoning regulations or subdivision regulations or any other law or regulation of the county or state shall be cause for the denial of a building permit until such violations are removed, and/or compliance with all such regulations and such laws has been accomplished. 
(Code 1987, §§ 7-3—7-6) 
Sec. 18-92. - Conflict of regulations; most stringent prevails. 
This division is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this division imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or requires greater space than is imposed by other regulations or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this division shall govern. 
(Code 1987, § 7-7) 
Secs. 18-93—18-110. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permits For All Work Governed By Construction Codes 

Sec. 18-111. - Application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Exception. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
(5)  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 w) or less. 
(c)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided that the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(d)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(f)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided that the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.1, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-112. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings, drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to such drawings, specifications, and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings. and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(d)  Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(e)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(f)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(g)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquidtight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.2, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-113. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided that the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.3, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-114. - Issuance. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where such building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate such building. It shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.4, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-115. - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.5, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-116. - Conditions. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. If such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. One set of drawings shall be retained by the building official, and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of the work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or authorized representative. 
(d)  Restriction. No building permit shall be issued for any construction wherein the plans for such construction include the use of a metal facade building on any lot which abuts the right-of-way of Georgia Highway 109 between its intersection with Morgan Street in the City of LaGrange through its intersection with the eastern boundary of Interstate 185. This prohibition shall apply to only areas of the unincorporated area of the county lying within such boundaries outlined in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.1, 6-19-2001; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 1, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-117. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the board of commissioners have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Where work for which a permit is required by this section is started or proceeded prior to obtaining such permit, the fees specified in this section shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this section in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in this section. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.7, 6-19-2001; Ord. No. 01-04, §§ 3, 4, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-118. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports, unless the reports are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the construction code: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place to verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.8, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-119. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Such certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuance. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.9, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-120. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business; when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 3.10, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-121. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner or agent by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 4, 6-19-2001) 
Secs. 18-122—18-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-141. - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The board of commissioners shall appoint such board. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 5.1, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-142. - Membership. 
(a)  Composition; financial interest. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of seven members. Such board members should be composed of individuals appointed by the board of commissioners with knowledge and experience in the construction codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there may be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(b)  Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes or modifying a decision of the building official, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. If regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(d)  Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 5.2, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-143. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further described in section 18-144, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 5.3, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-144. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations under such codes have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this article or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within ten calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 5.4, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-145. - Rules and regulations. 
The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after the notice of appeal has been received. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 5.5, 6-19-2001) 
Sec. 18-146. - Decisions. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant, and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 01-04, Attach. A, § 5.5.1, 6-19-2001) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Roads and streets, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-21 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Burials. 
It shall be unlawful for any undertaker or any other person to bury or cause to be buried, or to in any manner aid or assist in the burial of the dead body of any human being in any cemetery or location in the unincorporated area of the county other than an authorized public cemetery or a private cemetery established and approved pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § VI(1), 2-19-2002) 
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE CEMETERIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private cemetery means a cemetery located on privately owned property which is intended to be used for the burial of human remains by members of an identifiable class of persons that can be reasonably distinguished from the general public or citizenry, and which may not be used for the burial of members of the general public or citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § II, 2-19-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 22-32. - Authority of building official. 
The building official shall be responsible for issuing permits and ensuring that the requirements of this article are satisfied. Other than maintaining in his office an original of the plat of survey of each private cemetery and maintaining an inventory of private cemeteries in the county, the building official and county shall have no responsibility for or duty to supervise the operation of any such private cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § IV, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-33. - Records. 
The building official shall maintain a record and inventory of the locations of all private cemeteries established and permitted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § IV, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-34. - Enforcement officers. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, certified peace officers, and/or officials of the state, or any county code enforcement officer, are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § VIII, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-35. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Violators of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-19 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § VII, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-36. - Operation. 
It shall be the sole responsibility and duty of the owner, creator, trust or other legal entity which shall own, supervise or have control of a private cemetery to ensure that the same shall not at any time constitute a health hazard or be or constitute a nuisance. The owner, creator, trust or other legal entity which shall own, supervise or have control of a private cemetery shall have the right and responsibility of creating rules and regulations necessary to or appropriate for the operation of such private cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § V, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-37. - Marketing and advertising. 
No private cemetery established and approved pursuant to this article shall market, advertise or sell lots or burial spaces to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § VI(2), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-38. - Use. 
All private cemeteries created pursuant to this article shall be and remain purely private, and all lots and spaces shall be reserved for relatives, friends, neighbors or other members of an identifiable class of persons that can be reasonably distinguished from the general public or citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § VI(2), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-39. - Creation of nuisances. 
No owner, creator, trust or other legal entity which shall own, supervise or have control of a private cemetery shall allow such private cemetery to accumulate weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions so as to create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § VI(3), 2-19-2002) 
Secs. 22-40—22-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-61. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a private cemetery in the unincorporated area of the county unless done so in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(intro. ¶), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-62. - Survey required. 
A plat of survey of the private cemetery prepared by a state-registered land surveyor shall be submitted to the building official along with the application. Upon approval of the survey by the building official, the applicant shall file, or cause to have filed, two signed original copies of the survey with the superior court clerk for recording. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(1), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-63. - Minimum area required. 
No private cemetery shall be approved unless the survey provided for in this division indicates that the private cemetery contains not less than one acre, the entire area of which shall be dedicated to and used only for private cemetery purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(2), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-64. - Land use compatibility. 
The location of the proposed private cemetery is to be compatible with adjacent land uses, existing or proposed highways and any other elements or factors deemed by the county to affect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the area surrounding the proposed location. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(3), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-65. - Buffer area. 
The proposed location must contain a buffer area that is suitably landscaped with trees and/or shrubbery on all sides of the site that is identified on the survey and is not less than ten feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(4), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-66. - Flood prevention. 
No private cemetery shall lie in whole or in part within a floodplain and certification of the same must be provided upon the survey. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(5), 2-19-2002) 
Cross reference— Floods, ch. 38. 
Sec. 22-67. - Identification of boundaries. 
The boundaries of the proposed private cemetery must be clearly marked and delineated. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(6), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-68. - Ingress and egress. 
Adequate access, ingress and egress to and from the private cemetery must be available by public road or private drive. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(7), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-69. - Health department approval. 
The approval of the proposed private cemetery must be obtained from the health department and submitted with the application. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § III(8), 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-70. - Appeal from denial. 
Appeals from the denial of a permit authorized by this division shall be to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § IV, 2-19-2002) 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Elections generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 et seq.; Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Adoption of state rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board that pertain to local elections, together with the provisions of the state election code contained in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., are adopted as the rules, regulations and provisions that shall govern the conduct of local general and special elections in the county. 
Sec. 26-2. - Expenses. 
Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and at other times when required. 
Sec. 26-3. - Polling places and voting precincts; as shown on official map. 
The polling places and voting precincts of the county shall be as shown on the official map on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by local governments, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless service. 
(a)  9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of 75 cents. 
(b)  Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)  Administrative provisions. The Troup County Clerk is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this ordinance and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of this section. 
(d)  Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by Troup County from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by Troup County pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
( Ord. No. 2011-05 , §§ 1—4, 6-21-2011; Ord. No. 2012-01 , §§ 1—4, 7-26-2011) 
Editor's note— Sections 1—4 of Ord. No. 2011-05 , adopted June 21, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence codification as § 30-1 was at the discretion of the editor.   The 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless service shall become effective January 1, 2012. 
Secs. 30-2—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of electronic alarm systems by county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; license required to engage in low voltage alarm system contracting, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8.1. 

Sec. 30-31. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the installation and use of alarm systems, to establish standards for control of and maintenance of the various alarm systems that are intended to bring about sheriff's department, fire department and/or other emergency department response, and to provide penalties for violations. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-11) 
Sec. 30-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices designated and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into the premises, to signal an attempted burglary, robbery or other criminal activity in or upon the premises, a medical emergency needing medical attention, and/or an ambulance, or like occurrences. 
Enforcement authority means the county, through the fire department, sheriff's department, or any other designated department. 
Owner means the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises having an alarm system regulated under the provisions of this article. 
Unauthorized alarm means the activation of an alarm system signal resulting in a response by the sheriff's department, fire department, or other county emergency department where none of the events or emergencies for which the alarm system has been installed have, in fact, occurred. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 30-33. - Scope of article provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the installation, alteration, equipment, use and maintenance of alarm systems installed within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-13) 
Sec. 30-34. - Validity of other laws. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws or ordinances which prescribe more restrictive limitations. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-14) 
Sec. 30-35. - Display of address required. 
The owners of such alarm systems must display their address on the property such that is visible from the right-of-way. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-15) 
Sec. 30-36. - Prohibited equipment. 
An owner shall not use or operate, attempt to use or operate or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will, upon being activated, either mechanically, electronically, or by any other automatic means, call and deliver a recorded message to any 911 telephone number at the county E 911 center. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-16) 
Sec. 30-37. - Prohibited connection. 
An owner shall not place, install, join, connect or otherwise locate any central station alarm system equipment or device for direct access with the 911 telephone number. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-17) 
Sec. 30-38. - Responsibility for installation and operation. 
The owner of an alarm system shall be responsible for the proper installation and operation of the alarm system and obtain a written description of the function of the system along with the procedure and means for activating and deactivating the system. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-18) 
Sec. 30-39. - Unauthorized alarm; user fees. 
(a)  A user fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk is hereby imposed upon any owner for all false fire, burglar, holdup, panic, and/or medical alarms at all locations in the unincorporated county, in excess of two during any 30-day period. After four unauthorized alarms within any 30-day period, the matter may be referred to the proper enforcement authority for appropriate action which may include the issuance of a citation and prosecution for violation of this article. Notwithstanding anything contained in this subsection to the contrary, an owner installing or having installed on the premises a new alarm system shall be granted a grace period of 30 days beginning with the date of the initial installation, during which grace period the user fees provided in this section shall not apply. 
(b)  Any unauthorized alarm which is caused by the alarm company will not be charged against the homeowner but will be charged against the alarm company. All alarm companies are required to contact the county E 911 center and advise what lines they are working on before they begin work and after the work is complete. An unauthorized alarm caused without notification to the E 911 center will result in a $50.00 fine per occurrence to the alarm company. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-19) 
Sec. 30-40. - Deactivation of alarm systems. 
The owner shall be responsible for deactivating or causing to deactivate the alarm system within a reasonable time following notification by the enforcement authority or any other county department providing notice. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-20) 
Sec. 30-41. - Exception and force majeure. 
In determining the number of unauthorized alarms chargeable to an owner, certain alarms shall be excluded as an unauthorized alarm if such alarm was determined to be caused under any one or more of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Criminal activity or unauthorized entry onto the protected premises; 
(2)  Earthquake or other natural occurrence causing structural damage to the protected premises; 
(3)  High winds sufficient to activate motion detection systems or causing physical damage to the protected premises; 
(4)  Flooding of the protected premises due to overflow of natural drainage; 
(5)  Lighting bolt causing physical damage to the protected premises; 
(6)  Telephone line malfunction verified in writing by a telephone company supervisor; 
(7)  Electrical service interruption verified in writing by the electrical service supplier; 
(8)  The generation of an unauthorized alarm which is beyond the reasonable control of the system user. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-21) 
Sec. 30-42. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates other provisions of this article or any regulations promulgated pursuant hereto shall be guilty of the violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 for the first violation and a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation thereafter, or such other amounts as determined by the magistrate court. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally activates any alarm system for any reason other than for those authorized by this article or during controlled testing of equipment shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or up to 30 days in jail. 
(c)  No person shall operate any audible alarm system that does not have an automatic 15-minute shutoff after activation. The enforcement authority shall take all appropriate actions to shut off an audible alarm that does not automatically shut off within 15 minutes of activation. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-22) 
Sec. 30-43. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  An alarm system installed in a motor vehicle; or 
(2)  An alarm system installed upon the premises of a federal, state, county or municipal government or to the county school system. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-23) 
Sec. 30-44. - Confidentiality of information on alarm system. 
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this article is and shall be personal in nature and confidential and not subject to public inspection except where specifically required under provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 50-18-70—50-18-76. Any employee of the enforcement authority, or other person providing the confidential information secured under this article to any unauthorized person, or using the information to the detriment of the owner, shall be guilty of a violation of this article and subject to the penalties under this article. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-24) 
Sec. 30-45. - Enforcement responsibility. 
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the appropriate enforcement authority of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-25) 
Sec. 30-46. - Liability of the county. 
(a)  The county shall take every reasonable precaution to ensure that alarm messages or signals received by the county E 911 center are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the county shall not be liable for any omission or neglect regarding the inspection of the installation or alteration of equipment, transmission of alarm signals, alarm messages, or the relaying of any such signals or messages to the E 911 center. Further, the county shall not be liable for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of a signal from an alarm system, nor for the failure or neglect of the county E 911 center or any other person or agency providing dispatch or monitoring services to properly notify the county's sheriff, fire, or other emergency response departments. 
(b)  If any part of this article shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remainder of the enactment, and such remainder shall remain in full force and effect. 
(c)  All laws, ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof, which conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1987, § 8.6-26) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; solid waste disposal, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 34-31. - Intent. 
It is declared to be the intent of the board of commissioners, in furtherance of its governmental interest in and responsibility to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county, to enact the regulations in this article governing the maintenance of property and the removal of hazards there from, all in order to assure the prevention and abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(1), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined in this section, all words used in this article shall have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as provided for herein: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal or other combustible material. 
Breeding places means a mound or mass of construction debris, garbage, trash, cut vegetation or woody material. 
Developed property means property upon which a structure has been erected which requires permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. 
Filth means foul, rotten or putrid matter which causes offensive odors and creates unhealthy conditions. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Inoperable vehicle means any vehicle that is resting on blocks, without tires, with major parts missing, in a state of repair which precludes use, or lacking a current valid state tag. 
Litter means any kind of discarded and uncontrolled or uncontained solid waste, garbage, trash, dirt, sand, gravel, refuse, debris, dead animal or thing or substance, whether liquid or solid, that may be carried or deposited, in whole or in part, by wind, rain, snow, water, animal or any other such force into any public or private property, or into any river, public waterway, drain, sewer or receiving basin. 
Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle, and other grazing animals, and all rarities, including but not limited to ostriches, emus and rheas. 
Open storage means the storage of personal property, including but not limited to vehicles, that is not screened on all sides from view by a building, fence, landscaping or other visual buffer from any public way or adjoining property. 
Person means firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, trusts, companies and bodies politic and corporate, or any other group of individual acting as a unit, or any combination thereof, as well as individuals. 
Poultry means domestic fowl, including, but not limited to, waterfowl such as geese and duck, birds which are bred for meat and egg production, exhibition, or competition; game birds such as pheasants, partridge, quail and grouse, as well as guinea fowl, pigeons, dove, peafowl; and all other avian species. 
Private property means property privately owned by one or more persons. 
Public property means any road, street, alley, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare in unincorporated Troup County or property owned and controlled by any governmental entity. 
Refuse means all putrescible or nonputrescible waste (except body waste) including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, road or street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, equipment, appliances, machinery, and solid market and industrial waste. 
Road means the entire width between boundary lines of every right-of-way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, cans, yard clippings, wood, woody tree cuttings, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Running at large means any livestock which is not under manual control of a person and which is on any public road of the city or any property not belonging to the owner of the livestock, unless by permission of the owner of such property. 
Trash means organic and inorganic waste that is too large or heavy to be routinely broken down, compressed, or otherwise disassembled to fit into the normal solid waste containers authorized for use by a household or business for the collection of its waste. Trash includes, but is not limited to, items such as lumber, bedding, furniture and garden tools, but does not include yard trimmings. 
Vegetation means grass, weeds, or plants having no permanent woody stem less than one inch in diameter at breast height and showing no visible signs of having been maintained, as distinguished from a tree or shrub. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(1), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 34-33. - Penalty for violation. 
In addition to any other remedy or right of abatement provided in this article, the county Code and laws, or general law, any person found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to the penalties as described in section 1-19 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(1), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 34-34. - Unlawful acts and conditions. 
(a)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of the county Code and laws are deemed a public nuisance and declared unlawful as such. 
(b)  By way of illustration only and without limiting the scope of subsection (a) of this section, the following acts and/or conditions are declared public nuisances and unlawful: 
(1)  The open storage of inoperable and/or non-licensed vehicles on private property; provided, however, that any person lawfully engaged in the repair of a damaged or inoperable vehicle may temporarily store one such vehicle on private property without the necessity of screening for a period not to exceed 30 days; 
(1.1)  The storage of two inoperable and/or unlicensed vehicles unless fully screened from public street and surrounding properties; 
(1.2)  The storage of three or more inoperable and/or unlicensed vehicles unless stored in an enclosed accessory structure; 
(2)  Failing to maintain developed or undeveloped private property in such a manner as to prevent the establishing of breeding places for small animals or insects that are destructive, annoying or injurious to the public health; 
(3)  Allowing developed property to become overrun with vegetation so that such vegetation, by virtue of its height and/or density, constitutes a danger to the health, safety and/or welfare of the public or would endanger or hinder the performance of duly authorized law enforcement, fire and/or other public safety officers in the exercise of their official duties upon the property; 
(4)  Allowing the collection of filth, such as but not limited to, stagnant water, decayed vegetables and fruits, dead animals, tainted meat, sewage or excrement of any kind upon private property; 
(5)  Dumping, depositing or throwing litter, including but not limited to refuse, garbage, rubbish, construction or demolition debris, woody or vegetative debris, appliances, equipment of any type or inoperable vehicles, or trash, on any public or private property; 
(6)  Casting, placing, sweeping or depositing anywhere within the unincorporated areas of the county any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any county road, public right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, sewer or onto any occupied premises; 
(7)  Allowing livestock or poultry to run at large in the unincorporated areas of the county; 
(8)  Allowing wells upon private property to remain uncovered; 
(9)  Allowing upon private property stagnant water, decayed vegetables, decayed fruits and fruit refuse, dead animals or tainted meant, filthy privies, filthy water or excrement, broken or ruptured sewer lines, raw sewage or anything that causes offensive odors or that works hurt, damage or inconvenience to another; the conducting by pipes, sewers or otherwise into any county road, street, public alley or on the lot of another, of any filthy water or excrement of any kind, such as comes from kitchens, bathtubs, laundry places, privies, stables and other places. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, either the owner of the real property upon which a condition prohibited by this article exists or the lawful possessor in control of said real property, or both, may be held liable for violation of this section. Provided, however, that the owner of the real property upon which a public nuisance exists shall not be liable for the violation of this section by a lawful possessor in control of said real property until said owner has been notified of the existence of the nuisance. Once notified of the existence of the nuisance, the owner may be held liable to the same extent of the lawful possessor of the property unless said owner establishes by a preponderance of the evidence: 
(1)  That they neither caused nor contributed in any manner to the existence of the nuisance; 
(2)  That they have no legal authority to control the actions of the lawful possessor or to remove the lawful possessor from possession upon being notified of the existence of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(1), § I, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 2015-03 , § I, 12-2-2014) 
Sec. 34-35. - Abatement. 
(a)  All nuisances and dangerous objects in and about county roads, streets and other public places may be removed at once by the county, without any notice, and the expense incurred in the removal shall be paid by the owner of the dangerous objects or of the person maintaining the nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the person creating or maintaining any nuisance within the unincorporated areas of the county to fail or refuse to abate and remove same after having been ordered to do so in accordance with the provisions of the Code and laws of the county. 
(c)  Any nuisance on private property in the unincorporated areas of the county may be removed on the written complaint of any officer or inhabitant of the county, which complaint must set forth particularly the nature and location of same and the person complained against. On such complaint being filed with the county magistrate court, the court shall issue a summons to the person charged with maintaining such nuisance, requiring him to show cause before the court at some time therein specified, within not more than ten days after service is perfected in accordance with section 34-35.1 herein, unless said time period should be extended to allow for service by publication, why said nuisance complained of should not be abated. Such notice shall be served personally by any marshal at least one day before the hearing. At the trial, the court shall hear evidence as to the facts and pass an order as may be just. If the thing complained of is a nuisance, the order shall specify within what time it is to be abated by the defendant. If it is not abated within the time specified in the order, the court shall issue a writ directed to the chief marshal directing and requiring the abatement of the nuisance. 
(d)  Whenever the person creating or maintaining any nuisance within the unincorporated areas of the county shall fail to abate after notice to do so, and it shall become necessary to issue a writ, directed to the chief marshal, requiring him to remove same, it shall be the duty of the chief marshal to keep an account of the necessary expenses incurred and to render to the court a statement of same. The court shall issue an execution against such order for such amount, the same to be levied upon and collected in any manner allowed by law, including but not limited to the manner as is provided for the levy in collection of executions for taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(1), § I, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 2012-04 , § I, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 34-35.1. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints filed pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure, if any, within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq.; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 15 prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
( Ord. No. 2012-04 , § II, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 34-36. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The board of commissioners finds and declares that within the unincorporated areas of the county there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with the applicable state construction codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the county; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the unincorporated areas of the county, where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The board of commissioners finds that there exist in the unincorporated areas of the county dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the board of commissioners that this section shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(2), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Secs. 34-37—34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE AND UNHEALTHFUL PREMISES 

Sec. 34-61. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the county that nothing in section 34-36 shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local law, ordinance, or regulation nor to prevent or punish any violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(3), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 34-62. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined in this section, all words used in this article shall have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as provided for herein: 
Applicable codes means (i) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (ii) any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; and (iii) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. after October 1 provided that such building or state construction codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9—41-2-17, and this section, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, this article, and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9—41-2-17 and by ordinances adopted under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, this article, and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9—41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(3), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 34-63. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the unincorporated areas of the county to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the unincorporated areas of the county or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall appoint the building official and the chief marshal and his designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the county charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in this subsection (g) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The county may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(3)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(4)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(3), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 34-64. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of such county or municipality. Such conditions may include the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(3), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 34-65. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the unincorporated area of the county or in the municipality in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of the ordinances; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(3), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 34-66. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq.; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06(3), § I, 6-15-2004) 
Secs. 34-67—34-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REDUCED-PHOSPHATE LAUNDRY DETERGENTS 

Sec. 34-91. - Declaration of policy. 
The county board of commissioners does hereby declare it to be the public policy of this county to encourage the use of clean, reduced-phosphate household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than one-half of one percent (0.5) phosphorus by weight. The county board of commissioners hereby finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect the county's rivers and lakes, as well as Lake West Point, and promotes health, safety and welfare, prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life, and property. The board of commissioners hereby finds that it is vital to the health, well-being, and welfare of present and future inhabitants of this county that these water sources are protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-1(a)) 
Sec. 34-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering, cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
(2)  A detergent used in dairy, beverage or food processing for cleaning equipment; 
(3)  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner or metal conditioner; 
(4)  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities, or in agricultural production; 
(5)  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
(6)  A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
(7)  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory or engineering laboratory; or 
(8)  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospitals, health care facilities, or veterinary hospitals. 
Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-1(b)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 34-93. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than one-half of one percent (0.5) phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-1(c)) 
Sec. 34-94. - Actions or proceedings in court. 
The county may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-1(e)) 
Sec. 34-95. - Limitation. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-1(f)) 
Secs. 34-96—34-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Sections I—X of Ord. No. 2010-04 , adopted Nov. 17, 2009, has been treated as superseding art. V, Soil erosion and sedimentation control, §§ 34-121—34-130, to read as herein set out. Former art. V derived from Ord. No. 2004-05, adopted June 1, 2004. 

Sec. 34-121. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Troup County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § I, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-122. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: Engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood-control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 34-124(c). 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: Planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 34-123(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing shortterm vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § II, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-123. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 34-124(c)(15) and (16)of this article, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 2-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § III, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-124. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPS. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land- disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surfacewater to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments onsite or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § IV, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-125. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Troup County without first obtaining a permit from the Troup County Building Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Troup County Building Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection 34-124(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 34-124(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 34-124(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 34-124(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § V, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-126. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The Troup County Building Department, by and through the Troup County Building Official or his/her designee, will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The Troup County Building Department, by and through the Troup County Building Official or his/her designee, shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § VI, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-127. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 34-125(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § VII, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-128. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said subsection. 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § VIII, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-129. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Troup County Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § IX, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-130. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the first day of January, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. 2010-04 , § X, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 34-131—34-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE 

Sec. 34-151. - Restriction on outdoor water[ing] of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable Troup County ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
( Ord. No. 2011-03 , § I, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 34-152. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in [this] article. 
(b)  The Troup County Building Department shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2011-03 , § I, 12-7-2010) 
ARTICLE VII. - FORECLOSURE REGISTRY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section I(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2013-07 , adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed the former art. VII, §§ 34-153—34-157, and enacted a new art. VII as set out herein. The former art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2012-04 , § III, adopted Oct. 18, 2011. 

Sec. 34-153. - Purpose. 
Neighborhoods are facing significant threat of becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are abandoned, foreclosed or where ownership has been transferred after foreclosure. Improperly maintained and secured abandoned and/or foreclosed properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of abandoned and/or foreclosed real property. There is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
This foreclosure registry will require creditors or mortgagees to provide the county with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing abandoned and/or foreclosed real property into compliance with applicable provisions of Chapter 18 (Buildings; Construction and Related Activities), Chapter 34 (Environment), Chapter 66, Article II—(Roads, Streets and Other Public Places, Drainage), Chapter 70 (Solid Waste Disposal) and Appendix D (Quality Development Corridor Overlay District) of the Code of Troup County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2013-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-154. - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in sections 1-4, 34-22 and 34-62, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned means a property that is vacant and is under a notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax commissioner lien sale and/or properties that have been subject of a previous foreclosure sale in which title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure and/or sale. 
County means Troup County, Georgia. 
Creditor means a person or entity to whom a debt is owed or who has a right to require the fulfillment of an obligation or contract, wherein said debt or right is secured by a deed to secure debt, deed of trust or other instrument conveying a lien upon or security title to real property. 
Days means consecutive calendar days. 
Enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer, marshal, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by or working on behalf of the county. 
Foreclosed real property means real property that is subject to any process under O.C.G.A. tit. 44 whereby a grantor of a secured debt in real property is divested of all rights to said real property and title to the real property is not sold in an arms-length transaction but retained by a creditor or mortgagee after a foreclosure sale or proceeding or transferred to a creditor or mortgagee pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
Form means the foreclosed or vacant property registration form created by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs registry. 
Local means within the geographical boundaries of the following counties: Troup, Heard, Coweta, Meriwether, and Harris. 
Mortgagee means a person or entity that holds or receives a deed to secure debt, deed of trust, or other instrument conveying a lien upon or security title to real property. 
Property agent means any person or entity empowered by a creditor, mortgagee, or transferee, as it pertains to the foreclosed real property, with authority: 
(1)  To ensure security and maintenance; 
(2)  To comply with code enforcement orders issued by the county; 
(3)  To provide a trespass authorization upon request of an enforcement officer; 
(4)  To conduct inspections; 
(5)  To accept rental payments from tenants, if no management company is otherwise employed; and 
(6)  To serve as an agent authorized to receive any citation under this chapter and notice pertaining to any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
Real property means any improved residential or commercial land or portion thereof identified by a map and parcel identification number, located in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Registry official means the county's chief marshal or his designee 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
Transferee means the person entity to whom foreclosed real property is first transferred by a creditor after foreclosure. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
( Ord. No. 2013-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-155. - Registry of foreclosed real property. 
Any creditor or mortgagee who obtains foreclosed real property by way of a foreclosure sale or proceeding shall, within 91 days of obtaining such property, pay to the county a registration fee for each foreclosed real property in accordance with the fee schedules set by the board of commissioners, not to exceed $100.00 per foreclosed real property and register with the county at the time by completing and turning in the form, providing the following information: 
(1)  Creditor's or mortgagee's official contact information, including a name, title, street address, telephone number and e-mail address; 
(2)  Agent's name, street address, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The street address, including tax map and parcel identification number, of the foreclosed property; 
(4)  The date the property was transferred, as stated on the instrument conveying the real property, whether that instrument has been recorded or not; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
( Ord. No. 2013-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-156. - Registry of transferred foreclosed real property. 
Any creditor or mortgagee who has foreclosed on real property and then transfers said foreclosed real property to a person or entity shall, within 91 days of said transfer shall pay to the county a registration fee for each transferred foreclosed real property in accordance with the fee schedules set by the board of commissioners, not to exceed $100.00, and register with the county at the time by completing and turning in the form, providing the following information: 
(1)  Transferee's official contact information, including a name, title, street address, telephone number and e-mail address; 
(2)  Agent's name, street address, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The street address, including tax map and parcel identification number, of the foreclosed property; 
(4)  The date the property was transferred, as stated on the instrument conveying the real property, whether that instrument has been recorded or not; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
( Ord. No. 2013-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-157. - Exemption from registration requirements. 
No creditor or other owner of foreclosed real property shall be required to register such foreclosed real property under sections 34-155 or 34-156, nor shall such creditor or owner be required to pay any registration fee, if: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure under which the creditor or owner takes the property contains the information specified in paragraphs (1) through (5) of section 34-155 or 34-156; 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of superior court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the office or officer in charge of the county foreclosed real property registry: 
a.  A filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  A recorded copy of the entire deed under power of sale, or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
( Ord. No. 2013-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-158. - Removal from registry. 
A vacant or foreclosed real property owner, or the agent of such owner, may apply to remove such vacant or foreclosed real property from the registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes vacant or foreclosed real property. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the county, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The reason the property is no longer vacant or foreclosed real property; 
(2)  The current owner's name, street address, mailing address, telephone number and e-mail address; 
(3)  The street address, including tax map and parcel identification number, of the foreclosed real property; 
(4)  The date on which the property was no longer vacant or foreclosed real property; and 
(5)  If the reason for removal is the transfer of the property to a new owner who has inhabited the property or is actively engaged in improving the property pursuant to a valid building permit, then at such time as it becomes available, provide the recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the new owner. 
The registry official shall grant or deny such application within 30 days of receipt of a fully completed application, and if no such determination is made within 30 days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
( Ord. No. 2013-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 34-159. - Administration, enforcement, violation and penalties. 
(a)  All creditors or mortgagees subject to registration or registered pursuant to this article shall: 
(1)  Comply with applicable provisions of this chapter; and 
(2)  Report any change in required information set forth in sections 34-155 and 34-156 to the county within 30 days of the change, regardless of whether such information was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(b)  County may make foreclosure registry information accessible online. 
(c)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(d)  Registry official is in charge of administering the provisions of this article, and as such has the sole authority and discretion to determine compliance, to grant or deny applications removal from registry, and to determine whether a creditor, transferee, or owner is required to register property pursuant to this article. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit or limit the ability of other enforcement officers from issuing citations [for] violations of this article. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved of a decision by the registry official may appeal that decision to the Magistrate Court of Troup County within 30 days of: 
(1)  The issuance of a citation for violating this article; or 
(2)  The date of the written decision denying the application or request. The person aggrieved shall have three additional days added to the 30 days if the written decision is mailed, rather than hand-delivered. 
(f)  Violation of this article shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
( Ord. No. 2013-07 , § I(Exh. A), 2-19-2013) 
Chapter 38 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; flood prevention for private cemeteries, § 22-66; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. C. 
State Law reference— Construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), adopted June 26, 2012, repealed the former art. II, §§ 38-31—38-43, 38-61—38-64, 38-91—38-95, 38-121—38-124, 38-151—38-155, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the codification of 1987, § 7-105—7-117, 7-128—7-131, 7-142—7-146, 7-157—7-160, 7-171—7-175. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 38-31. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 1, § A, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Troup County, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 1, § B, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-33. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 1, § C, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-34. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 1, § D, 6-26-2012) 
Secs. 38-35—38-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 38-61. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of unincorporated Troup County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 2, § A, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-62. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated April 19, 2017, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated April 19, 2017, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Troup County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 100 Ridley Avenue, Suite 1300, LaGrange, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 2, § B, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 2017-17 , § I, 4-4-2017) 
Sec. 38-63. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 2, § C, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-64. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 2, § D, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-65. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 2, § E, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-66. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 2, § F, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-67. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Troup County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 2, § G, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-68. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-19 in Troup County, Georgia Code of Ordinances, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Troup County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 2, § H, 6-26-2012) 
Secs. 38-69—38-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 38-91. - Designation of article administrator. 
The senior building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 3, § A, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-92. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the senior building official on forms furnished by the building and zoning office prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 38-122(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The senior building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 3, § B, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-93. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the senior building official shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 38-62, then the senior building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 38-92(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 38-92(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the senior building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 38-92(1)c. and subsection 38-122(2) or 38-124(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the senior building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the senior building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 3, § C, 6-26-2012) 
Secs. 38-94—38-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 38-121. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 4, § A, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-122. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-121(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in a1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 38-93(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 38-121(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 38-122(3)a.,c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-62, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 4, § B, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-123. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-62, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 38-62, then the senior building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-121(4) "elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The senior building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 4, § C, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-124. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-62, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 38-122. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 4, § D, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-125. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-62, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-121(4) "elevated buildings." 
The senior building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 38-92(1)c. and 38-92(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 4, § E, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-126. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 4, § F, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-127. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 4, § G, 6-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-128. - Substantial damage/repetitive loss. 
The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires participating communities to conduct assessments for substantial damage following a flooding event. A building is considered to be substantially damaged when: 
"Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred." 
If a substantially damaged building is rebuilt in violation of a community's floodplain management ordinance including not properly elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential buildings only), flood insurance will be significantly higher. In addition, the property owner will not be eligible for an increased cost of compliance (ICC) claim payment. The NFIP has implemented a new coverage called ICC, which is an endorsement to the standard flood insurance policy. It applies to all new and renewed flood insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. Structures that have suffered substantial damage from flooding may be required to elevate, demolish, relocate, or flood proof (nonresidential buildings only) the damaged structure upon rebuilding. Through ICC coverage, funds are available to the property owner to pay for flood protection measures that meet NFIP standards. 
Property owners may file for ICC coverage in two instances: 
(1)  If the community determines that the home or business is damaged by flood to the point that repairs will cost 50 percent or more of the building's pre-damaged market value. This is substantial damage. 
(2)  If the community has a repetitive loss provision in its floodplain management ordinance and determines that the home or business was damaged by a flood two times within a ten-year period, where the cost of repairing the flood damage, on average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of its market value at the time of each flood event. This is repetitive damage. Additionally, there must have been flood insurance claim payments for each of the two flood losses. 
If a community chooses to adopt a repetitive loss provision, the following language developed by FEMA must be adopted, at a minimum, in order for buildings to qualify for a claim payment under ICC coverage. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 4, § H, 6-26-2012) 
Secs. 38-129—38-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 38-151. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning commission as established by Troup County shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the senior building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the superior court of Troup County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The senior building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 5, 6-26-2012) 
Secs. 38-152—38-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 38-161. - Specific definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the senior building official's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 38-62. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. See definition for "structure". 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation, perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 5, 1990. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 3, 2012. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study. The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after December 5, 1990, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 3, 2012, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after July 3, 2012. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have occurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
( Ord. No. 2012-07 , § I(Exh. A), Art. 6, 6-26-2012) 
Chapter 42 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; special historic buildings, § 18-35; environment, ch. 34; planning, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 42-31. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the county is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; and in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same, the board of commissioners hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(Code 1987, § 9.2-11) 
Sec. 42-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. The term "building" may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object including, but not limited to, the kind of texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the board of commissioners as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 42-34(b). 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof which is designated by the board of commissioners as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 42-34(c). 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Code 1987, § 9.2-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 42-33. - Creation. 
(a)  Title. There is hereby created a commission the title of which shall be the "Troup County Historic Preservation Commission" ("commission" in this article). 
(b)  Members: number, appointment, terms and compensation. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the board of commissioners' chairman and ratified by the board of commissioners. All members shall be residents of the county and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available in the county, the five members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archeology or related professions, and building construction or real property appraisal. Members of the commission as of October 16, 2012, shall complete their current term of office. Members appointed on or after October 16, 2012, shall serve three-year terms. All members shall be eligible for reappointment, shall not receive compensation, and shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. The director of the Troup County Archives shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting, member of the commission. 
(c)  Statement of the commission's powers. The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the county having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the board of commissioners specific districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historical districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny the same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the board of commissioners that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Advise the board of commissioners on the restoration or preservation of any historic properties acquired by the county. 
(Code 1987, § 9.2-13; Ord. No. 2013-05 , § I, 1-15-2013) 
Sec. 42-34. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the county. 
(2)  Commissioner's power to recommend districts and buildings to the board of commissioners for designation. The commission shall present to the board of commissioners recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the board of commissioners for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) of individual properties therein or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects and landscape features or a combination thereof which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the county. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic district shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic (contributes to the district); 
b.  Nonhistoric (does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section); and 
c.  Intrusive (detracts from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property; criteria for selection. A historic property is a building, structure, site or object, including an adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, the county or the state for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era. 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style. 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the county, state, or the region. 
(4)  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the board of commissioners, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the names of the owners of the designated property; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the county, and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Required public hearings. The commission and the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than 15 nor more than 45 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the county tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification of the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation section. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic the commission must submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3) of this section to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources. 
(5)  The board of commissioners' action on commission recommendation. Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the board of commissioners may adopt the designation as proposed, may adopt the designation with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the designation. 
(6)  Notification of adoption of designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the designation by the board of commissioners, the owners and occupant of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the county historic preservation commission, which notice shall apprise such owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the county tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(7)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the county of the ordinance for designation. 
(8)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the board of commissioners shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property from the time of receipt of the commission's recommendation until final action by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 9.2-14) 
Sec. 42-35. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a historic or nonhistoric building, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the commission, as further set forth on the application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard. Prior to reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the application. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in the same manner as for zoning amendments and a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the building and zoning department shall be required. The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications or certificates of appropriateness. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
(1)  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above-proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building material, setback and landscaping to the Secretary of Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" and to any design guidelines adopted by the county. 
(2)  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure or object shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
b.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
c.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
d.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
(3)  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites or object shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site or object. 
b.  The importance of the building, structure, site or object to the ambiance of a district. 
c.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site or object because of its design, texture, material, detail or unique location. 
d.  Whether the building, structure, site or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the county. 
e.  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
f.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site or object from collapse. 
g.  Whether the building, structure, site or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions or to interpret the meaning of such provisions so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the provisions so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 30 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property or of a building, structure, site or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Where the commission and applicant agree that additional time is required for evaluation of a proposed material change, an agreement may be reached to extend the deadline for commission action. Any such extension shall be signed by the applicant and the commission and shall become a part of the records of the commission. 
(3)  In the absence of an extension agreement, failure of the commission to act within 30 days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  If the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and in such a case no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall rescind the certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall send written notification of the rescission to the building inspector who shall promptly issue a stop-work order. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(l)  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with such application. 
(m)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the board of commissioners. Any such appeal must be filed with the board of commissioners within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this section or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 30-day period allowed for commission action in subsection (h)(2) of this section. The board of commissioners may approve, modify or reject the determination made by the commission if the board of commissioners finds that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decision of the board of commissioners may be taken to the superior court in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for county ordinance violations. 
(Code 1987, § 9.2-15) 
Sec. 42-36. - Maintaining of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  If the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and will advise the owner of the steps which should to be taken to remedy the situation. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Code 1987, § 9.2-16) 
Sec. 42-37. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 9.2-17) 
Chapter 43 - IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-03 , §§ 1—14, adopted Sept. 15, 2009, with an effective date of July 1, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as a new ch. 43, arts. I and II, was at the discretion of the editor. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 43-1—43-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE 

Sec. 43-41. - Short title, authority, and applicability. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Troup County, Georgia," or, for brevity, the "Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(b)  Authority. This article has been prepared and adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of Troup County, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(2)  This article shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Troup County, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 1 (1.01—1.03), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-42. - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  Findings. The Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia, finds and declares: 
(1)  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Troup County; 
(2)  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
(3)  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this article is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this article to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Troup County and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(c)  Intent. This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the Troup County Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 50-8-1 et seq.); and the applicable minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning and the development impact fee compliance requirements, both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 2 (2.01—2.03), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-43. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
The provisions of this article shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Troup County. 
(1)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
a.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this Ordinance and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of Troup County, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this article. 
b.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
c.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
d.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
e.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
f.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
g.  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
h.  The use of "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
i.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
j.  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this article are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this article. 
(2)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
Administrator means the County Manager of Troup County, Georgia, or the county manager's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this article. 
Board of commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia. 
Building permit is the permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the Troup County Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the board of commissioners. 
Commencement of construction, for private development means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Comprehensive plan means the Troup County Plan or planning elements as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 50-8-1 et seq.) and the applicable minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
County means Troup County, a legal subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Troup County, Georgia. 
Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this article has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this article or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by Troup County, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements means site-specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by Troup County, Georgia shall be considered a project improvement. 
Property owner means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities means: (A) Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; (B) public safety facilities, including sheriff, inmate housing, fire, and emergency communications facilities; (C) libraries and related facilities; and (D) roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any other components of state or federal highways. 
Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 3 (3.01, 3.02), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-44. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who after the effective date of this article engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(1)  Construction not subject to impact fees. The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this article, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
a.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this article that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
b.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
c.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
d.  Placing or replacing a manufactured home in a manufactured home park on a prepared manufactured home pad in existence and operation prior to the effective date of this article. 
e.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
f.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
g.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(2)  Grandfathered projects. 
a.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this article shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
b.  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of this article may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this article, provided that: 
1.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of this article shall be or have been paid in full; and 
2.  Said construction shall be commenced, pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit, or within 180 days, whichever is later. 
(3)  Method of calculation. 
a.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and which: 
1.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
2.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
c.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this article shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of Troup County, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
d.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
e.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 4 (4.01—4.03), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-45. - Fee assessment and payment. 
(a)  Fee schedule. 
(1)  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as attachment A for a property located inside of Troup County, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Troup County, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
(3)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
a.  The Administrator in his or her sole discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
b.  In making such determination, the Administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
c.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this article, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the county's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the board of commissioners. 
d.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the board of commissioners in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(b)  Timing of assessment and payment. 
(1)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit. 
(2)  All development impact fees shall be collected no earlier than the time of issuance of a building permit, and no later than as a prerequisite to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building. 
(3)  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
(4)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the feepayor or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
(c)  Individual assessment determinations. Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(1)  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established on the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as attachment A. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Troup County or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and 
c.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
(3)  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this Article. A negative determination by the Administrator may be appealed to the board of commissioners in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(4)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Troup County, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Fee certification. Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certification of the development impact fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as attachment A or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 5 (5.01—5.04), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-46. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exemption policy. Troup County recognizes that certain office, retail trade and industrial development projects provide extraordinary benefit in support of the economic advancement of the county's citizens over and above the access to jobs, goods and services that such uses offer in general. In addition, the county recognizes that certain types of residential development provide benefit to the county beyond tax digest value. 
(1)  To encourage such development projects, the board of commissioners may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for such a development project upon the determination and relative to the extent that the business or project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth of public benefit to Troup County, or the extent to which an affordable housing project provides benefit to the community, in accordance with adopted exemption criteria. Such criteria shall be adopted by the board of commissioners prior to the consideration of any application for reduction or exemption from any impact fee. 
(2)  It is also recognized that the cost of system improvements otherwise foregone through exemption of any impact fee must be funded through revenue sources other than impact fees. 
(b)  Process for exemption approval. An application for exemption shall be considered under the following procedures: 
(1)  Application for exemption approval must be made by the building permit applicant to the administrator. A building permit may be issued upon approval of an exemption, or may be issued without payment of applicable impact fees following receipt of a complete exemption application and pending its approval, but a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a decision regarding the exemption has been made, or until such time that the application for exemption is otherwise withdrawn by the applicant and payment of impact fees have been paid. 
(2)  Documentation must be provided to the administrator that demonstrates the applicant's eligibility for an exemption. This documentation shall address, but need not be limited to, all applicable exemption criteria adopted by the county. This documentation constitutes the application for exemption. 
(3)  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether an application for exemption addresses the exemption criteria adopted by the county and is complete. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the board of commissioners in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(4)  The administrator or the board of commissioners shall determine the eligibility for and extent of exemption, in accordance with the standards and procedures contained in the exemption criteria adopted by the board of commissioners. If action by the board of commissioners is required, the application for exemption shall be considered at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners that falls at least two weeks after a complete application for exemption has been received by the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 6, (6.01, 6.02), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-47. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
(a)  Maintenance of funds. 
(1)  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this article shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
(2)  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
(3)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
(b)  Expenditures; restrictions. 
(1)  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
(2)  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the following shall be considered general revenue of Troup County, and may be expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Troup County for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and 
c.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Annual report. 
(1)  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the board of commissioners as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
(2)  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 7 (7.01—7.03), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-48. - Credits. 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(1)  Credits; restrictions. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b. below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this article. 
b.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of this article for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of Troup County, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
c.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Granting of credits. 
a.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
1.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan; 
2.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and 
3.  The board of commissioners shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
b.  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is authorized under a private agreement executed under the provisions of section 43-49 of this article. 
(3)  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
a.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
b.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
c.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that Troup County, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
d.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the county, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
e.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the board of commissioners in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(4)  Credits; application. 
a.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
b.  The administrator, in his or her sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
c.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(5)  Credits; abandoned building permits. In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the county, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 8 (8.01—8.05), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-49. - Refunds. 
(a)  Eligibility for a refund. 
(1)  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or 
b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
(2)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(b)  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Troup County within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "notice of entitlement to development impact fee refund." no refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
(c)  Filing a request for a refund. All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
(d)  Payment of refunds. 
(1)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
(2)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(3)  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Troup County for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 9 (9.01—9.04), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-50. - Private contractual agreements. 
(a)  Private agreements; authorized. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the county and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
(1)  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  The amount of any credit or reimbursement granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
(b)  Private agreements; provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the county to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this article. 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this article, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(c)  Private agreements; procedure. 
(1)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 10 (10.01—10.03), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-51. - Periodic review and amendments. 
(a)  Article amendments. 
(1)  This article may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. 
(2)  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under subsection 43-45(a)(3)c. are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the board of commissioners when this article is subsequently amended. 
(b)  Capital improvements element periodic review. 
(1)  Update. At least once each year, the board of commissioners shall review and may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the regional development center for their review, in accordance with the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the board of community affairs of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the board of commissioners may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
b.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
c.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
d.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
(c)  Continuation of validity. Failure of the board of commissioners to undertake a periodic review of the capital improvements element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this article. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 11 (11.01—11.03), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-52. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Eligibility to file an appeal. Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the county or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
(b)  Appeals process. 
(1)  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter, the "appellant") must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or receipt of written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
(2)  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the appellant; 
b.  The location of the affected property; 
c.  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator (from which the appeal is taken); 
(3)  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
(4)  Appeals from the final decision of the administrator shall be made to the board of commissioners within 30 days of receipt by the appellant of the administrator's decision. Delivery by hand or certified mail to, or posting upon the property at, the address given by the appellant in the application for relief shall constitute "receipt by the appellant" under this provision. 
(5)  The board of commissioners shall thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days provided that at least two-weeks' written notice thereof can be given to the appellant. The board of commissioners shall decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing, but in no case more than 15 days following the hearing, unless the appellant agrees to an extension to a later date. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
(c)  Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
(1)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
(2)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be stopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 12 (12.01—12.03), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-53. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement authority. 
(1)  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
(2)  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop work order or citation for violations, as the administrator in his or her sole determination may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop work order or citation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. 
(3)  The administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals. If the provisions of this article have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(2)  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(3)  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(4)  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of the Troup County Code of Ordinances Section 1-19. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the board of commissioners shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article including, but not limited to, injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 13 (13.01, 13.02), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 43-54. - Repealer, severability, and effective date. 
(a)  Repeal of conflicting laws. Any and all ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Severability. If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this article is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the article as a whole or any other part hereof shall not be affected. 
(c)  Incorporation by reference of Georgia Law. It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the Development Impact Fee Article of Troup County, Georgia comply with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). To the extent that any provision of this article is inconsistent with the provisions of said chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this article is silent as to any provision of said [O.C.G.A.] ch. 36-71 that is otherwise made mandatory by said [O.C.G.A.] ch. 36-71, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the county. 
(d)  Effective date. This article shall take effect on July 1, 2010. 
( Ord. No. 2010-03 , § 14 (14.01—14.04), 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Attachment A 
Fee Schedule—Troup County, GA 
The attached fee schedule reflects the adoption of an impact fee schedule that is 26.4711 percent of the maximum allowable impact fee, as calculated in the July 16, 2009 Troup County Impact Fee Methodology Report. 
Troup County Impact Fee Schedule 

 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. 2010-03 , Att. A, 9-15-2009, eff. 7-1-2010) 
Chapter 46 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; solid waste disposal, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; mobile home [Manufactured home] parks, R-500, app. A, art. XIII; placement of mobile homes [manufactured homes] and travel trailers/recreational vehicles, app. A, art. XXV; mobile homes [manufactured homes], app. A, art. XXVI; subdivisions, app. C. 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits; display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Manfactured home park means a lot, or parcel of land, or place where two or more manufactured homes or house trailers are parked for residential or recreational purposes, or where space is set aside and offered for rent for manufactured homes. 
Manufactured home subdivision means a subdivision which permits a manufactured home on one or more lots. 
Manufactured housing means any prefabricated, precut or preassembled dwelling unit or any combination thereof which has a first floor area of 1,000 square feet or more and an overall width (shortest dimension) of 24 feet or more, provided that the unit will meet the requirements of the county building and other codes. Where the size and spacing of framing members on materials are in conflict with, or not covered by this article, they will be acceptable if the assembly meets the load requirements of this article with regard to roof, floor, wind loads, etc., provided that they conform to the requirements as set forth for tests under this article. Also foundations of a manufactured home shall meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
Owner means the owner under a fee simple title of record or a vendee under a contract of purchase agreement. 
(Code 1987, § 7-40) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 46-32. - Installation. 
(a)  Location of a manufactured home shall meet the requirements of the county zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations (appendix A and appendix C to this Code). 
(b)  Foundations for manufactured homes shall conform to the requirements of the county building code. 
(c)  All pertinent information concerning the size, year, make, serial number, and proposed location of each manufactured home shall submitted to the building official before such structure is placed on the lot or parcel of land. 
(d)  Manufactured homes shall be installed in manufactured home parks in accordance with the county zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
(e)  Manufactured home rentals and/or spaces. All manufactured homes being set up on individual lots other than in manufactured home parks must be in conformance with all requirements for setup in the county concerning manufactured homes. 
(Code 1987, § 7-48) 
Sec. 46-33. - Conflict of article regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this article imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or requires greater space than is imposed by other regulations or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Code 1987, § 7-49) 
Sec. 46-34. - Inspection; notice to electrical supplier. 
(a)  After the manufactured home is completely set up meeting all requirements of the county and completely ready for occupancy, the manufactured home is then ready for inspection. 
(b)  Upon passing the inspection, the power supplier will be notified that the manufactured home has been properly installed and is ready for the meter to be installed. 
(Code 1987, § 7-46) 
Sec. 46-35. - Connecting utilities. 
The power supplier in connecting to power poles servicing manufactured homes in the county, may connect to the electrical pole set beside the manufactured home, but shall not install the meter until approval of setup and electrical connection to the manufactured home is given by the county building inspection department that the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(Code 1987, § 7-47) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78. 
Secs. 46-36—46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 46-61. - Required; not in lieu of tax sticker; lapse. 
(a)  Any person desiring to place a manufactured home on a lot or parcel of land in the county shall first obtain a permit from the building official. 
(b)  The permit for placing the manufactured home is not intended to be used as, or to nullify the necessity of, an ad valorem tax sticker. 
(Code 1987, § 7-41) 
State Law reference— Manufactured home taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-445 et seq. 
Sec. 46-62. - Lapse. 
If, within 60 days after issuance of the manufactured home permit, the rules and regulations set forth in this article are not complied with or no activity has been started, the permit shall be deemed void. 
(Code 1987, § 7-42) 
Sec. 46-63. - Application. 
The owner shall obtain from the building official, complete in full, and submit a temporary manufactured home application. 
(Code 1987, § 7-43) 
Sec. 46-64. - Fees. 
Fees for the permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Code 1987, § 7-44) 
Sec. 46-65. - Issuance; display. 
(a)  After the temporary manufactured home permit application has been completed and all other related requirements have been met, a county permit will be issued. 
(b)  The permit shall be located on the electrical meter base so that a final approval sticker can be placed on the permit. 
(Code 1987, § 7-45) 
Chapter 50 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; utilities, ch. 78; home occupations, app. A, art. IV, § 8; general commercial district, C-100, app. A., art. XV; commercial, C-A, app. A, art. XVI; industrial district, I-100, app. A, art. XVII; neighborhood commercial district, C-200, app. A, art. XVIII. 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license generally; notice; hearing; refund. 
(a)  Any license under this chapter which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the county to any licensee may be suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners for due cause as defined in subsection (b) of this section and after a hearing held for the purpose of considering any such suspension or revocation. At least five days' prior written notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held shall be given to the holder of such license which is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  The term "due cause" for the suspension or revocation of any license shall include any of the following: 
(1)  A violation, in the course of operating the business for which a license has been granted under this chapter, of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the county now or hereafter existing. 
(2)  A violation, in the course of operating the business for which a license has been granted under this chapter, of any state or federal law or regulation, now or hereafter existing. 
(3)  A material misrepresentation, misstatement or omission of fact in connection with the applications for such license. 
(4)  The failure of the holder of any license to continue to meet or comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter for the issuance of such license. 
(5)  The operation of the business for which a license is issued in a loud, disorderly, obnoxious or other manner so as to constitute a public nuisance as may be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The board of commissioners is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued under this chapter for any emergency situation, civil disorder, or natural disaster; or in any situation that the board of commissioners deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the county; and such suspension to remain in force until the board of commissioners determines that the emergency or other need for such suspension is over. 
(d)  When a license is suspended or revoked, the county shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee to the holder of such suspended or revoked license. 
(Code 1987, § 10-51) 
Secs. 50-2—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 50-31. - Required for business dealings in the county. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the county, whether with a location in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an annual occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the building official or this officer's deputies or to any marshal of the county upon request. 
(Code 1987, § 10-1) 
Sec. 50-32. - Construction of term; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "county" is used in this article, such term shall be constructed to mean Troup County, Georgia. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds or should withhold FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues or should issue to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person means sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1987, § 10-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 50-33. - Levy; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location of office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the following criteria: The number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  The occupation tax schedule shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county business license department. 
(Code 1987, § 10-3) 
Sec. 50-34. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the businesses largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 10-4) 
Sec. 50-35. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the building official and that line of business being noted by the building official upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1987, § 10-5) 
Sec. 50-36. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 1987, § 10-6) 
Sec. 50-37. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18). 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 50-33(b). 
(2)  A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the business license department per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1987, § 10-7) 
Sec. 50-38. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1987, § 10-8) 
Sec. 50-39. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1987, § 10-9) 
Sec. 50-40. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 15 of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency as well as other penalties prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the county, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the building official. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1987, § 10-10) 
Sec. 50-41. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this resolution shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 100 percent of the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1987, § 10-11) 
Sec. 50-42. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1987, § 10-12) 
Sec. 50-43. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1987, § 10-13) 
Sec. 50-44. - Liability of officer and agents; resignation required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the business. Any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions, or occupations without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to the penalties provided. 
(Code 1987, § 10-14) 
Sec. 50-45. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided in this article before February 15 of each year, and on February 15 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-19 of this Code. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal provided; and may be collected by the remedies provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the building official, and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions, or occupations without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided. 
(Code 1987, § 10-15) 
Sec. 50-46. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1987, § 10-17) 
Sec. 50-47. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the such county, at the business license department, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before February 15 each year. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18) 
Sec. 50-48. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of county in the preceding year, the tax for the first year of operation shall be as follows: If the business commences before July 1, 100 percent of the tax calculated under this article shall be due. If the business commences July 1 or thereafter, 50 percent of the tax calculated under this article shall be due. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.1) 
Sec. 50-49. - More than one place of line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, such business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.2) 
Sec. 50-50. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the building official of the county, through his officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The building official shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the county, and upon demand of the building official, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in the county for examination by the building official at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty may be assessed pursuant to action being filed in the county magistrate court. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.3) 
Sec. 50-51. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon failure of any business to pay such occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 50-50, any business tax registration granted by the county under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the building official. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax by action filed in the county magistrate court. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.4) 
Sec. 50-52. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, or their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in such county after the registration for such business has been revoked, as stated in section 50-51, are hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and whoever fails to make such returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, and who refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who makes false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the county request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax by action filed in the county magistrate court. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.5) 
Sec. 50-53. - Amendment or repeal of article provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the commission to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.6) 
Sec. 50-54. - Application of article provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance or resolution heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior action have not been paid in full and shall have no effect whatsoever on regulatory fees such as those assessed on amusement devices or any permit fees such as those assessed on building permits. So much and such parts of such action heretofore and hereafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such actions, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such action, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.7) 
Sec. 50-55. - Article provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by board of commissioners. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the board of commissioners. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.8) 
Sec. 50-56. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The board of commissioners may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in the occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.9) 
Sec. 50-57. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions of article. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this section that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1987, § 10-18.10) 
Sec. 50-58. - Tax on hotel, motel and other accommodations. 
(a)  Tax imposed; exception. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq., an eight-percent tax is hereby imposed upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the county for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value, but such provisions shall not apply to charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms, or which are being used by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(b)  Returns. Those persons or legal entities which shall be responsible for paying the tax imposed in this section shall make quarterly returns showing the amount of taxes collected, the deductions for which they are allowed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52 and the net tax due. Such return shall include a check payable to the county for the net tax due. The return should be made on forms provided by the county business office by the dates specified on such forms. 
(c)  Expenditure of proceeds. The proceeds from this tax shall be expended pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq., which provides for the imposition of this tax. 
(Code 1987, § 10-20; Res. No. 2011-05 , 10-19-2010) 
Note— The eight-percent tax shall be effective and implemented on January 1, 2011. 
Secs. 50-59—50-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE BUSINESS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; general assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c). 

Sec. 50-91. - Gross premiums tax on insurance other than life insurance; levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied for each year, an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1987, § 10-30) 
Sec. 50-92. - Administration of article provisions. 
The clerk of the county is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the state insurance commissioner within ten days of enactment of the resolution from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1987, § 10-31) 
Secs. 50-93—50-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 50-121. - Levy of business license tax. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Code 1987, § 10-40) 
Sec. 50-122. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 1987, § 10-41) 
Sec. 50-123. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Code 1987, § 10-42) 
Sec. 50-124. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due not later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 50-123 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 10-43) 
Sec. 50-125. - Administration of article provisions. 
The clerk of the county is hereby directed to forward a copy of the resolution from which this article is derived to each depository financial institution in the county and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 10-44) 
Secs. 50-126—50-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT OR ITINERANT MERCHANT'S OR VENDOR'S LICENSE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate peddling and fix the cost of licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(9); Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 50-161. - Application to judge of probate court; imposition of fees; scope of license. 
Every peddler or itinerant trader, by sample or otherwise, shall apply for a license to the judge of the probate court, which license shall be granted to him on the terms the judge of the probate court may impose. The judge is authorized to impose such license fee as he may deem advisable, which fee shall be used for county purposes. The license shall extend only to the limits of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 10-50) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1. 
Secs. 50-162—5-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-02 , §§ 1—8, adopted Oct. 16, 2012, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. IV, §§ 50-181—50-188 was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 50-181. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: "dealer;" "energy;" "local sales and use tax;" and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
( Ord. No. 2013-02 , § 1, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 50-182. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
( Ord. No. 2013-02 , § 2, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 50-183. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Troup County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)  (1)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Troup County shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
( Ord. No. 2013-02 , § 3, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 50-184. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. §48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of Troup County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
( Ord. No. 2013-02 , § 4, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 50-185. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of Troup County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 50-188 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this article when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
( Ord. No. 2013-02 , § 5, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 50-186. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on January 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Troup County monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
( Ord. No. 2013-02 , § 6, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 50-187. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of Troup County at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one percent of such proceeds collected by Troup County shall be paid into the general fund of Troup County to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within 30 days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Troup County and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)  If two local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Troup County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Troup County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Troup County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of Troup County may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Troup County. 
( Ord. No. 2013-02 , § 7, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 50-188. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of Troup County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2013-02 , § 8, 10-16-2012) 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety, ch. 62; traffic, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

Sec. 54-1. - Use of tobacco products prohibited in certain areas of Callaway Stadium. 
(a)  The following areas of Callaway Stadium shall be and are hereby declared to be tobacco free areas, and the use of tobacco products in all forms shall be prohibited in the following areas inside Callaway Stadium: 
(1)  On the coaching and playing fields. 
(2)  Inside all dressing rooms, restrooms, concession stands, and press boxes. 
(3)  In all spectator seating areas, whether permanent or temporary. 
(b)  The county parks and recreation commission is authorized and directed to place appropriate signs at the entrance and inside Callaway Stadium designating the areas described in subsection (a) of this section to be nontobacco use areas. 
(c)  The county parks and recreation commission is further authorized and directed to have announcements made at the beginning of and at other appropriate times during all events conducted at Callaway Stadium informing the participants and spectators of the designation of the areas described in subsection (a) of this section as nontobacco use areas. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-2) 
Chapter 58 - PLANNING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 46; roads and streets, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. C; comprehensive plan, app. C, art. II, § C. 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
The board of commissioners hereby adopt the county comprehensive plan as the official plan for the county. 
(Code 1987, § 11.5-1) 
Chapter 62 - PUBLIC SAFETY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency services, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Fire department; E-911 center. 
The county currently operates a fire department and E-911 center for the safety of the public. The creation, funding and operation of these departments are expressly ratified and approved, and the departments shall continue in operation until further action of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 62-2. - Local emergency planning council. 
(a)  Establishment; member agencies. The board of commissioners hereby establishes the local emergency planning council of the county, which shall be composed of members of the following county agencies: 
(1)  The county emergency management agency. 
(2)  The county sheriff's department. 
(3)  The county emergency medical service. 
(4)  The county fire department. 
(5)  The county E 911. 
(6)  The county Red Cross. 
(7)  WGMC Hospital Administration. 
(8)  LaGrange Fire Department. 
(9)  Georgia State Patrol. 
(10)  Public Information Group (media). 
(b)  Groups solicited for additional participation. The county emergency management agency shall solicit additional participation for the local emergency planning council by inviting the following organizations, and other organizations, as needed, to also become members: 
(1)  County manager's office. 
(2)  County legal counsel. 
(3)  County chamber of commerce. 
(4)  LaGrange Downtown Development Authority. 
(5)  Industrial Park Safety Committee. 
(6)  County transportation committee. 
(7)  Airport authority (manager). 
(8)  West Point Police Department. 
(9)  West Point Fire Department. 
(10)  Hogansville Police Department. 
(11)  Public Information Group (media). 
(12)  The county zoning appeals/planning board. 
(13)  Technical experts. 
(14)  Ham Radio Communications Group. 
(15)  County health department. 
(16)  LaGrange Police/Fire Department. 
(17)  Coroner's office. 
(18)  City manager's office. 
(c)  Purpose. The council shall pursue the development of an awareness program involving industry, the community, local government and news media and evaluate available resources for preparing for and responding to potential incidents. These incidents may include, but not be limited to, hazardous materials spillage, terrroristic threats, severe weather damage and others identified by the emergency operational plan (EOP). 
(d)  Responsibility of county emergency management agency. The county emergency management agency shall be responsible as a coordinator/consultant to the local emergency planning council and shall furnish all administrative support attendant to council activities, including chairing of meetings. The agency shall also act as a liaison through District 4 All Hazards Committee, Georgia Emergency Management Agency and Georgia Homeland Security for the local emergency planning council. 
(Code 1987, § 2-5) 
Sec. 62-3. - Homeland security. 
That certain executive order promulgated by the governor on March 13, 2003, relating to homeland security is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein and shall be applicable within the county to the extent feasible. In order to give force and effect to homeland security operations within the county, the county marshal shall act as the director of homeland security for the county. 
Secs. 62-4—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 62-31. - Office created; recognition as law enforcement unit; powers. 
(a)  There is created the office of county marshal for the county. 
(b)  The county marshal's office shall do all things necessary in order to be recognized as a law enforcement unit of the state and certified within the standards of the POST Act, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 
(c)  The county marshal's office shall have the powers of arrest and the enforcement of all county ordinances and all laws of the state and all powers as outlined in O.C.G.A. § 36-8-5, and as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1987, § 2-58) 
Sec. 62-32. - Duties. 
The primary duties and responsibilities of the office of the county marshal shall be as follows: 
(1)  To service the county magistrate court and to enforce all ordinances enacted by the county board of commissioners; 
(2)  To issue warnings and citations for magistrate court appearance for the violation of county ordinances; 
(3)  To investigate and collect evidence of these ordinance violations; 
(4)  To respond to complaints of alleged ordinance violations; 
(5)  To appear and testify in court; 
(6)  To ensure proper collection of fines imposed by the courts; 
(7)  To perform any other such duties as may be assigned. 
(Code 1987, § 2-59) 
Sec. 62-33. - Requirements of office. 
The following are requirements of the county marshal's office: 
(1)  All marshals of the county marshal's office shall be POST certified or certified within a 12-month period. 
(2)  Experience may be required in the issuance of citations, warnings and court appearances. 
(3)  All marshals must be at least 19 years of age, have a high school diploma or G.E.D., and a valid state driver's license. 
(4)  All marshals must have a clean criminal history. 
(Code 1987, § 2-60) 
Sec. 62-34. - Jurisdiction. 
The office of county marshal shall be within the county boundaries. 
(Code 1987, § 2-61) 
Sec. 62-35. - Organization. 
There shall be a chief marshal who shall be the department head. The chief marshal shall be responsible for developing office policy and organization and for the appointment of deputy marshals pursuant to the county personnel policy as may be approved by the county board of commissioners through the regular budgetary procedures. 
(Code 1987, § 2-62) 
Secs. 62-36—62-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02 , §§ I—VII, adopted July 21, 2009, amended art. III, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 62-71—62-78, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1987, §§ 8-1—8-7, and Ord. No. 2006-02, adopted Sept. 6, 2005. 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

Sec. 62-71. - Definitions. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the Local Emergency Operations Plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services (public safety); medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; (nuclear power) plant protection; temporary restoration of public service utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. (Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. Ch. 3, Art. 1, § 38-3-3, as amended December 1992) 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the Governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
( Ord. No. 2010-02 , § I, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 62-72. - Local organization for emergency management. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is hereby established the county emergency management agency. The chairperson of the county commissioners, with the concurrence of officials of the cities within the county, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the county emergency management agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such governing body. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of county and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activities, etc.). 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
( Ord. No. 2010-02 , § II, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 62-73. - Troup County Emergency Management Agency. 
The Troup County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions, (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as set forth in the county emergency management agency operations plan, which is hereby adopted and shall be maintained on file with the county clerk. 
Heads of county departments listed in the county emergency management agency operations plan are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
( Ord. No. 2010-02 , § III, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 62-74. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairperson of the county commissioners separately, or jointly with the mayors of LaGrange, Hogansville and West Point, or in their absence their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units (O.C.G.A. Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 38-3-27). 
( Ord. No. 2010-02 , § IV, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 62-75. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith (O.C.G.A. Ch. 3, Art. 2, § 38-3-35). 
( Ord. No. 2010-02 , § V, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 62-76. - Liberality of construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
( Ord. No. 2010-02 , § VI, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 62-77. - National incident management system. 
Troup County, Georgia, hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents. 
( Ord. No. 2010-02 , § VII, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 62-78. - Waiver of formalities. 
(a)  Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(1)  Meetings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the affairs and business of Troup County may, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54, be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of Troup County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of Troup County, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Troup County. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(2)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county board of commissioners may, in compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 36-91-22(e) and 32-4-63(6), contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical, and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(3)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Troup County, or any portion thereof, where: 
a.  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
b.  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
c.  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(4)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(5)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners may issue temporary permits for mobile homes, trailers, recreational vehicles or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Troup County Health Department and the Troup County Building Inspection, Zoning and Planning Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the board of commissioners, the permit may be extended for a period of an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
(2)  State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(3)  Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations of a particular zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 2010-08 , 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-79. - Curfews. 
(a)  Institution of curfew. 
(1)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster in the county or directly impacting the county, the board of commissioners may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Troup County. 
(2)  All unincorporated areas of the county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(3)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect and may include any other information, conditions or terms deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall have an ongoing duty and responsibility to continually assess the necessity of the imposed curfew, and shall ensure that the curfew is lifted or narrowed in scope at the earliest practicable opportunity. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Curfew. A curfew is a regulation requiring the withdrawal of all persons, except exempt individuals, from appearing in prohibited public areas during specified hours. 
(2)  Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, exempt individuals include those individuals engaged in the provision of or receipt of designated, essential services, such as fire protection, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the board of commissioners, also exempt other individuals including regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, and building contractors (properly registered according to section 62-81 and performing activities pursuant to that section). 
(3)  State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(c)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public (including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places) under the following two conditions: 
(1)  In the territory subject to the curfew; and 
(2)  During the stated hours of the curfew. 
(d)  Public information. County staff shall make reasonable efforts to inform the public of the details and terms of any curfew instituted under this section. Such efforts shall include utilization of the county website, if available, and posting information at county facilities. Such efforts may include signage, door-to-door personal advisement, and use of public announcement systems. 
(e)  Penalties. Any individual violating this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
( Ord. No. 2010-08 , 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-80. - Building contractor registration. 
(a)  Building contractor registration required. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster, no building contractor shall engage in doing business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Troup County without having first registered the name of the business with the Troup County Building, Inspection, Zoning and Planning Department and having paid fees as provided by this section. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Building contractor. As used in this section, the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
(2)  Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this section if: 
a.  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that, in the unincorporated areas of the county, engages in activities expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
b.  He performs, in the unincorporated areas of the county, activities expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto, regardless of the location of the principal office of the building contractor. 
(3)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(4)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the affected area(s), but shall not exceed three months after the emergency or disaster declaration has been terminated by the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, or by the governor unless extended by official action of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Registration; certification. All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of Troup County during an emergency or disaster declared by the governor or by the board of commissioners or any subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the Troup County Building Inspection, Zoning and Planning Department or such other person designated by the board of commissioners at the county administration building or such other place or places designated by the board of commissioners. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(d)  Registration fees. Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this section at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. Registration fees shall be waived for those contractors already registered within Troup County before the state of emergency. 
(e)  Penalties. Any building contractor required by this section to pay a registration fee who is found to be doing business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this section. Violation of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Transferability. Each certification issued under this section is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable, and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(g)  Display of registration certification. Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or in the vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(h)  Revocation; suspension. Each certification granted under this section is a mere permit to do business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The board of commissioners hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this section or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
( Ord. No. 2010-08 , 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-81. - Overcharging. 
(a)  Overcharging prohibited. In order to preserve, protect, and sustain the life, health, welfare, and safety of persons and their property during emergency or disaster situations and subsequent recovery periods, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency, or upon the determination by the county board of commissioners of the existence of an emergency or disaster, or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Troup County to overcharge for housing or for any of the following goods, materials, or services sold within the unincorporated areas of the county; food and nonalcoholic beverage items; nonprescription and prescription drugs; personal and residential hygiene items including, but not limited to, soap, toothpaste, toothbrushes, shampoo, dish soap, laundry detergent, and deodorant; first aid items including, but not limited to, bandages and disinfectants; clothing; corrective eye-ware; hearing aids; necessary items for disabled persons; office supplies; tools and building materials; gasoline; building construction, renovation and repair services; automobile repair services; engineering services; accounting services; legal services; and medical services. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Overcharging. To overcharge is to demand prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which prices are substantially in excess of customary prices, or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. A rebuttable presumption of overcharging shall occur in the event that the price at which goods, materials, services, or housing is offered during a state of emergency or disaster increases by more than 50 percent over the price at which such goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster. Overcharging shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor resulting from the emergency or disaster. 
(2)  State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(3)  Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the emergency or disaster area(s), but shall not exceed six months after the emergency or disaster declaration has been terminated by the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, or by the governor unless extended by official action of the Board of Commissioners of Troup County. 
(c)  Penalties. Violation of the provisions of this section upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2010-08 , 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-82. - Emergency interim successors to the board of commissioners. 
(a)  In the event that a quorum of the Board of Commissioners of Troup County becomes impossible to assemble due to injury or death of board members during an emergency or disaster, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50(f) there are hereby appointed the following emergency interim successors in descending order of succession: 
(1)  County commission chairman; 
(2)  County manager; 
(3)  Sheriff; 
(4)  Fire chief; and 
(5)  County engineer. 
(b)  This section shall be construed and implemented in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50, and any emergency interim successor designated by this section shall possess all authority provided for therein. 
( Ord. No. 2010-08 , 2-2-2010) 
Chapter 66 - ROADS, STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section I of Ord. No. 2010-05 , adopted Dec. 1, 2009, changed the title of Ch. 66 from "Roads and streets" to "Roads, streets and other public places." 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-14(6); any resolution or ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-14(9); any resolution or ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county saved from repeal, § 1-14(15); public drinking or consumption of alcohol, § 6-3; buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; cemeteries, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; traffic, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; airport zoning, app. B; subdivisions, app. C. 
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Official county roads and streets; maintenance. 
(a)  Only those roads and streets shown on the list and map accompanying the ordinance from which this section is derived, by number, shall be maintained by the county. Such list and map, when signed and attested, shall be incorporated and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(b)  The list and map shall be amended automatically upon the recording of any plat which has met the requirements of the county subdivision regulations and has been approved and accepted by the board of commissioners at a regular or special called meeting. 
(c)  The list and map may be amended by the board of commissioners accepting a deed for a street or road which has met the requirements of the county road regulations. No deed dedicating real estate to the county for public use shall be deemed to have been accepted unless and until such dedication is approved and such deed is accepted by the board of commissioners, and such acceptance is noted on the official minutes of the board of commissioners. Additions or deletions to this list, due to errors of inventory of roads, must be approved by the board only during a regular or special meeting of the board. 
(d)  Any recordation in the Records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia or other action made in the attempt to bypass the requirements of road acceptance set forth in this section, or to assist others in an attempt to bypass the requirements of this section, is prohibited. 
(e)  Any individual violating this ordinance, or knowingly assisting an individual in the violation of this ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Code 1987, § 12-1; Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 7-1-2008) 
Secs. 66-2—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRAINAGE 

Sec. 66-31. - Driveway permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to install a driveway or driveway culvert pipe in the right-of-way of a county road without having secured a permit from the board of commissioners or its authorized agent. 
(b)  Application. Prior to the installation of a driveway or driveway culvert pipe, a permit shall be secured from the board of commissioners or designee, the application for which shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Property owners and/or contractor; 
(2)  Mailing address; 
(3)  Description of the property: 
a.  A legal description or plat; 
b.  The location, road, subdivision, etc.; 
c.  The acreage; 
d.  Existing driveways. 
(4)  The size and location of culvert pipe and a description of the work to be completed. The property owner shall also clearly identify the proposed location of culvert pipe by stakes at the property line. 
(5)  The signature of applicant or authorized agent. 
(c)  Fee. A permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the building and zoning department shall be assessed for every driveway installed by the property owner across the county right-of-way. 
(Code 1987, §§ 12-20—12-21.5) 
Sec. 66-32. - Public right-of-way nuisance. 
(a)  No contractor/homebuilder shall allow dirt, mud or other debris resulting from contractor/homebuilder construction operations to accumulate upon the right-of-way of any public road to such an extent that it becomes a nuisance or a hazard to persons traveling upon such roads, or that it creates an unsightly condition upon the public right-of-way. 
(b)  No contractor/homebuilder shall allow dirt, mud or other debris resulting from construction operations to accumulate in ditches and drainage areas on public right-of-way to such an extent that the usual flow of water or runoff is stopped, disturbed, changed or interrupted. 
(c)  No contractor/homebuilder shall create any other type of public nuisance on rights-of-way within the unincorporated county. 
(d)  No contractor/homebuilder or person shall park or leave unattended a truck or other motor vehicle or trailer upon the right-of-way of any county road. 
(e)  No contractor/homebuilder shall commence construction without first installing and maintaining soil erosion and sedimentation controls sufficient to prevent dirt, mud and other debris from accumulating in the county drainage ditches and on the county roads. 
(f)  The contractor/homebuilder shall give notification upon completion of construction to the county engineering department within 72 hours. 
(g)  Upon site inspection by the county engineering department and the determination that the road and access site are in a proper state of repair from construction operations, the superintendent shall provide a written notice of release of liability to the contractor/homebuilder within ten days of notification from the contractor/ homebuilder. Should such notice of the release of liability not be made on a timely basis, contractor/homebuilder shall not be held responsible or liable under this section. 
(h)  If it is determined by the county engineer during or at the conclusion of operations that the county road and access site are not in a proper state of repair, the contractor/homebuilder shall have ten days to correct the site, at contractor/homebuilder expense or to appeal the decision to the county board of commissioners. 
(i)  Upon receipt of a written appeal, the board of commissioners, shall have no more than 30 days from the receipt of the letter of appeal in which to reach a decision. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(j)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this section for repair will give the county the right to make the repairs and charge the expense therefor to the contractor/homebuilder. 
(Code 1987, § 12-21.6) 
Sec. 66-33. - Driveway and culvert pipe specifications. 
Driveways and culvert pipes shall be installed to the latest county specifications which may be obtained from the office of the building and zoning department. 
(Code 1987, § 12-22) 
Sec. 66-34. - Culvert pipe material and size. 
(a)  Material and size of culvert pipe shall be approved by the county road superintendent or engineer prior to construction. A 12-inch culvert pipe shall be the minimum; however, where drainage and grade conditions warrant, the road superintendent or engineer shall require a larger size. 
(b)  Culvert pipe for agricultural and residential purposes shall not be less than 20 feet in length, nor more than 30 feet in length. For commercial and industrial uses culvert pipe shall not exceed 40 feet in length. 
(c)  Culvert pipe ends shall be riprapped when required by the county road superintendent or engineer. 
(Code 1987, § 12-23) 
Sec. 66-35. - Location of culvert pipes. 
(a)  The end of a culvert pipe shall not be less than five feet from the side property line extended. 
(b)  The distance between culvert pipes shall not be less than 20 feet. 
(c)  The total length of all culvert pipes shall not exceed 20 percent of the lot frontage in residential districts and 40 percent in industrial districts and commercial districts. If lot frontage is less than 100 feet, the property owner shall be entitled to one 20-foot driveway culvert pipe. 
(Code 1987, § 12-24) 
Sec. 66-36. - Temporary driveways. 
Temporary driveways for logging, clearing and construction shall have a culvert pipe unless otherwise authorized by the road superintendent or engineer. Temporary driveways and pipe shall be removed and drainage ditch restored to original condition at the completion of the project. Any damage occurring to the road and drainage ditch shall be corrected at the property owner's expense. 
(Code 1987, § 12-25) 
Sec. 66-37. - Obstruction of drainage. 
No debris, trash, dirt, or other obstruction shall be placed in a road drainage ditch or drainage easement. 
(Code 1987, § 12-26) 
Sec. 66-38. - Unlawful use of right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful to utilize the right-of-way of a county road for storage, logging, loading and unloading, construction or landscaping without the express permission of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 12-27) 
Sec. 66-39. - Variance. 
Where, due to unusual conditions, the board of commissioners finds that strict compliance with the regulations of this article may result in excessive hardship or practical difficulties, certain variances may be authorized by it, provided that substantial justice is done, the public interest secured, and the variance will not nullify the intent or purpose of this article. 
(Code 1987, § 12-28) 
Sec. 66-40. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person installing a driveway or driveway culvert pipe without having secured a permit or obstructing a drainage easement shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-19 of this Code. Each day of violation may be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person or contractor installing a driveway or driveway culvert which does not meet county specifications shall immediately remove the same upon notification by the county. If the person refuses or fails to remove such driveway and driveway culvert, the county road superintendent or engineer shall remove the same, and a lien will be filed against the property owner for cost of equipment and labor. 
(Code 1987, § 12-29) 
Sec. 66-41. - More stringent requirements apply. 
The regulations of this article are not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. Where the regulations of this article impose a greater restriction upon the use of property or require greater space than is imposed by other regulations, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this article shall govern; however, the regulations of this article are not intended in any way to supersede the requirements of the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1987, § 12-30) 
Secs. 66-42—66-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY FACILITY ENCROACHMENTS AND ROAD CROSSINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78. 

Sec. 66-71. - Permit. 
(a)  Required; strict construction, work limited; no fee. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any utility facility encroachment in, or any crossing of, a public road maintained by the county outside of the corporate limits of any municipality in the county, without a permit therefor from the board of commissioners. 
(2)  The permit is to be strictly construed, and no work other than that specifically described therein is authorized. 
(3)  The board of commissioners make no charge for permits for right-of-way encroachments. 
(b)  Definition of qualified applicant. Applications for permits under the rules of this article will be accepted only from a political entity, an individual, partnership or corporation, or other body recognized by law as owning all or the major interest in the property abutting the road right-of-way, or the proposed facility, which will be principally affected by the performance of the work covered by the permit or by the lessee of property of business. Such qualified persons will be referred to in this article as the "applicant." 
(c)  Information on application; filing. 
(1)  Applications for permits shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and a mailing address of the owner or lessee; 
b.  A description of the type of work intended and submission of a plan with three copies. The plan should show the centerline and the right-of-way, indicating width, and also the width of pavement, the location of existing driveways and drainage structures, elevation and/or sections when necessary. It should also show the boundaries of the contemplated work. When the grading is proposed, the drainage plan shall be shown. 
c.  Give the county, state route number, and distance from geographical point such as intersecting highways, municipal corporate limits, or county highways. 
(2)  The application will be filed with the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Scope; effect; transfer; damage liability. The provisions of any permit granted under the rules and regulations of this article shall be construed as regulatory and not as contractual. No interest or right of an applicant shall be transferred to another except by written consent of the board of commissioners. No inherent or retained right or privilege belonging to any abutting property owner is affected, interfered with or abridged through or because of this article or any permit issued under this article, nor is the county responsible for any damage claim which may arise as between the applicant and any property owner concerning such right-of-way or its occupancy or use. The decision of the chairman of the board of commissioners (or the chairman's designated agent) shall be final and conclusive with respect to any of the conditions, terms, stipulations and provisions of the permit. This shall not foreclose the applicant's right of appeal to the Superior Court of Troup County. 
(e)  Revocation. Any permit granted by the board of commissioners shall be revocable at the pleasure of the board. If any facilities after construction become dangerous, unsafe or a nuisance to the traveling public using the highways, or if such facilities should create any unreasonable interference with the proper use of the highways by the traveling public, or in case it becomes necessary to use all of the right-of-way to widen the existing roadway or to construct service roads or to make any other revisions in location, alignment or grade of the roadway, making the approved entrance plan impractical, hazardous, or otherwise objectionable, the permit for the same may be revoked. However, in that event, there shall be given ten days' written notice prior to such revocation. 
(Code 1987, §§ 12-50—12-54) 
Sec. 66-72. - Allocation of costs. 
(a)  The entire cost of installing, maintaining, repairing, operating, or using the pole line, buried cable, pipeline, or miscellaneous facility; performing miscellaneous operations and any other expense whatsoever incidental to the facilities or operations authorized by the permit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)  The applicant shall, in addition to compliance with subsection (a) of this section, reimburse the county for any reasonable and necessary expense that it may incur in connection with the facilities or operations authorized by the permit. The reimbursement to the county shall be made by the applicant within 30 days after receiving a statement from the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The applicant upon notification in writing by the chairman of the board of commissioners, shall pay a reasonable market price for any materials removed from the right-of-way or destroyed as a result of operations authorized by the permit. 
(Code 1987, § 12-55) 
Sec. 66-73. - Installation to comply with rules. 
The utility covered hereby shall be installed in accordance with the plan and subject to the printed rules and regulations for the control and protection of county-maintained roads and rights-of-way on file in the office of the board of commissioners, which rules and regulations are made a part of this article by reference thereto, and particularly to the applicable provisions of such rules and regulations shown on the permit and any special requirements set forth in this article. The applicant agrees to comply with and be bound by such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1987, § 12-56) 
Sec. 66-74. - Protection of public from injury, and highway from damage. 
(a)  The applicant shall employee all methods in performing the operations authorized by the permit which the chairman of the board of commissioners or designated agent may require in order to properly protect the public from injury and the highway from damage. 
(b)  During the initial installation or construction of the facilities authorized by the permit, or during any future repair, removal or relocation thereof, or during any miscellaneous operations, the applicant shall at all times maintain such flagmen, signs, lights, flares, barricades, and other safety devices as the chairman may reasonably deem necessary to properly protect traffic upon the highway, and to warn and safeguard the public against injury or damage. The applicant shall maintain a watchman, as required, to maintain such signs, flares, barricades and other safety devices during nonwork hours, and shall upon request furnish the county road superintendent the telephone number and/or address of such watchman. 
(c)  The applicant shall so conduct the operations that there will be a minimum of interference with or interruption of traffic upon and along the highway. Except in emergencies there shall be no interference with or interruption of traffic upon and along the road or highway until a plan for the satisfactory handling of traffic has been worked out and approved by the chairman of the board of commissioners or the county road superintendent as soon as practicable. 
(d)  All roads should be bored where feasibly possible (dry bore). 
(e)  Any supervision or control exercised by the county road superintendent shall in no way relieve the applicant of any duty or responsibility to the general public, nor shall such supervision or control relieve the applicant from any liability for loss, damage or injury to persons or property. 
(Code 1987, § 12-57) 
Sec. 66-75. - Regrassing; restoration of surface. 
(a)  Any area where grass is destroyed shall be regrassed. 
(b)  All applicants shall comply with county specifications for restoration of the surface. All cuts across or into county paved roads shall be: 
(1)  Tamped by pneumatic tamp. 
(2)  Filled with concrete as required. 
(3)  Finished with asphalt as required. 
(c)  Final inspection and approval shall be by either the county manager or the county road superintendent. 
(Code 1987, § 12-58) 
Secs. 66-76—66-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TIMBER HARVESTING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-14, § I, adopted March 20, 2018, repealed art. IV in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 66-111—66-114 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2003-02, §§ I—IV, adopted Nov. 19, 2002; and Ord. No. 2007-10, § I, adopted Feb. 20, 2007. 

Sec. 66-111. - Purpose and intent. 
This article is intended to require notice of timber harvesting operations within the unincorporated areas of Troup County pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24, and, in accordance with Title 32 of the Official Code of Georgia, provide regulations further governing use of public roads by persons engaged in said timber harvesting operations in order to assure the public safety and to protect the county roadways and environments. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14 , § I, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 66-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County engineer means the individual appointed Troup County Engineer by the Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
County road means any county owned or maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. For the purposes of this article, the term "county road" includes all area within the county road right-of-way, including but not limited to, the travel surface, the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain, back slope, and any facility or appurtenance. 
County road system means for the purpose of this article those official county roads identified and shown on the official Troup County list and map of roads and streets. 
Harvesting means for the purpose of this article the cutting of standing timber for the purpose of removal and transportation. 
Harvesting operations means the harvesting of any standing timber in any unincorporated areas of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside the State of Georgia. 
Notice means the notice required to be given by the timber harvester as provided herein. 
Obstruct means for the purposes of this article, without limitation, the causing of any buildup of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals, or other materials by continued ingress or egress of vehicles or of any natural waters dammed or redirected by diversion to an extent which presents a hazard to the traveling public. 
Road department means the Troup County Road Department. 
Surety bond means a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in the State of Georgia, protecting the county against any damage cause by such person or firm in an amount specified by the governing authority of Troup County not exceeding $5,000.00 or, at the option of the timber harvester, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of $5,000.00 in lieu of such bond. Any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be in form prescribed by or acceptable to the county engineer and shall be for the calendar year in which delivered. 
Timber means softwood or hardwood trees harvested for commercial purposes. 
Timber harvester means any individual, person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or private organization of any character, and the officers, agents and/or employees of any of the same, carrying out harvesting operations as defined in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14 , § I, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 66-113. - Notice. 
Written notice shall be required of any timber harvester harvesting timber in the unincorporated areas of the county for each separate tract to be harvested. Said written notice shall be: 
(1)  Delivered to the Troup County Board of Assessors, which shall forward a copy to the road department, prior to entering onto the subject tract, if possible, but in no event later than 24 hours after entering onto said tract; and 
(2)  In such form and containing all information as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24(b)(1). Notice shall be effective only as to the tract described therein upon receipt by the Troup County Board of Assessors (as confirmed by written acknowledgment from the same to the timber harvester) and compliance with all other applicable requirements of this article. Such notice may be given in person, by transmission of an electronic record via tele facsimile, e-mail, or such other means as approved by the governing authority of the county, or by mail. 
Prior to and at all times during any timber harvesting operations subject to this article, the timber harvester shall additionally ensure that the requisite notice is continuously posted and displayed in good condition and in a conspicuous location on each tract of land identified in said notice. For purposes of this section, the notice shall be deemed posted in a "conspicuous location" if clearly visible and located in the immediate vicinity where the entrance road or trail providing vehicular access to the subject tract meets the nearest public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14 , § I, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 66-114. - Surety bond. 
(a)  All timber harvesters subject to the notice requirement set forth in this article shall, prior to harvesting any timber in the unincorporated areas of the county, be required to deliver a valid surety bond in the amount of $5,000.00, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the county against any damage caused by such timber harvester to the chief appraiser of the county board of tax assessors. In lieu of providing a surety bond, a timber harvester may provide a valid irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $5,000.00 issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, protecting the county against any damage caused by such timber harvester. The surety bond/letter of credit shall be delivered to the road department and the required notice shall not be or remain effective for harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered the surety bond/letter of credit to the road department. 
(b)  The amount of the bond/letter of credit shall not exceed $5,000.00. The bond shall indemnify the county against any and all damage caused, as a result of the timber harvesting and related activities, to any county roads, rights-of-way, points of egress or other public property. The surety bond shall also indemnify the county for any costs incurred in the cleanup of waste or debris left on public property as a result of the timber harvesting. 
(c)  Upon completion of any necessary repairs to public property and removal of all waste and debris, the county will release the timber harvester from the surety bond/letter of credit. 
(d)  In no event shall the delivery of a surety bond/letter of credit limit the liability of any person engaged in timber harvesting and related activities for damages to public property or rights-of-way or for other personal injury or property damage. 
(e)  No more than one surety bond shall be required at any one time from a timber harvester hereunder regardless of the number of tracts harvested in the unincorporated areas of the county so long as said surety bond remains in effect; provided that a valid replacement surety bond must be obtained and delivered to the road department no later than the close of business on the fifth day following the day that the county files a claim to recover damages against the then-existing surety bond. Upon filing such claim, the road department or other designee of the county shall immediately provide notice thereof, including the date such claim was filed, to the person causing the damage. Such notice may be given by person, by transmission of an electronic record via tele facsimile, or by e-mail. For purposes of the section, any such surety bond shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14 , § I, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 66-115. - Requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any timber harvester subject to this article to obstruct, encroach upon, or injure materially any part of any county road. 
(b)  Any timber harvester who unlawfully obstructs, encroaches upon, or injures any part of any county road shall be responsible for reimbursing the county for the costs of removal of said obstructions or encroachments and the costs of repairs to the county road incurred by the county, including any costs associated with traffic management; provided, however, that such costs shall be limited to those costs which are directly incurred from such damages. Costs incurred for traffic management may include, but are not limited to, costs incurred for flagging, signing, or provision of detours, provided that these activities are directly caused by the obstruction, encroachment, or injury to the county road system. 
(c)  The county shall periodically make an inspection of county roads and shall notify each timber harvester then conducting harvesting operations of all actions reasonably necessary to maintain and ensure the return of the condition of the county roads to a state equal to that existing immediately prior to the instituting of harvesting operations. Upon notice from the road department work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the timber harvester and the owner of the subject property and shall state the conditions under which work may resume. When an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required. If the timber harvester does not complete such repairs as are reasonably periodically necessary within five days of notice, the county may, at its sole option, complete the repairs and charge the costs of the same (including any costs associated with traffic management which are directly incurred from the obstruction, encroachment upon or injury to any county road caused by the harvesting operations) to the timber harvester and against the posted bond or irrevocable letter of credit. The timber harvester shall remain liable for any additional maintenance cost, traffic management cost, and the cost of returning the county roads to their prior condition upon the completion of harvesting operations. 
(d)  No timber harvester shall commence timber harvesting operations until he has first posted or caused to be posted along the county road onto which the timber operator will enter from his timber harvesting operations at least the following signs: one sign in each direction located 500 feet from the entrance which states "slow trucks entering highway;" one sign in each direction located 1,000 feet from the entrance stating "warning: logging operation ahead." Each such sign shall be 36 inches by 36 inches, orange in color and posted at least three feet from the road surface of said county road. 
(e)  No timber harvester shall park or leave unattended a truck or other motor vehicle or trailer upon a county road. 
(f)  All harvesting operations shall be conducted on the tract identified in the notice and off public roads and rights-of-way. Logging and skidding of logs on public roads and rights-of-way are strictly prohibited. 
(g)  Ditches constituting a part of the public drainage system or otherwise benefitting a public right-of-way shall be kept clear of all debris and residue at all times to permit proper drainage. 
(h)  Prior to commencing any timber harvesting operations, the road department shall inspect the point of access to the public road from the tract described in the notice in order to determine its suitability. If graveling or a culvert is required at the point of access, it shall be promptly installed by the timber harvester as directed and to the design specifications required by the road department. The county engineer may also impose such other design specifications and requirements as in his/her sole discretion are necessary to protect and to provide for the safe and efficient use of the county road system. The point of access shall be maintained by the timber harvester so long as timber harvesting operations are ongoing. 
(i)  The timber harvester shall give written notification to the road department within 24 hours following completion of the timber harvesting operations. The road department shall inspect all affected public property and public rights-of-way to assure that the same has not been damaged or has been restored to its original condition, including any shaping of ditches, grading or seeding as required. The timber harvester shall be notified in writing of any deficiencies and given 15 business days to correct said deficiencies. If not accomplished during that period, the road department (or its designee) shall be authorized to complete the work at the cost of the timber harvester. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14 , § I, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 66-116. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor prosecutable in the Magistrate Court of Troup County and punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and imprisonment in the county jail for a period of no longer than 12 months. The court may, in addition to any other sentence authorized by law, order a person convicted of violating this article to make such restitution for the offense. 
(b)  The county code enforcement officer(s) shall be authorized to issue citations in order to initiate such prosecution. 
(c)  The imposition of any fine or other sentence pursuant to this section shall in no way limit the liability of any person for damage done to public property or public rights-of-way, and all means permitted by law or in equity, to include, without limitation the filing of a suit for damages, or the seeking of injunctive relief to stop any such damage. 
(d)  The payment of any fine imposed does not relieve the offending person or firm from the obligation to pay for all costs incurred by the county as provided in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-14 , § I, 3-20-2018) 
Secs. 66-117—66-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COUNTY ROADS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-01 , § I(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 4, 2014, repealed former art. V in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 66-151—66-154 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1987 Code, §§ 12-86—12-89. 

Sec. 66-151. - Definitions. 
The general definitions set forth in section 1-4 of this Code shall apply, except the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County rights-of-way means the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain, back slope, facility or any appurtenance of any county road. 
County road means any county-owned or county-maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. 
Motorized vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on or off road, and that derives power from any source other than muscle or wind, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Non-truck route means all county roads other than truck routes and restricted roads as defined by this section. 
Restricted road means: 
Fling Road; 
Old West Point Road; 
North Butts Mill Road. 
Through truck means a truck traveling through the county that is not making a stop or delivery within the county. 
Truck means a vehicle that is designed or operated for the transportation of property, including raw materials, that meets one or more of the following criteria: has more than six wheels; exceeds 36,000 pounds in gross vehicle weight; or has an overall length of more than 30 feet. A vehicle designed and used solely to carry passengers is not a "truck" under this definition. 
Truck route means state highways, federal highways, the Dwight D. Eisenhower System of Interstate and Defense Highways and the following county streets/roads: 
Pegasus Parkway; 
Davis Road; 
Waugh Road; 
Ann Bailey Road; 
Orchard Hill Road; 
Lukken Industrial Drive; 
Upper Big Springs Road (from SR14 Spur to I-185). 
( Ord. No. 2015-01 , § I(Exh. A), 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 66-152. - Truck traffic. 
(a)  Truck routes mandatory. All through trucks are required to travel upon truck routes. All other trucks are required to travel upon truck routes, except in any of the following limited circumstances: 
(1)  Local pickups and deliveries. If the terminal, parking lot, repair garage, headquarters, or place of pickup or delivery of the truck is not on a truck route, then the vehicle may travel on non-truck routes only by the shortest (least mileage), most direct route between such places and the nearest truck route. The shortest route between such places and the nearest truck route may be specifically designated by the county to prevent truck traffic on county roads that are deemed inadequate for such travel. Trucks shall not use any restricted roads, unless the origination or destination of the truck is on a restricted road, in which case, the truck shall travel by the shortest, most direct route between the nearest truck route, then the nearest non-truck route to or from the origination/destination. 
(2)  Agricultural products and equipment. Trucks hauling farm animals, farm materials, farm equipment, farm machinery, farm supplies, or farm products to or from a location in the county shall not be required to use a truck route, but shall be required to use a non-truck route, unless the origination or destination of the truck is on a restricted road, in which case, the truck shall travel by the shortest, most direct route between the nearest truck route or non-truck route to or from the origination/destination. Delivery slips, bills of lading, invoices, receipts, or other documentation may be presented by truck drivers as evidence that certain materials, equipment, machinery or supplies that are not used exclusively for farm or agricultural purposes are in fact for farm or agricultural purposes. 
(3)  Forest products. Upon providing the notice and posting the bond required by sections 66-112 and 66-113, a truck hauling forest products to or from a location within the county shall not be required to use a truck route, but shall be required to use a non-truck route, unless the origination or destination of the truck is on a restricted road, in which case, the truck shall travel by the shortest, most direct route between the nearest truck route or non-truck route to or from the origination/destination. 
(b)  Interstate pickups and deliveries. All trucks picking up or delivering a majority of their load within one mile of an interchange with Interstate 85 or 185 shall use said interstate instead of county roads, except for those trucks listed above in subsections (a)(2) and (3). 
(c)  Proof of destination. Drivers of trucks shall be prepared to show law enforcement officers the log book, weight slips, delivery slips, bills of lading, and other written evidence of destination and point of origin to justify any presence of the truck on a county road other than a truck route. 
(d)  Bridges. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, no truck or vehicle of any kind shall be operated over a county bridge with a posted limit less than the total gross weight of the truck or vehicle and its load. 
(e)  Temporary closures. If any designated route, or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, trucks shall use such other temporary route as may be designated by the county. 
(f)  Emergency closures. When the county engineer or his or her designated agent determines that an emergency situation has arisen wherein trucks are damaging or destroying streets or avenues which are not designed or constructed to withstand heavy truck traffic, the county engineer is authorized to prohibit truck traffic to alleviate the situation. Such prohibition shall be defined and official signs erected designating the maximum gross weight of vehicles to include load thereon and/or maximum length. Within 30 days after taking such action, the county engineer shall report the same to the board of commissioners for confirmation by Code amendment and/or resolution. 
(g)  [Rain or inclement weather.] Delivery or transport vehicles shall not proceed over any unpaved county road or unpaved portion of a county road during periods of rain or inclement weather when clearly said travel causes excessive damage and maintenance to the road system such that road conditions for the passage of smaller and lighter passenger vehicles has been substantially hampered. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Violation of any part of this section shall be punishable by a fine up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment of up to 60 days. Violation of subsection (a) shall subject the violating operator of a truck or restricted motor vehicle, to the following minimum penalties: 
(1)  First offense: $150.00; 
(2)  Second offense within 24 months: $500.00; 
(3)  Third offense within 24 months: $1,000.00; 
(4)  Additional offenses within 24 months: $1,000.00 and up to 60 days in jail. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01 , § I(Exh. A), 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 66-153. - Maximum weights and dimensions. 
(a)  Gross weight. No vehicle with a total gross weight in excess of 80,000 pounds shall be operated on any street or road maintained by the county. The county may lower the gross vehicle weight of trucks on non-truck routes and restricted roads unless such vehicles are exempted by O.C.G.A § 32-6-26. 
(b)  Weight per wheel/axle. No wheel on any vehicle operated on any street or road maintained by the county equipped with low pressure pneumatic tires shall carry a load which exceeds 10,000 pounds or any axle load which exceeds 20,000 pounds. An axle load shall be defined as the total load on all wheels the centers of which may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart. If the driver of any vehicle can comply with the requirements of this section by shifting or equalizing the load on all wheels or axles and does so when requested by the proper authority, said driver shall not be found in violation of this section. 
(c)  State permit. All motor vehicles in excess of weight limitation as prescribed by the state department of transportation, which apply to state routes, are prohibited from using any street in the county except when applicable state department of transportation permits have been secured by vehicles which are in excess of the provisions contained in the state law before said vehicles will be allowed to travel on the streets and highways of the county. 
(d)  Length/width. No vehicle using any public street within the county shall exceed a total outside width, including load thereon, of 96 inches, not including mirrors and accessories attached thereto; no vehicle un-laden or with load shall exceed a height of 13 feet, six inches; no vehicle or combination of vehicles shall exceed a total length of 55 feet; single trip movements for necessary purposes of materials, objects or vehicles of dimensions which exceed the limits provided in this subsection and which are of such nature that they cannot be readily dismantled or separated may be permitted, but only when applicable state department of transportation permits have been secured. The state law provides that load of poles; logs, lumber, structural steel, piping and timber may exceed the length fixed without requiring special permit. Vehicle combinations, the power unit of which is designed to be used primarily as self-contained united (i.e., dump truck), shall not be subject to the 55-foot length limitations when pulling a trailer or another vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01 , § I(Exh. A), 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 66-154. - County rights-of-way, prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, through the nonemergency operation and use of a motorized vehicle upon a county right-of-way, or through any other means, to: 
(1)  Damage a county right-of-way by rutting, gouging, undercutting, digging up, displacing earth from, excavating, denuding, and/or defoliating the right-of-way. 
(2)  Cause dirt, mud or other debris to accumulate upon a county road or county right-of-way to such an extent that it becomes a nuisance or hazard to persons traveling upon such roads or right-of-way, or that it creates an unsightly condition upon the county road or county right-of-way. 
(3)  Cause any other type of public nuisance on county roads or county rights-of-way within the unincorporated county. 
(4)  Allow dirt, mud or other debris resulting from that person's use of the county right-of-way to accumulate in ditches and drainage areas of such right-of-way to such an extent that the usual flow of water on runoff is stopped, disturbed, altered, impeded, changed or interrupted. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-19 of this Code. 
(c)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall further be liable to county for the actual damage to county rights-of-way, as well as consequential damages. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01 , § I(Exh. A), 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 66-155. - Limitation. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person or the county to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01 , § I(Exh. A), 11-4-2014) 
Secs. 66-156—66-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL EVENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section II of Ord. No. 2010-05 , adopted Dec. 1, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VI, §§ 66-155—66-166. In order to preserve the numbering style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. VI, §§ 66-181—66-192. 

Sec. 66-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Producer means any person responsible for planning, producing and conducting a special event. 
Special event means any organized for-profit or nonprofit activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education which: 
(1)  Takes place on public or private property; and 
(2)  Requires special public services and which is permitted by the county under this article. Gatherings or activities that take place on private property and that make no use of county streets, roads or rights-of-way, other than for lawful parking, are not subject to the provisions of this article, but shall comply with all other requirements specified by ordinance as to the use of such property. No special event shall be allowed to exceed six days in any 30-day consecutive period of time. 
By way of example, special events include, but are not limited to, fairs, tours, grand opening celebrations, races, parades, marches, rallies, assemblies, festivals, concerts, holiday celebrations, bicycle runs, and block parties. Private social gatherings which will make no use of county streets, roads or rights-of-way, other than for lawful parking are not included. Garage sales, lawn sales, rummage sales, flea market sales, or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property are not included. 
A parade, march, or procession subject to this article is defined to be a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of five or more vehicles and ten or more persons, or a combination of three or more vehicles and five or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets, roads or rights-of-way of the county. Specifically excepted from this definition are funeral processions. 
Vendor means any person or persons or entity who engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or public property as an authorized participant of the special event. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-182. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of any of the sections of this article or any part thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-19 of the Troup County Code. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-183. - Permit conditions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a special event to occur in the county without having first obtained a permit for such special event. 
(b)  All permits issued pursuant to this article shall be temporary and shall not vest in the holder any permanent property rights in a permit. 
(c)  The location of a special event must comply with all existing zoning requirements of the county, and there must be sufficient lawful parking available. An application for a permit shall be subject to review of the county zoning administrator to determine compliance with zoning requirements. Administrative exceptions are subject to the approval of the county manager. 
(d)  Parades, marches, and processions shall follow such designated route or routes as may be on file with the county manager and shall be preceded by a sheriff's vehicle. 
(e)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, a special event is subject to and must comply with any and all other applicable ordinances of the county. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-184. - Application. 
(a)  The producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for the special event on a form prescribed by the county. 
(b)  An application for a special event permit shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the date the special event is scheduled to take place; provided, however, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the special event. 
(c)  Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $500.00. 
(d)  All producers of a special event shall be properly identified on the application; provided, however, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person. Therefore, if a group, organization, association, or other entity is producing the special event, a designated agent of the producer shall be named for purposes of the permit, and this individual shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements of this article and other applicable laws. 
(e)  The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Purpose of the special event; 
(2)  Name, address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the sponsoring entity or person in addition to the person named in subsection (d) of this section; 
(3)  Proposed date, location, and hours of operation, but in no event earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 11:00 p.m. in residential zoned locations and in no event earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 12:00 midnight in commercial zoned locations; 
(4)  Schedule of proposed activities; 
(5)  Projected attendance at the special event; 
(6)  Plans for parking, restroom facilities, and sanitation concerns; 
(7)  Plan for crowd and traffic control. 
In addition, the county or any of its departments may require any other information deemed reasonably necessary to determine that the permit meets the requirements of this article. 
(f)  Two copies of a to-scale survey of the proposed location for the special event shall accompany the application and shall accurately depict the proposed location of the special event, all buildings, structures, parking, and curb cuts permanently located on the site. The survey shall further show the proposed temporary location of any and all buildings, structures, and parking to be associated with the proposed special event. Moreover, the entire location shall comply with the county's standards for setbacks. 
(g)  Each county department and/or agency whose services would be impacted by the special event shall review the application and recommend in writing any conditions or restrictions deemed necessary. Special conditions or restrictions recommended by the county manager, or his/her designee, shall become a condition of the permit. 
(h)  The following standards shall be considered in reviewing the application: 
(1)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate plan for crowd and traffic control, as well as security, and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty uniformed and P.O.S.T. certified police officers has been verified by the county and obtained by the producer. 
(2)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate plan for fire inspection/prevention and/or fire code enforcement and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty uniformed fire personnel has been verified by the county and obtained by the producer. 
(3)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate EMS plan and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty medics who are state-certified EMT or paramedics has been verified by the county and obtained by the producer. 
(4)  A special event permit may be issued only after adequate waste disposal facilities have been determined by the county and obtained by the producer. The producer shall be required to clean the right-of-way or public property of rubbish and debris, returning it to its pre-special event condition, within 24 hours of the conclusion of the special event. If the producer fails to clean up such refuse, cleanup shall be arranged by the county, and the costs incurred for this service shall be charged to the applicant. 
(5)  A special event permit granted by the county may provide for the county to close designated streets, roads and intersections to allow use of the public right-of-way for the special event during designated hours and days. 
(i)  After all of the requested information pertaining to the special event has been submitted, reviewed, and approved, a permit may be issued upon payment of all applicable fees and costs. The special event permit, as well as any other permits required in conjunction with the special event, shall be posted on site during the special event. 
(j)  Should a permit be denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-185. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Each county department and/or agency whose services would be impacted by the special event shall itemize the departmental activity required for the special event, showing the hourly rate and the actual and reasonable total cost. The "total costs to the county" shall be the sum of each department's costs. The county manager shall determine and calculate a reasonable fee to reimburse the county for its services. 
(b)  A cash bond may be determined to be appropriate by the county, and in this event the county shall advise the producer of the amount, and this bond shall be remitted to the county before the special event permit is issued. 
(c)  The initial permit fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the permit and in any event no later than 72 hours prior to the date of the event. 
(d)  The fees required in this article shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other applicable ordinances or regulations. 
(e)  No producer of any special event, except as may otherwise be provided herein, shall be exempt from the payment of the appropriate fees and charges required under this article. 
(f)  Should a producer desire to have use of any equipment owned by the county, such as barriers, traffic cones, and the like, an additional fee, as may be established from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners, shall be paid so as to cover the reasonable cost for use of the equipment, as well as the delivery and return of the items by county employees. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the producer of any special event associated with and benefiting the cause of a charitable organization, recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be excused by the county manager from the permit fee requirement, but may be required to post the bond described in subsection (b) of this section. Criterion to be considered in determining the appropriateness of requiring a bond shall include the impact of the event on the cost of services to be provided by the county and on the general public health, welfare, or safety of the county. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-186. - Liability. 
(a)  At the discretion of the county, prior to issuance of a permit, the producer shall provide to the county proof of comprehensive liability insurance naming the county as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of $300,000.00 personal injury per person, $1,000,000.00 maximum, and $100,000.00 property damage against all claims arising from permits issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The producer of any special event shall provide a written agreement in a form satisfactory to the county providing the producer shall defend, pay, and save harmless the county, its officers, employees, and agents from liability of all personal or property damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event and from any and all claims, attorney fees or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the special event. The agreement shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. 
(c)  The county, its officials, employees, or agents shall not incur any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which the permit has been issued. The county, its officials, employees, or agents shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of the right-of-way or other public property. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-187. - Vendors of food and merchandise. 
(a)  The sale of food and/or merchandise by vendors shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided each vendor is authorized to participate in writing by the producer of the event and provided further each vendor shall be subject to all conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. 
(b)  The producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and control of all food and merchandise vendors as a component of a special event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. 
(c)  Authorized vendors of the producer, providing food and/or merchandise, shall not be required to obtain a separate vendor permit to operate during the special event. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, food vendors authorized by the producer shall be required to comply with rules and regulations of the county health department as to the preparation and service of food. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-188. - Vendors of alcoholic beverages. 
The dispensing of alcoholic beverages, by sale or otherwise, shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided each vendor is authorized to participate by the producer and provided further each vendor dispensing alcoholic beverages shall have been duly licensed by the state and the county or another local governing authority and shall further have complied with all provisions of this Code relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages off-premises at an authorized function or event. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-189. - Miscellaneous provisions regarding vendors. 
(a)  Each vendor authorized by the producer of the special event shall prominently display on his or her person a badge provided by the producer and identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the special event which shall bear the signature of the producer or his designated agent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer as provided herein to engage in any business within a distance of 100 yards of the special event from one hour before the start of the special event, and until one hour after the special event. 
(c)  A special event permit granted by the county may provide for the county to close designated streets, roads and intersections to allow use of the public right-of-way for the special event during designated hours and days. The producer shall bear all responsibility for having all vendors remove any structures and all trash and debris from the designated area by not later than the time stated under the permit for reopening of all streets. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-190. - Other permits. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to allow the county's departments and staffs to review an application for a special event permit outside the regular ordinance standards in order to determine how disruptive a special event may be to the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks and to make recommendations and allowances. Administrative guidelines issued by the county zoning department shall be followed by the county in allowing specified signage and advertising which may not be in compliance with existing zoning or other ordinances for banners and vendors. Upon approval by the county manager, or his designee, recommendations and allowances made shall become conditions of the permit to be followed and carried out by the producer. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  The holder of a license to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages shall obtain an off-premises license and event permit for pouring alcoholic beverages for an authorized function or event as provided in chapter 6 of this Code if he is authorized to participate by the producer; and 
(2)  A permit allowing fireworks shall be approved and permitted by the chief of the county's fire department or his designee. Further, the person to be performing the firework display shall be pyrotechnics licensed and qualified in the state. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-191. - Denial or revocation of a special event permit. 
(a)  Reasons for denial of a special event permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The special event will unnecessarily disrupt traffic within the county beyond practical solution; 
(2)  The special event will interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
(3)  The location of the special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; 
(4)  The special event will cause unnecessary disruption of public services which would unreasonably impact the remainder of the county; 
(5)  The application contains incomplete or false information; and 
(6)  The producer fails to comply with any terms required by this article. 
(b)  Reasons for revocation of a special events permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  False or incomplete information on the application; 
(2)  Failure to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit; 
(3)  Failure to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance or bonds to the county; and 
(4)  Existence of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency as the county determines, in its sole discretion, to be an impact upon the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Further, a special event permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the county, if the sheriff, the chief of the fire department, or their designees, determines that the health, welfare, or safety of the public may be endangered. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 66-192. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any producer whose special event permit application has been denied or revoked may request in writing a review of this decision by the county manager. This request must be in writing and received by the county manager within five days of the permit denial or revocation. 
(b)  The county manager shall review the application and reasons for the denial or revocation of the special event permit and shall issue a decision, within five days, whether to uphold or reverse the previous decision and grant or reinstate the permit with such additional conditions as the county manager may deem justified by the evidence. 
(c)  Should the producer be dissatisfied with the decision of the county manager, an appeal may be filed with the board of commissioners within five days of the decision of the city manager. The board of commissioners shall set a hearing date within 30 days of receiving an appeal. At the hearing, evidence may be submitted by the producer addressing why the permit should have been granted or not revoked and by the county manager addressing why the permit was denied or revoked. The board of commissioners shall determine whether the denial or revocation of the permit is justified, or it may reverse the previous decision and grant or reinstate the permit with such additional conditions as deemed justified by the evidence. 
( Ord. No. 2010-05 , § II, 12-1-2009) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; manufactured homes, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, roominghouse, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single dwelling unit/residential unit. 
Dwelling unit means a house or other structure or a portion of any building or structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living in a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels, or other structures designed for transient residents. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food and the storage and sale of produce, tin cans, glass, paper or other containers and newspapers. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological waste; highly flammable or explosive waste; toxic waste; sewage, sludges and other waste materials determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in rules for the state department of human resources, chapter 270-5-20, entitled "Radioactive Materials." Hazardous waste shall also include ignitable, corrosive, reactive or toxic materials, infectious waste, nuclear or radioactive materials, and liquid waste. In this regard, the term "ignitable waste" shall be defined as waste that has a flashpoint at a temperature less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit, causes a fire by friction under normal circumstances or is an oxidizer. The term "corrosive waste" is defined as waste with a pH of 2.0 or less or 12.5 or more. The term "radioactive waste" is defined as waste that is normally unstable, reacts violently with water, forms an explosive mixture in water, contains quantities of cyanide or sulphur that could be released to the air, or can easily be detonated or exploded. 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Multiple dwelling means a building designed for and containing two or more dwelling units. 
Noncombustible trash means materials which are unburnable at incinerator temperatures of 800 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Owner means any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises in the jurisdiction of the county. 
Refuse means garbage and rubbish collectively. 
Residential unit means any structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Sanitary landfill means any refuse disposal area approved by the state department of natural resources and the county board of commissioners. Such landfill shall be operated without creating a nuisance or hazard to public health or safety by utilizing the principles of engineering to confine the refuse to the smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a layer of earth at the conclusion of each day's operation. 
Sanitation officer means a person employed by the director of sanitation, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Scavenge means searching for and/or removing material from any transfer station. 
Transfer station means an assigned place for the collection of household garbage as designated by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1987, § 13-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 70-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter through a designee referred to as the "sanitation officer." 
(b)  The sanitation officer's duties shall be to make routine inspections of all commercial, private and public refuse collection systems to determine if any unsanitary or unsightly condition or any other violation of this chapter exists. 
(c)  The county marshal's department shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter and shall have the authority to serve warrants of arrest and to collect fines from any person who is in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1987, § 13-2) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 70-3. - Collections of refuse generally; conditions for collections by county. 
(a)  Refuse may be collected for disposal by the county, by municipalities or by persons or commercial sanitation firms meeting the requirements of section 70-8. 
(b)  Collectors and sanitary contractors will collect refuse under the following conditions: 
(1)  Garbage shall be collected by sanitary contractors when licensed and under contract a minimum of once each week from residential units. 
(2)  Refuse shall be collected a minimum of twice a week from commercial establishments. 
(3)  Collection service shall be discontinued where containers are inadequate or have been condemned as unit by a sanitary inspector and notice of the condemnation has been given to the owner who has refused to correct the situation then existing. 
(c)  The county shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling industrial waste, discarded building material, dirt, rock, discarded furniture and appliances, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors, nor shall the county collect or haul garbage from residential units. 
(Code 1987, § 13-3) 
Sec. 70-4. - Disposal of refuse at official sites and private landfills; dumping of fill. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, cans, bottles or paper except at sites and/or transfer stations designated by the county board of commissioners. These designations shall be made from time to time by resolution of the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped any junk, appliances, equipment, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts thereof anywhere in the unincorporated areas of the county except at the official sites designated by resolution of the county board of commissioners. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped or buried on any private property any of the garbage, refuse and related materials described in subsection (a) of this section, unless the same shall be approved by the state department of natural resources and the county board of commissioners as a private sanitary landfill. 
(d)  Sand, dirt, broken brick, or broken pavement or other suitable material may be used as a fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided that the same is not maintained in unsightly condition and provided that the owners of the property on which such material is dumped agree to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment, and to cover it with dirt, upon direction of the board of commissioners, or, in lieu thereof, agrees to permit the county to level and cover such material so dumped with appropriate grading equipment and assess the cost thereof against the owner of the real property on which such material is dumped. 
(Code 1987, § 13-4) 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
Sec. 70-5. - Preparation and storage of residential refuse for collection; prohibited placement of certain refuse for collection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any nonresident of the county to utilize the county-owned transfer stations or landfills or dispose of rubbish in the county in any manner whatsoever without the express permission of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Garbage shall be stored in transfer stations. 
(c)  Each owner shall prevent excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property occupied by such person or upon public thoroughfares adjoining such person's property. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or transfer station for collection any acid, explosive material, flammable liquid, dangerous or corrosive material, or hazardous material of any kind. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed any refuse upon the ground in the area of county maintained transfer stations. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to place wood, brush, furniture, metal, appliances, manufacturing waste, or building construction waste in county-owned transfers stations or on the ground surrounding such stations. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to set fire to any refuse or refuse transfer station or to place material in such transfer station that would cause refuse to burn (i.e., lighted cigarettes, hot coals, etc.). 
(h)  Scavenging from transfer stations or any landfill is prohibited. 
(Code 1987, § 13-5) 
Sec. 70-6. - Maintenance of area surrounding container. 
(a)  Where the occupants of two or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or container, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulation of refuse. All rubbish from commercial operations shall be transported to a dumping site designated by the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  Where multiple dwellings or mobile home parks are served by containers, it shall be the responsibility of the management of such property to maintain the area surrounding such containers clean and free of accumulation of refuse. 
(Code 1987, § 13-6) 
Sec. 70-7. - Regulation of transportation of refuse. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including city or county collectors and sanitary contractors, to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking, or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this subsection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without a business license approved by the board of commissioners, to collect and haul for hire any refuse other than that arising from such licensee's own accumulation within any area of the county in which refuse collection service is maintained by the county. 
(Code 1987, § 13-7) 
Sec. 70-8. - License and regulation of commercial sanitation firms. 
(a)  None of the provisions of this section shall apply to private individuals disposing of garbage or rubbish generated by their own household. 
(b)  No person shall engage in or carry on any garbage or refuse collection or disposal service without first obtaining the appropriate business license in accordance with chapter 50 of this Code. 
(c)  Each truck used to collect and transport solid waste shall bear an identification acceptable to the board of commissioners which shows it has been authorized to operate in the county, and shall also bear the name and telephone number of the owner of the truck. 
(d)  A commercial sanitation firm applying for a business license to collect solid waste shall certify at the time of application that neither the applicant nor any agent or representative of such firm, is engaged in any illegal servicing of any commercial containers of refuse collection of any type in the county. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial hauler to dump at any site other than that designated by the county by way of resolution. 
(Code 1987, § 13-8) 
Sec. 70-9. - Operational procedure for depositing of solid waste in county landfill. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Solid waste means that waste defined by the rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division, section 391-3-04-.01(mm). Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, solid waste shall not include hazardous waste, biological waste, chemical or radioactive waste, special waste, commercial waste, inert waste, batteries, tires, grease, sludges, liquid waste, dead animals or waste generated or originating from outside the geographical boundaries of the county. 
(b)  Hours of operation. The county landfill shall be opened for the reception of solid waste on as directed by the board of commisioners. Dumping of any waste other than as alowd by the board of commissioners or at times other than during the hours of operation is hereby prohibited. In this regard, the gates to the landfill shall be locked other than those hours in which the landfill is operating. 
(c)  Fees. All incoming solid waste shall be weighed and records maintained by the landfill personnel regarding such weight. There shall be imposed on the person bringing the waste to the landfill a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the sanitation department per ton for all solid waste disposed at the facility. This fee shall be paid at the time the waste is deposited at the landfill. 
(d)  Waste transported to be covered. No person shall be allowed to deposit solid waste at the landfill unless such waste is covered in the vehicle used to transport the same to the landfill. 
(e)  Dumping of nonpermitted waste. In addition to the penalties provided for by subsection (f) of this section, any person determined to be responsible for depositing waste other than solid waste shall be required to remove such waste at that party's expense from the facility. All reparation costs, remediation costs and/or fines imposed by the state or federal government associated with the placement of such restricted waste shall be paid by the person responsible for depositing the same. 
(f)  Penalties. In addition to those penalties imposed by subsection (e) of this section, violations of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-19 of this Code. 
(Code 1987, § 13-9) 
Sec. 70-10. - Dumping of construction and/or agricultural rubbish and debris. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to dump and/or bury construction and/or landscaping waste, debris, etc. on any lot upon which a residence is to be constructed in the unincorporated area of the county when such building lot is 1.5 acres or less in size. 
(Code 1987, § 13-10) 
Sec. 70-11. - Solid waste service district. 
(a)  A special solid waste service district is created and established which shall correspond with and be coterminous with the geographical boundaries of Troup County, Georgia. 
(b)  A tax upon each parcel subject to ad valorem taxation in the special solid waste service district in an amount to be established by the board of commissioners shall be levied and collected on a yearly basis. 
(c)  The tax provided for in this section shall be enforced in the same manner as authorized by law for the enforcement of the collection and payment of state taxes, fees or assessments, and the tax commissioner of Troup County shall be the officer charged with the enforcement of its collection and payment. 
(d)  The proceeds of the tax provided for herein shall be used only to pay, in whole or part, the cost of solid waste collection and disposal services, and to construct and maintain facilities therefor, within the special district. 
( Ord. No. 14-01 , § I, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 70-12. - C&D Waste Disposal. 
(a)  Purpose. The purposes and goals of this section are to: 
(1)  Ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public, citizens and residents of Troup County, Georgia; 
(2)  Maintain the economic viability of the publicly owned and operated county landfill(s); 
(3)  Enable the county by and through the revenue generated by its landfill operations to continue and expand its efforts to promote public awareness and reduce the volume of C&D waste disposal through source reduction, recycling, reuse and resource recovery; 
(4)  Limit the potential for later chain of title liabilities with respect to the handling or disposal of C&D waste; and 
(5)  Increase efficiency in the collection of C&D waste and the provision of environmental benefits through cooperation with the City of LaGrange, Georgia. 
(b)  Disposal of C&D waste. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity which transports, pursuant to a contract, whether oral or otherwise, construction/demolition waste generated within the unincorporated area of Troup County shall be required to deliver such construction/demolition waste to the Troup County C&D Landfill. For purposes of this section, the term "construction/demolition waste" shall be as defined in Georgia Department of Natural Resources Rule 391-3-4-.01." 
( Ord. No. 2019-02 , § I, 9-4-2018) 
Editor's note— It should be noted, Ord. No. 2019-02 , adopted September 4, 2018, has an effective date of January 1, 2019. 
Secs. 70-13—70-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL 

Sec. 70-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 1987, § 13-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 70-42. - Placement and disposal; prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with any othe type solid waste within the unincorporated county. 
(Code 1987, § 13-22) 
Sec. 70-43. - Mixing of yard trimmings and municipal solid waste. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to deposit yard trimmings into any container designated for the collection of any other solid waste. 
(Code 1987, § 13-23) 
Secs. 70-44—70-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 70-71. - Definitions. 
The general definitions set forth in section 1-4 of this Code shall apply, but the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means, but is not be limited to, all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, aluminum cans, refuse, cigarette butts, garbage, carpet selvedge, trash, debris, dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-41. 
Public property and private property mean the public or private right-of-way of any roadway or highway; any body of water or watercourse, or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation, or recreation area; and all residential or farm properties, timberland, or forests. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-21; Ord. No. 2017-05 , § I, 11-15-2016; Ord. No. 2017-07 , § I, 11-15-2016) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 70-72. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons or legal entity in person or its agent or employees to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause, or to permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless: 
(1)  Such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies, or political subdivisions, for the disposal of such litter, and such a person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property in such manner. This exception specifically refers to, but is not limited to, all lands owned, leased, controlled, or operated by or on behalf of the county. 
(2)  Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed upon such property for such purpose. 
(3)  Such person or legal entity is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and not in violation of any other law, statute, rule, or ordinance promulgated by any political subdivision having authority to do so. 
(b)  Upon conviction of violation of subsection (a) of this section, the court shall cause to be published in the LaGrange Daily News the names and offenses of persons convicted of violating such section. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-22; Ord. No. 2017-05 , § II, 11-15-2016; Ord. No. 2017-07 , § II, 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 70-73. - Additional prohibitions. 
No person shall drive or move any vehicle within the unincorporated area of the county unless such vehicles are so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter contained therein from being blown or deposited upon any road, street, alley, or other public place. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-23) 
Sec. 70-74. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, bicycle, airplane, or other vehicle in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator thereof has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any items including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the item belongs to such person, it shall become a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-24) 
Sec. 70-75. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions contained within O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b), the jurisdiction of all alleged violations of this article shall be in the county magistrate court. The minimum punishment for violation of any provision of this article shall be no less than $100.00 for the first offense, and the maximum punishment for violation of any provision of this article shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. 
(b)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street, or highway, or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of the sentence. 
(c)  In the sound discretion of the court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public park, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner, or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of the sentence. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-25) 
Sec. 70-76. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, certified peace officers, and/or officials of the state or any code enforcement officer of the county or any enforcement agency, officer, or any official of any commission of this state, or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-26) 
Sec. 70-77. - Limitation. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person, or the county to damages or other relief on account of injuries to person or property arising out of a violation of this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Code 1987, § 10.5-27) 
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Possession of open container while operating a motor vehicle, § 6-4; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; roads and streets, ch. 66; disabled motor vehicles, app. A, art. IV, § 5; off-street parking and loading requirements, app. A, art. XXVIII. 
State Law reference— Authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

Sec. 74-1. - Rules of the road adopted by reference. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-370—40-6-376, title 40, chapter 6 thereof, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, definitions, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulation of this county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Code 1987, § 14-1) 
Sec. 74-2. - Speed limits. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-183 and 40-6-376 of the Uniform Rules of the Road Act, for local authorities to alter lawful speed limits, based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law, the following speed zones are established: 
ON-SYSTEM 
SR 1 from the Harris County Line (mile point 0.00) to 100 feet north of South Highland Boulevard (mile point 13.48), a distance of 13.48 miles, to zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 1 (School Zone) from 500 feet south of Rosemont School Road (mile point 8.36) to 100 feet north of Rosemont Road (mile point 8.73), a distance of 0.37 miles at to be zoned at 45 mph. From 7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., school days only. 
SR 1 from 100 feet north of South Highland Boulevard, mile point 13.48 to 320 feet south of Willis Circle (south City Limits of LaGrange) at mile point 13.74, a distance of 0.26 miles to zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 1 from 1050 feet north of North Page Street (mile point 18.68) to 200 feet south of South Meadowland Trail (mile point 19.36) a distance of 0.68 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 1 from 200 feet south of South Meadowland Trail mile point 19.36 to the Heard County Line mile point 27.79, a distance of 8.43 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 1 (School Zone) Hillcrest Elementary School hours only (7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.) from 1,100 feet south of Wares Cross Road mile point 22.54 to 200 feet north of Wares Cross Road mile point 22.79, a distance of 0.25 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 14 from 370 feet north of Woodlawn Lane mile point 2.34 to 300 feet south of Teaver road mile point 11.84 a distance of 9.50 miles, to zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 14 (School Zone) Center Elementary School hours only (7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 03:00 p.m.) from 200 feet south of Hamilton Drive mile point 8.05 to 200 feet south of Old West Point Road mile point 08.38 a distance of 0.33 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 14 300 feet south of Teaver Road mile point 11.84 to 200 feet south of Morningside Drive mile point 13.59, to be zoned for 50 mph. 
SR 14 from 200 feet south of Morningside Drive mile point 13.59 to 200 feet south of Theresa Drive mile point 14.05 a distance of 0.46 miles to zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 14 from 200 feet south of Theresa Drive mile point 14.05 To 1050 feet east of SR 109 mile point 14.30, a distance of 0.25 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
SR 14 from 100 feet south of Iris Drive mile point 20.15 to 200 feet south of Willowood Road mile point 22.59 a distance of 2.44 mile to be zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 14 from 200 feet south of Willowood Road mile point 22.59 to 2400 feet south of Mobley Bridge mile point 28.71 a distance of 6.12 miles to zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 14 from 160 feet north of Old American Legion Road mile point 31.21 to the Coweta County Line mile point 34.45 a distance of 3.24 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR Spur from 150 feet South of Cooley road mile point 1.50 to State Route 14 mile point 4.98 a distance of 3.48 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 18 from a point 2,400 feet east of SR 103 mile point 2.32 to the Harris County Line mile point 8.73 a distance of 6.41 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 54 from SR 1 mile point 0.00 to 50 Feet west of Brooks Road mile point 6.42 a distance of 6.42 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 100 from 850 feet north of Barrow Street mile point 4.06 to the Coweta County Line mile point 7.29 a distance of 3.23 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 109 from the Alabama State line mile point 0.00 to 200 feet east of Weathers Drive mile point 8.18 a distance of 8.18 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 109 from 200 feet east of Weathers Drive mile point 8.18 to 3,500 feet east of West Lakeview Drive mile point 9.12 a distance of 0.94 miles to zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 109 from 3,500 feet east of West Lakeview drive mile point 9.12 to SR 14 mile point 9.66, a distance of 0.54 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
SR 109 State Route 109 runs common with SR 14 from mile point 9.66 to mile point 11.96 (LaGrange City Limits begin at mile point 9.74 
SR 109 from 50 feet west of Callaway Baptist Church mile point 15.83 to 1,100 feet east of Boddie Road mile point 19.00 a distance of 3.17 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 109 from 1,100 feet east of Boddie Road mile point 19.00 to 250 feet east Dallas Mill Road mile point 21.34 a distance of 2.34 miles to be zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 109 (School Zone) Mountville Elementary School hours only 07:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. from 1,300 feet east of Boddie Road mile point 19.04 to 2,700 feet east of Boddie Road mile point 19.30 a distance of 0.26 miles to zoned for 35 mph. 
SR 109 from 250 feet east of Dallas Mill road mile point 21.34 to the Meriwether County Line mile point 21.81 a distance of 0.47 miles to zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 219 from the Harris County Line mile point 0.00 to 200 feet north of Bryant Road mile point 7.92 a distance of 7.92 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 219 from 200 feet north of Bryant Road mile point 7.92 to 50 feet North of Blue John Bridge mile point 9.85 a distance of 1.93 miles to be zoned for 45 mph. 
SR 219 from 1,350 feet south of Sanders Road mile point 17.43 to the Heard County Line mile point 23.55 a distance of 6.12 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
SR 403 (I-85) from 450 feet north of the north bound on ramp from SR 18 mile point 2.60 to 265 feet south of the north bound off ramp mile point 17.70 a distance of 15.10 miles to be zoned for 70 mph. 
SR 403 (I-85) from 150 feet north of SR 109 mile point 18.16 to the Meriwether County Line mile point 29.51 a distance of 11.35 miles to zoned for 70 mph. 
SR 411 (I-185) from the Harris County Line mile point 35.14 to SR 403 mile point 49.30 a distance of 14.16 miles to be zoned for 70 mph. 
Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation. 
OFF-SYSTEM 
Abbottsford Road from SR 109 to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers R.V. park a distance of 0.80 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Adams Road from Shumaker Road to SR 18, a distance of 2.19 miles to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Alverson Road from Mountville-Hogansville Road to the Meriwether County Line, a distance of 3.55 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Antioch Road from SR 109 to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers property, a distance of 5.34 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Bartley Road from SR 1 to SR 219 a distance of 2.37 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Bartley Road from SR 219 to Webb Road, a distance of 6.03 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Bass Cross Road from SR 14 to the Hogansville City Limits, a distance of 3.21 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Baughs Cross Road from SR 219 to Bartley Road, a distance of 3.76 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Big Springs-Mountville Road from SR 109 to a point 1.50 miles south of SR 109, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Big Springs-Mountville Road from 1.50 miles south of SR 109 to Lower Big Springs Road, a distance of 2.07 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
Blue Creek Road from Hogansville city limits to the Sportsman Club Road, a distance of .49 miles, to be zoned 45 mph. 
Blue Creek Road from the Sportsman Club Road to County Line Road, a distance of 1.72 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
Briley Road from Stovall Road to Rosemont Road a distance of 1.90 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Burgess Road from Rosemont Road to Hamilton Road, a distance of .83 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Burkes Chapel Road from SR 219 to Salem Road a distance of 2.30 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Cameron Mill Road from SR 219 to Whitaker Road, a distance of 4.16 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
Cannonville Road from Old West Point Road to Robert Taylor Road a Distance of 1.88 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Cannonville Road from Robert Taylor Road to New Hutchinson Mill Road, a distance of 1.21 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Dallas Mill Road from Stovall Road to the Meriwether County Line, a distance of 5.65 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Dennis Smith Road from Salem Road to the Harris County Line, a distance of 3.31 miles, to zoned for 55 mph. 
Finney Road from SR 1 to Salem Road, a distance of 1.13 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Flat Shoals Church Road from Salem Road to Dennis Smith Road, a distance of 1.94 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Fling Road from SR 109 to SR 14, a distance of 3.62 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Floyd Road from Salem Road to Oak Grove Road, a distance of 2.36 miles, to zoned for 55 mph. 
Gabbetteville Road from SR 14 to Webb Road, a distance of 6.61 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Garrett Road from Lovic Davis Road to Liberty Hill Road, a distance of 1.75 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Hammett Road from the city limits of LaGrange to 1 mile north of the city limits, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Hammett Road from a point 1 mile north of the city limits of LaGrange to a point 0.25 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Hammett Road from 1.25 miles north of the city limits of LaGrange to the Heard County Line a distance of 8.46 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Hightower Road from Hammett Road to 6,000 feet east of Hammett Road, a distance of 1.14 miles, to be zoned 35 mph. 
Hightower Road from a point 6,000 feet east of Hammett Road to the Hogansville city limit, a distance of 1.58 miles, to be zoned 45 mph. 
Hillcrest Road from Robert Hayes Road to Youngs Mill Road, a distance of 8.41 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Hines Road from SR 14 to Willowwood Road, a distance of 0.29 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Hines Road from Willowwood Road to Mountville-Hogansville Road, a distance of 5.63 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Hunt Road from Salem Road to Bartley Road, a distance of 1.75 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Jarrell Hogg Road from Bartley Road to Adams Road, a distance of 2.23 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Johnson Road from SR 100 to Corinth Road, a distance of 2.00 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Kimbrough Road from Upper Glass Bridge Road to Lower Glass Bridge Road, a distance of 3.36 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Knott Road from Upper Big Springs Road to Big Springs-Mountville Road, a distance of 5.07 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Liberty Hill Road from Antioch Road to Garrett Road, a distance of 2.77 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Long Cane Road from SR 14 to Cannonville Road, a distance of 1.90 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Lovic Davis Road from SR 219 to Liberty Hill Road, a distance of 5.18 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Lower Big Springs Road from SR 1 to Drake Road, a distance of 0.46 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Lower Big Springs Road from Drake Road to Cook Road, a distance of 4.90 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Lower Glass Bridge Road from SR 14 to the Corps of Engineers property, a distance of 6.03 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Maley Road from Teaver Road to Pyne Road, a distance of 0.77 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Mobley Bridge Road from Hogansville City Limits to Hightower Road, a distance of 1.41 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Mobley Bridge Road from Hightower Road to Youngs Mill Road, a distance of 7.00 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Mountville-Hogansville Road from SR 109 to Camp Viola Road, a distance of 0.52 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Mountville-Hogansville Road from Camp Viola Road to a point 800 feet north of Bass Cross Road, a distance of 4.6 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Mountville-Hogansville Road from a point 800 feet north of Bass Cross Road to Hogansville city limits, a distance of 0.34 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Mountville-Hogansville Road from Hogansville city limits to SR 54, a distance of 1.18 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
New Hutchinson Mill Road from SR 219 to Bartley Road, a distance of 4.91 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
North Butts Mill Road from SR 1 to the Harris County Line, a distance of 1.10 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Oak Grove Road From SR 1 to Salem Road, a distance of 4.68 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Old Chipley Road from SR 1 to the Meriwether County Line, a distance of 4.17 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Old West Point Road from SR 14 to Hudson Road, a distance of 2.59 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Old West Point Road from Hudson Road to SR 14, a distance of 1.52 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Patillo Road from SR 109 to 0.70 miles north of SR 109, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Patillo Road from 0.70 miles north of SR 109 to SR 14, a distance of 1.00 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Perry Mill Road from Dallas Mill Road to Old Chipley Road, a distance of 2.40 miles to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Priddy Road from Salem Road to dead end, a distance of 2.44 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Pype Road from SR 109 to Upper Glass Bridge Road, a distance of 2.28 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Robert Taylor Road from Gabbettville Road to Cannonville Road, a distance of 2.50 miles to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Robertson Road from Lower Big Springs Road to Hamilton Road, a distance of 1.54 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Rock Mills Road from SR 109 to the Heard County Line, a distance of 7.40 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Rosemont Road from SR 1 to Lower Big Springs Road, a distance of 2.23 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Salem Road from SR 1 to Oak Grove Road, a distance of 4.36 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Salem Road from Oak Grove Road to the Harris County Line, a distance of 3.30 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Salem-Chipley Road from SR 1 to Salem Road, a distance of 4.48 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Seminole Road from Whitaker Road to the Corps of Engineers property, a distance of 0.84 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Shake Rag Road from Flats Shoals Church Road to Ely Callaway Road, a distance of 2.06 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Shoemaker Road from SR 18 to Bartley Road, a distance of 10.96 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Simms Road from Mountville-Hogansville Road to SR 54, a distance of 3.37 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Sivell Road from SR 14 to 1.14 miles north of SR 14, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Smith Road from Mobley Bridge Road to Youngs Mill Road, a distance of 1.12 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Smokey Road from SR 1 to Knott Road, a distance of 4.92 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
South Gates Road from Old Chipley Road to Dallas Mill Road, a distance of 0.91 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
South Thompson Road from SR 1 to Oak Grove Road, a distance of 4.23 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Stewart Road from SR 109 to Knott Road, a distance of 2.18 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Stovall Road from Lower Big Springs Road to the Meriwether County Line, a distance of 4.91 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Teaver Road from SR 14 to Pyne Road, a distance of 1.77 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Thornton Road from SR 219 to SR 219, a distance of 0.45 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Thrash Road from SR 109 to Big Spings-Mountville Road, a distance of 5.07 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Tin Bridge Road from SR 14 to Hammett Road, a distance of 6.25 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Tommie Road from Bartley Road to Baughs Cross Road, a distance of 1.77 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Towns Road from SR 109 to Hines Road, a distance of 2.93 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Tucker Road from Oak Grove Road to South Thompson Road, a distance of 0.84, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Upper Big Springs Road from SR 14 Spur to Lower Big Springs Road, a distance 7.07 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Upper Glass Bridge Road from SR 14 to the Corps of Engineer property, a distance of 3.48 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Vernon Ferry Road from SR 109 to SR 109, a distance of 1.41 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Vulcan Material Road from SR 219 to Hood Road, a distance of 1.75 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Waldrop Road from Baughs Cross Road to Jarrell Hogg Road, a distance of 1.46 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Wares Cross Road from SR 1 to SR 219, a distance of 10.60 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Wares Cross Road from Robert Hayes Road to SR 219, a distance of 2.52 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Warner Road from Webb-Bartley Road to Jim Turner Road, a distance of 2.54 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Waugh Road from SR 1 to Youngs Mill Road, a distance of 0.92 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Webb Road from SR 14 to a point 1,600 feet east of Reed Road, a distance of 0.42 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Webb Road from a point 1,600 feet east of Reed Road to the dead end, a distance of 0.36 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Webb-Bartley Road from Kia Parkway to a point 1320 feet east of Kia Parkway, a distance of 0.25 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Webb-Bartley Road from a point 1320 feet east of Kia Parkway to Shoemaker Road, a distance of 0.85 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Whitaker Road from SR 109 to Cameron Mill Road, a distance of 3.62 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Whitfield Road from SR 14 to Hammett Road, a distance of 2.40 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Whitfield Road School Zone (Callaway High School) from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. (School Days Only) from 0.80 miles east of Hammett Road to 400 feet east of Hammett Road, a distance of 0.72 miles, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
Willowwood Road from SR 14 to Hines Road, a distance of 1.12 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Youngs Mill Road from the city limits of LaGrange to 1.20 miles north of Shoal Creek, a distance of 3.15 miles, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Youngs Mill Road from 1.20 miles north of Shoal Creek to SR 54, a distance of 5.27 miles, to be zoned for 55 mph. 
Signs for "OFF-SYSTEM" roads shall be erected by the county. The speed zone for any county road not specified herein shall be as posted by Troup County Board of Commissioners or its duly authorized designee. 
All lists and parts of lists in conflict with this list are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1987, § 14-2; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1, 3-1-2005; Ord. No. 2008-01, § I, 7-17-2007; Ord. No. 2010-09 , § I, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 2012-05 , § I, 2-12-2012) 
Sec. 74-3. - No parking zones. 
(a)  No vehicle of any type shall be parked in the following no parking zones: 
(1)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of U.S. Highway 29 between a point 100 feet south of the south edge of the south driveway and a point 100 feet north of the north edge of the north driveway to the parking lot of a business known now or formerly as the Turnaround Christian Center Roller Skating Rink. Such business is located near mile point 12 and approximately 0.1 mile from the intersection of U.S. Highway 29 and Teaver Road. 
(2)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of Potts Road extending easterly from the western end of such road for a distance of 725 feet as measured along the northern and southern right-of-way lines of such road from the intersection of such right-of-way lines with the property of the United States of America (U.S. Corps of Engineers-Lake West Point Project). 
(3)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of Whitaker Road between a point 1,060 feet south of the center of bridge number 285-02098 P-001.74N and a point 1,060 feet north of the center of the bridge. 
(4)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of Cameron Mill Road between a point 1,320 feet south of the center of bridge number 285-02098-002.33N and a point 1,320 feet north of the center of bridge. 
(5)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of Swanson Drive between a point beginning 300 feet from the intersection of Swanson Drive and Gordon Road and extending to the end of Swanson Drive. 
(6)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of Salem Road lying 6,000 feet on either side of the bridge crossing Flat Shoal Creek. 
(7)  The right-of-way on both sides of Webb-Bartley Road. 
(8)  The right-of-way on both sides of Old Gabbettville Road. 
(9)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of Warner Road between the intersection of Warner Road and Webb-Bartley Road and the intersection of Warner Road and Gray Hill School Road. 
(10)  The right-of-way on both sides of Webb Road 
(11)  The right-of-way on both sides of Reed Road. 
(12)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of Gabbettville Road from the intersection of Gabbettville Circle and Gabbettville Road to the city limits of West Point, Georgia. 
(13)  The right-of-way on both sides of that portion of Robert Hayes Road between a point beginning at the intersection of Robert Hayes Road and Wares Cross Road and extending south to the cul-de-sac at the southern end of Robert Hayes Road. 
(b)  No parking zones shall be marked by appropriate signage to be placed and maintained by the Troup County Engineer. Such signs shall be official signs and no person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in violation of the directions and restrictions on such signs. 
(Code 1987, § 14-3; Ord. No. 2014-05 , § I, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § I, 12-6-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-05 , § I, adopted May 20, 2014, changed the title of § 74-3 from "No parking" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 74-4. - Stop intersections. 
(a)  Three-way stops. Three-way stop signs shall be placed at the following intersections: 
Maley Road and Lakecrest Drive; 
Upper Glass Bridge Road and Hudson Road; 
Plymouth Drive and Franklin Way; 
Rosemont Road and Briley; 
Linda Lane and McKinley Circle; 
Gordon Road and North Kight Drive. 
(b)  Four-way stops. Four-way stop signs shall be placed at the following intersections: 
Maley Road and Teaver Road; 
Youngs Mill Road and Hillcrest Road; 
Youngs Mill Road and Waugh Road; 
Hammett Road and Mobley Bridge Road; 
Bass Cross Road and Mountville-Hogansville Road; 
Briley Road and Smokey Road; 
Trippe Street and College Street; 
Sturbridge Drive and Village Drive; 
Samples Road and West Smith Street; 
Plymouth Drive and Independence Court. 
(Code 1987, § 14-4; Ord. No. 2013-03 , § I, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 74-5. - Possession of open container of alcoholic beverages by passengers in motor vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Open container means as defined by the state pursuant to statute. It is, therefore, the intention of this section that, if the state definition of open container should change, the definition, for purposes of this section, shall also change. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while riding as a passenger in a vehicle in this county. For the purpose of this section, an open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the passenger if it is not in the possession of the operator of the vehicle or any other passenger in the vehicle or is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. 
(Code 1987, § 14-5) 
Sec. 74-6. - Authority to install and maintain traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings. 
(a)  The Troup County Engineer (the "county engineer') is authorized to and shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings when and as required under this chapter or any other law or ordinance. 
(b)  When the county engineer deems a special hazard to exist at any intersection, he may cause to be placed and maintained such additional or replacement traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings as deemed necessary to regulate traffic in consideration of and for the duration of such special hazard. 
(c)  The county engineer may cause to be placed and maintained such traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings as he or she deems necessary to control, guide or warn traffic in the interest of public health and safety. 
(d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to uniform regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall be, so far as practicable, uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic control devices so erected and consistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter or any other ordinance shall be official traffic control devices. 
( Ord. No. 2013-03 , § II, 11-6-2012) 
Sec. 74-7. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership who violates any traffic regulation provided in this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereinafter be amended, shall be amenable to the process of the Magistrate or State Court of Troup County, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided [in] section 1-19 of the Troup County Code for each violation in the discretion of the court. 
( Ord. No. 2013-03 , § II, 11-6-2012) 
Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 46; connecting utilities, § 46-35; occupational licenses, taxes and regulations, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; utility facility encroachments and road crossings, § 66-71 et seq.; solid waste disposal, ch. 70; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. C. 
State Law reference— Water Resources Center, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to provide stormwater, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM EXPANSION 

Sec. 78-31. - Definitions. 
The definitions of words, terms and phrases used in this article shall be as interpreted in O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-170—12-5-193 and chapter 391-3-5 "Rules for Safe Drinking Water" or the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appropriate authority means persons designated by the board of commissioners. 
Developer means any person, including any agent or construction contractor, who wishes to construct new water lines in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Document means this article, and the county water expansion map as prepared by Tribble & Richardson, Inc., and any subsequent amendments thereof. 
Drinking water means water supplied for domestic use or human consumption, meeting the maximum contaminant levels established by the state. 
EPD means the state environmental protection division, department of natural resources. 
Government owned public water system means the system which provides piped water to the public for human consumption. Such term includes any collection, treatment, storage, and distribution facility, located in the unincorporated areas of the county and owned by and authorized by governmental agencies. 
Groundwater means water obtained from wells and used as a source of water supply. 
Operation, maintenance and replacement costs means the costs of operations and maintenance, to keep the water supply treatment works and distribution system in good repair and at design specifications. This includes labor, supplies, utilities, chemicals, contractual services and general expenses, including installation and/or repair of equipment, accessories or appurtenances necessary during the service life of the system. 
Person means as defined in section 1-4 of this Code, specifically including any individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, county, municipality, state agency or other entity. 
Privately owned public water system means any system which provides piped water to the public for human consumption. Such term includes any collection, treatment, storage, and distribution facility serving 15 or more units being owned and operated by an entity other than an authorized governmental agency. 
Professional engineer means a person registered to practice professional engineering in the state in accordance with the provisions of the act governing the practice of professional engineering in the state. 
Service line means a water line extending from a water main to the property line of premises to be served. 
Source of water supply means the waters of the state from which raw water is taken into a public water system to be treated and distributed. 
Spring means a surface water where water naturally issues forth for the first time from rock or soil onto the land or into a body of water. 
Standard methods means the publication "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," as published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Supplier of water or supplier means any person who owns or operates a public water system. 
Surface waters means all rivers, streams, branches, creeks, ponds, tributary streams and drainage basins, natural lakes, and artificial reservoirs or impoundments. 
Water main means a common water line, owned and/or controlled by an authorized agency, owned by private parties, or by the public. 
Water system means water source, treatment works, distribution system and related appurtenances. 
Well means any excavation that is cored, bored, drilled, jetted, dug, or otherwise constructed for the purpose of locating, testing, or withdrawing groundwater. 
(Code 1987, § 7-60) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-4. 
Sec. 78-32. - Applicability of article provisions. 
This article shall apply to the development of all water systems constructed in unincorporated areas within the boundaries of the county. 
(Code 1987, § 7-61) 
Sec. 78-33. - Withholding of construction or building permit until compliance with article provisions effected. 
The county may withhold the issuance of any construction or building permit and/or occupancy or use permit in any subdivision, development or improvement to which this article applies, until there is compliance with the regulations and specifications contained in this article. 
(Code 1987, § 7-62) 
Sec. 78-34. - Water review board. 
(a)  Established. The water review board is hereby established. 
(b)  Composition; terms. The water review board shall consist of five members. Initially, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, a second member shall be appointed for a term of two years, a third member shall be appointed for a term of three years, a fourth member shall be appointed for a term of four years, and a fifth member shall be appointed for a term of five years. The term of each member shall end on June 30 of his expiration year. The five members shall elect one of their number to serve as chairman of the water review board. 
(c)  Authority; responsibilities. The water review board shall have the following authority and responsibilities: 
(1)  To review all applications for new and/or expansion of existing water lines and systems in the unincorporated areas of the county; 
(2)  To provide to the board of commissioners recommendations for the approval of or denial of applications pertaining to water systems in the unincorporated areas of the county; 
(3)  To offer any recommendations regarding matters concerning water systems, regulations, and/or finances; 
(4)  To work with the various cities located within the county in the improvement of water service in the unincorporated areas of the county; 
(5)  To have the authority to recommend that the board of commissioners make variances, when it is feasible or necessary, from this article; and 
(6)  To work with the various county offices and state agencies to ensure an adequate and improved water system for the citizens of the county. 
(d)  Reception of construction plans and specifications. The water review board shall be the authorized officer of the county to receive construction plans and specifications as contemplated and required by section 78-37. 
(Code 1987, § 7-63) 
Sec. 78-35. - Statement of intent and purpose of article. 
(a)  It is the intent of the board of commissioners to provide the citizens of the unincorporated county areas with a sufficient water supply for the purpose of their health, safety, welfare and convenience. It is also the intent of the board of commissioners that water expansion progress in an orderly fashion for the purpose of providing the most water at the least cost. Consideration for service will be based on the need for water and the feasibility of providing service. 
(b)  It is the purpose of this article to ensure that all public and private water systems, constructed in the unincorporated areas of the county, satisfy all existing and future county, state and federal regulations. Both public and privately owned water systems in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be constructed only after the plans have been approved as outlined in this article and a construction permit has been granted. Only systems approved and constructed in accordance with this article will be allowed to operate in the county. 
(Code 1987, § 7-64) 
Sec. 78-36. - General design standards. 
General design requirements for both government owned and privately owned public water systems are set out herein. The county intends to maintain a class 6 fire insurance rating, and will, therefore, require an average of 500 gpm at a residual pressure of 20 psi at all fire hydrants. Where named products and materials are offered in this article, substitute products and materials may be used, but only with the approval of the county manager or the manager's authorized designated representative. 
(1)  The developer shall be required to install an adequate water supply system to, and with the area to be developed including service lines to each lot as shown, of the development. 
(2)  Water mains proposed along existing frontage roads or proposed main thoroughfares shall be sized consistent with the county water expansion map, designated as the master map dated 1987. 
(3)  All water mains shall be six inches in size or larger, except for short (500 feet or less), dead-end or connecting street in residential areas. 
(4)  Dead-end lines shall be minimized by looping of all mains when possible. 
(5)  Minimum horizontal distances between water and sewer lines shall be ten feet. The distances between water and sewer lines, when crossed, shall be 18 inches with the water line above the sewer line. Minimum horizontal and vertical distances between water lines and other underground utilities or structures shall be two feet. 
(6)  Design for all creek crossings shall be approved by an authorized representative of the county. 
(7)  All crossings of paved streets shall be by the bore method, unless otherwise approved prior to installation. All pipe six inches and larger in diameter shall require casing to be carried with the bore. A county street may be open cut, or bored without casing, only after written permission has been received from the designer. All pipe placed in open cut trenches or uncased bores under paved streets shall be ductile iron. All pipe shall have a minimum cover of four feet from finish grade of street or road. 
(8)  All crossings of driveways shall be by means of uncased bore or open cut as may be determined by the county representative. Where open cut method is required, existing concrete and asphalt driveways shall be sawed and the debris removed prior to trenching. When pipe installation is complete, the driveway shall be backfilled, tamped, and damaged areas replaced with material consistent with the driveway as soon as possible. 
(9)  Tees, crosses, valves and other necessary fittings shall be provided at all major intersections and at all points required by the water review board to provide for future expansion. 
(10)  Magnetic detection tape shall be placed directly over all nonmetal pipe at a maximum depth of two feet from finished grade. 
(11)  Fire hydrants serving residential areas shall be located at intervals not to exceed 1,000 linear feet along the street right-of-way. 
(12)  Generally, fire hydrants serving commercial, industrial, or multifamily residential areas shall be located at intervals not to exceed 500 linear feet along the street right-of-way. 
(13)  All fire hydrants shall be located on the right-of-way and shall have a valve installed between the main and the fire hydrant. 
(14)  All fire service lines and connections with private fire hydrants, hand hose connections, sprinkler heads, and any supply other than domestic lines shall have installed an underwriter approved double detector check valve. 
(15)  Shutoff valves shall be installed along the main line at intervals not greater than 2,000 feet. 
(16)  Shutoff valves shall be installed on all branch lines as well as on each side of the branch as close to the intersection as possible. 
(17)  Flush valves are required on dead-end water mains that do not have a fire hydrant at the end. 
(18)  Each underground valve shall include a valve box placed vertically to allow operation of the valve. Valve boxes not located in roadways shall have a precast concrete collar placed level around the top for protection. 
(19)  Service lines shall be provided to all residential lot property lines. Lines shall be three-fourths-inch minimum diameter and furnished with meter box, curb and corporation stops. 
(20)  Water services for commercial, industrial, or multifamily residential shall be adequate to provide for the specific needs of the installation, including adequate fire protection. 
(21)  Location of service laterals shall be indicated precisely on drawings. Services shall extend from the water main to the property line of each lot. Each line shall have a meter stop placed on its end and stubbed into a meter box set by the developer. 
(Code 1987, § 7-65) 
Sec. 78-37. - Submittal and approval standards. 
(a)  It is the purpose of the standards of this section to establish the minimum requirements for the information to be submitted to and approved by the board of commissioners or their designee. 
(b)  The developer shall submit to the authorized officer of the county two sets of construction plans and specifications for approval. Approval of the plans and specifications may be given by the appropriate authority. Work shall not begin until all approvals regarding materials, methods of construction, environmental impact, railroad permits, department of transportation permits and other required approvals are received from the respective approving agencies. 
(c)  The information shall be submitted to the board of commissioners or their designee for approval at least 60 days prior to the start of construction. The information submitted with the plans shall include the following in addition to the construction plans and specifications: 
(1)  Number of customers to be served. 
(2)  Location and depth of water mains. 
(3)  Tap-on fees to be charged. 
(Code 1987, § 7-66) 
Sec. 78-38. - Paying cost of main relocation for road work. 
The owner of any water system located on road rights-of-way of the county shall pay all cost of relocation of any water mains and appurtenances within the public rights-of-way which is necessary for roadway improvements. 
(Code 1987, § 7-67) 
Sec. 78-39. - Construction standards. 
The standards to be used in the design, material, implementation, etc., of any water system located in the unincorporated area of the county shall meet or exceed the standards for design, material implementation, etc., then in effect for the City of LaGrange. All questions regarding such matters shall be submitted to the water review board whose determination shall be final. 
APPENDIX A - TROUP COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix A contains the text amendments and revisions to the Troup County Ordinance No. 2009-08 , § I, adopted June 2, 2009, which derives from the county's zoning ordinance, adopted by the county on January 1, 1986, as amended; Ord. No. 02-01, § I, adopted July 17, 2001; Ord. No. 2004-03, § II, adopted May 25, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-04, § I, adopted May 25, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-02, § I, adopted September 7, 2004; Res. No. 06-14, §§ 1—4, adopted April 18, 2006; Res. No. 06-15, §§ 1—4, adopted April 18, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-05, § I, adopted Feb. 20, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-06, §§ I, II, adopted Feb. 20, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-07, § I(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 20, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-08, §§ II—IV, adopted Feb. 20, 2007; and Ord. No. 2009-02, § I, adopted July 1, 2008. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Any zoning resolution or ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-14(10); zoning classification created for adult entertainment establishments, § 10-33; buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; historical preservation, ch. 42; manufactured homes, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; airport zoning, app. B; subdivisions, app. C. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - ADOPTION 
OF ORDINANCE 

1.1 - Name. 
This Ordinance of Troup County, Georgia shall be known as the Troup County Zoning Ordinance and shall regulate the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; the use of buildings, and land for business, industry, residence, public activities and other purposes; and for dividing the unincorporated area into districts for such purposes and establishing boundaries; providing for a board of zoning appeals/planning commission, defining its power and duties; the method of administration, amendment and enforcement; prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions; and repealing conflicting resolutions. 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE 

2.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish minimum standards for the use of land and improvements in Troup County, Georgia. The zoning regulations and districts herein established are designed to: 
• Lessen congestion in the roads and streets; 
• Provide safety from fire, panic, and other dangers to the public well-being; 
• Promote health and general welfare; 
• Provide adequate water, light and air; 
• Avoid undue concentration of the population while still encouraging smart growth practices; 
• Provide for safe and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public services and requirements for adequate levels of service; 
• Conserve and promote economic prosperity; 
• Encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures; 
• Promote quality of life for all citizens; and 
• Provide consistency with the approved and adopted Comprehensive Plan for Troup County. 
2.2 - Policy Guide. 
The requirements of these regulations are minimum permissible standards; and it is expected that developers and the decision making authorities for developments will normally strive for quality developments that will exceed these minimum requirements. 
The comprehensive plan adopted by resolution of the Troup County Board of Commissioners is established as a policy guide for the county. The unincorporated areas of the county are divided into land use categories consistent with the character area map and future development map of the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the county, does not amend the official zoning maps, and does not by itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. The Troup County Planning Commission shall examine the character area map and future development map and approved zoning changes on an annual basis to assure consistency between the two maps and may recommend changes as needed to maintain consistency. 
2.3 - Comprehensive Plan Review. 
The comprehensive plan shall be reviewed on an annual basis and updated if conditions have changed to such a degree that the existing comprehensive plan and zoning are no longer consistent with each other. The update shall be used to identify current uses of land, emerging growth patterns and any significant change in land use policy. The update shall also be used as policy guide in the county's consideration of proposed amendments to the zoning map or text of the zoning ordinance. All amendments to the Troup County Comprehensive Plan shall be in accordance with the minimum planning standards and procedures of the Georgia Planning Act. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

3.1 - Terms. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular, the word may is permissive and the word shall is mandatory. Words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in other sections of the ordinance, shall be given the meaning set forth in that section. All other words and phrases shall be given the meaning as defined in section 1-4, chapter 1, the Code of Troup County, Georgia. 
Abutting. Having a common border with another lot or parcel. Rights-of-way or easements do not negate common borders. 
Accessory Building or Structure. A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main building on a single lot or parcel. Accessory buildings or structures include but are not limited to the following: greenhouses, playhouses, pools, pool houses, gazebos, barns, equipment sheds, storage buildings, workshops, detached garage, carport, dock house, and pole barns. See also "Storage Building." 
Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land located upon the same lot or parcel. 
Alteration of Building. Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls or partitions, beams, columns, girders, etc.). Alteration may also include any addition to or reduction of a building or moving a building from one location to another. 
Apartment. See "Dwelling, Multi-Family." 
Appraiser. A data collector or certified mass appraisal officer in the Troup County Property Appraisal Office. 
Appraiser Parcel Number (APN). Also called assessor parcel number, an identification number assigned to a parcel by the Troup County Property Appraisal Office. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land located inside a floodplain subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Assembly Site or Hall. A site, building or portion of a building in which facilities are provided for civic, educational, political, religious, or social purposes. 
Barn. An agricultural building used for storage and as a covered workplace. It may sometimes be used to house animals or to store farming vehicles and equipment. Barns are most commonly found on a farm or former farm. See also "Accessory Structure" or "Storage Building." 
Basement. The area below grade level of a building and having not more than one-half of its height above grade. 
Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same parcel or lot as the light source; or any light with one or more beams that rotate or move in any direction. 
Bed and Breakfast Home. A residential structure occupied as principal residence by the owner(s) of record wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast only is provided to guests for compensation. 
Bed and Breakfast Inn. A bed and breakfast inn is a building or dwelling unit, not necessarily owner-occupied, that offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for four or more guest rooms for compensation provided. 
Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screening, noise reduction or fulfill other such uses. 
Boarders. A person who occupies a bedroom or room as a lodging unit within a dwelling unit, boarding house, rooming house, or lodging house on a long-term residential basis for a consideration and where meals may be provided by the owner or operator. 
Boarding House. A residential structure where, for compensation, and by prearrangement, meals and/or lodging are provided for three or more guests, not to exceed ten guests. 
Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission. This is a legally established body by Troup County that hears variances, and reviews subdivisions and the Troup County Comprehensive Plan. This body also makes recommendations to the Troup County Board of Commissioners on zoning changes and special uses. 
Buffer Area or Buffer Strip. (1) Screen. A landscaped open area unoccupied by structures and facilities except as permitted by this ordinance and/or in some instances specified, a screen of shrubs, trees or similar plants at least eight feet in height and dense enough to establish interrupted vision from one side to the other as may be required by this ordinance. Both are established to separate different and possibly incompatible land uses. (2) A buffer area or strip in a river or stream corridor or floodplains is any area along the course of any river, stream or floodplain maintained in a vegetative, undisturbed and natural condition. 
Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade to the highest point of a building. 
Building Line. The line that represents distance a building or structure shall be set back from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or street centerline according to the terms set forth in this ordinance. 
Building, Principal. A building in which the primary use on any particular lot is conducted. Example: In a residential district a dwelling unit is considered to be the principal building on that lot of land. 
Cabin. A small one-story structure designed for temporary, intermittent use or lodging for vacation, recreation or as a base for hunting or fishing. 
Certification or Certified. A determination made by a certifying agent that a profession, service, production or handling operation is in compliance with the governing law or act and the regulations in this part. 
Child Care. A service offered at any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group wherein are received for pay for group care for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, under 18 years of age. This term shall not include a private school which provides kindergarten through grade 12 education, meets the requirements of Georgia Code section 20-2-690, and is accredited by one or more of the entities listed in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (6) of Code section 20-3-519 and which provides care before, after, or both before and after the customary school day to its students as an auxiliary service to such students during the regular school year only. 
Child Care, Day-Care Center. A place operated and received for pay for group care for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age. 
Child Care, Family Day-Care Home. A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, at least three but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such person and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. All definitions reflect current State of Georgia definitions. 
Child Care, Group Day-Care Home. Any place operated by any person or group wherein are received for pay not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for care and supervision for less than 24 hours per day. 
Church. A building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship. 
Clinic. A facility where medical, mental health and dental patients, not normally lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or a group of licensed professionals. 
Club or Lodge. Building(s) and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association or other legally established groups of persons for social, fraternal, civic, cultural, literary, political, educational or recreational purposes operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. This includes not for profit and for profit organizations. 
Commercial Recreational Vehicle Park. Any lot or parcel of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by the general public as temporary living quarters. 
Community Water System. Any system approved by the Troup County Health Department and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources that provides a central water supply to a number of housing units. 
Comprehensive Plan. A long range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region that typically includes inventory and analytic sections leading to recommendations for the community's future economic development, housing, recreation, transportation, community facilities and land use, all related to the community's goals and objectives for these elements. 
Concept Plan. A generalized plan indicating the boundaries of a tract or tracts of land and identifying proposed land use, use intensity, and thoroughfare alignment. 
Conditional Zoning. The imposition of conditions in the granting of a zoning change application that are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this zoning ordinance and that (1) relate to the mitigation of negative impacts of the zoning change on surrounding property, and (2) relate to the promotion of the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
Condominium. A multiple attached or detached unit or development containing individually owned units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities. 
Consumer Fireworks. Any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations. The definition also includes Roman candles. 
Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Facility. A permanent or temporary building or structure that is used primarily for the retail display and sale of consumer fireworks to the public (NFPA 1124, 3.3.29.1); provided, however, that such term shall not include a tent, canopy or membrane structure. 
Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Stand. A temporary or permanent building or structure that has a floor area not greater than 800 square feet, other than tents, canopies, or membranes structures, that is used primarily for the retail display and sale of consumer fireworks to the public. 
Convenience Store with Self-Service Fuel Sales. Any retail establishment offering for sale automotive and heating fuels, pre-packaged or on site produced food products, beverages, household items and any other goods commonly associated with convenience stores. See also "Service Station." 
Day Nursery. See "Child Care" and "Personal Care" definitions. 
Deck. A roofless accessory attached or detached platform without exterior walls generally constructed of wood and adjoins a principal building. Rails or safety features shall not be deemed to be exterior walls. 
Deed Restrictions/Private Covenants. Private stipulations running with the land, usually pertaining to residential or commercial subdivisions that govern such matters as lot size, minimum floor area, uses permitted and architectural design. Generally, these are stricter than the minimum standards set forth in zoning district in which the subdivision is located. Troup County assumes and shall have no responsibility to enforce deed restrictions/private covenants. 
Density. This term refers to the intensity of land use for a total project. When referring to residential area, density is defined as the number of housing units per acre as allowed by the district in which the property is located or as authorized in development standards of this ordinance. Unless otherwise stated, density figures are to be in terms of net acres, or the land devoted to residential use exclusive of streets or unbuildable acreage that includes but is not limited to wetlands, floodplains or steep slopes. 
Density Bonus. This term refers to an increase in the total number of lots in a residential development. For the purposes of this ordinance the increase in lots is expressed in a percentage. 
Development of Regional Impact (DRI). Private and some public developments that, because of location, scale use type or public service demand or any combination of the same, could affect the growth, development or quality of life of the region. This is a state regulated process and no zoning changes or issuance of permits may proceed until this process is completed per state guidelines. 
Developer. Any person, corporation or other legal entity that acts in his/her/its own behalf or as an agent of any owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation of construction activity on a parcel of land. 
Dock. A structure built or floating upon water and used as a landing for boats or other marine craft, fishing, swimming and other recreational uses. 
Dormitory. A building intended or used principally for sleeping accommodations where such building is related to educational, facilities, public or private, and religious facilities. 
Drainage. A general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or pumping. 
Drive-in. A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the consumer on the outside of the principal building by means of driving to a window and through a designated route. 
Duplex. A residential structure designed for two separate occupants with each occupant in a separate dwelling unit where the building is designed, constructed, altered or used as two dwelling units. The building is joined by a common wall and common floor. 
Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used for permanent residential purposes, not including recreation vehicles, hotels, motels, or mobile homes. 
Dwelling, Single-Family. Detached dwelling, containing not more than one dwelling unit that is designed as a single-family household. 
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building designed, constructed, altered or used for three or more adjoining dwelling units, where the occupants of the each individual unit are living independently of each other, with each dwelling unit having a party wall and/or party floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the same building. Multi-family dwelling may also be townhomes provided they meet all International Code requirements. 
Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit or portion thereof, provides complete living quarters including kitchen, bathroom and living space with all plumbing indoors for one or more persons living in a single housekeeping environment. 
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. This term shall refer to a plan for soil erosion and sedimentation control that result from land disturbing activity. 
Existing Grade. This term shall refer to the vertical location of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Fabricating. The process of assembling a finished product using standardized parts. 
Family. A single family may consist of not more than one of the following: 
(1)  Any number of people related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly authorized custodial relationship occupying a single dwelling unit, provided no such family shall contain more than two non-related persons; or 
(2)  A group of not more than three non-related persons occupying a single dwelling unit. 
For the purpose of this definition, a person shall be considered to reside in a dwelling unit if he or she stays overnight in a dwelling unit for more than 30 days within a 90-day period; or receives mail at the dwelling unit; or lists the dwelling unit as his or her home address on any documents. The term "family" does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, institutional group or like organization. 
Family Personal Care Home. See "Personal Care Home, Family." 
Fence. (1) A freestanding structure designed to restrict or prevent movement across or to establish a boundary. (2) A barrier constructed of any uniform, rigid material or similar materials including chain link (black, green or aluminum) or normal, customary agricultural material for containing farm animals and delineating property lines. (3) A solid barrier for the purpose of providing a screen from public view stored materials, business operations. This solid barrier shall not be constructed with any material that is considered cloth. Plastic material that is flexible is also not considered a solid barrier material. 
Floor Area. This term shall refer to the total number of heated square feet in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the interior faces of walls of the various floors of a structure. In addition, for commercial uses, the gross leasable measurement of square feet for any business or industry is based on interior measurements. 
Floor Area Ratio. The floor area ratio (FAR) is a ratio of the floor area of a building divided by the lot size. It is a measure of the bulkiness of the building. 
Frontage. That dimension of a lot measured along the front public street line. If said front street line is curved, then the dimension along the chord of the arc. 
Garage, Mechanical/Repair. Building(s) and premises designed or used for the purpose of providing services of maintenance, minor repair, washing, adjusting, equipping and/or major commercial repair of motor vehicles provided the body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and provided further that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible from any public street or adjoining property. A mechanical garage that provides for the storage of vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts for sale, repair or recycling shall be classified as a junk yard. 
Garage, Private. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for private storage of permitted motor vehicles. 
Greenspace. Open and/or undeveloped space designated for parks, passive recreation, trails, natural and planted gardens, and habitat or geological restoration and preservation. 
Greywater. Wastewater obtained from domestic sinks and tubs, but excluding plumbing wastes streams containing bio-wastes such as toilets. 
Gross Floor Area (GFA). The sum (in square feet) of the area of each floor level in the building, including cellars, basements, mezzanines, penthouses, corridors, lobbies, stores and offices, that are within the principal outside faces of exterior walls, not including architectural setbacks or projections. Included are all areas that have floor surfaces with clear standing head room (six feet, six inches minimum) regardless of their use. If a ground-level area, or part thereof, within the principal outside faces of the exterior walls is not enclosed, this GFA is considered part of the overall square footage of the building. However, unroofed areas and unenclosed roofed-over spaces, except those contained within the principle outside faces of exterior walls, should be excluded from the area calculations. For purposes of trip generation and parking generation calculations, the GFA of any parking garages within the building should not be included within the GFA of the entire building. The unit of measurement for office buildings is currently GFA; however, it may be desirable to also obtain data related to gross rentable area and net rentable area. With the exception of buildings containing enclosed malls or atriums, gross floor area is equal to gross leasable area and gross rentable area. 
Group Personal Care Home. See "Personal Care Home, Group." 
Guest house. Accessory living quarters situated within a detached site-built structure located on the same premises with the principal residence. Guest houses shall be limited to one such structure per lot and will not include mobile or modular structures. The size of the guest house shall be limited in that the total area of all structures (existing and proposed) shall not be more than 20 percent of the total lot area, if those structures include a guest house. A detached, subordinate building, located within the rear yard, except on parcels abutting US Corps of Engineers property where setbacks do not apply on that portion of the parcel, designed for lodging of temporary, non-paying guests. 
Halfway House. A licensed home for two or more inmates on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. Such placement is pursuant to the authority of the Georgia State Department of Corrections. 
Handicapped. Shall mean as such term is defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3602(h), and shall mean: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; or 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include the current, illegal use or addiction to a controlled substance of the current addiction to alcohol. 
Hardship Variance. A condition that shall be considered to exist only when one of the following applies to a particular lot or parcel of land. (1) The owner/applicant cannot comply with one provision of the ordinance without violation of another provision of this ordinance; (2) The topography of the land or shape of the lot or parcel precludes compliance with requirements of this ordinance. In order to be a hardship, the condition alleged to be a hardship must not have been created by the owner/applicant's own acts and must consist of more than an alleged economic burden in the use and/or development of a particular lot or parcel of land. See also "Special Exception Variance." 
Heavy Manufacturing. Modern manufacturing includes all intermediate processes required for the production and integration of a product's components. Some industries, such as semiconductor and steel manufacturers, use the term fabrication instead. As used herein, heavy manufacturing is the use of tools and labor to make things for use or sale. The term may refer to a vast range of human activity, from handicraft to high tech, but is most commonly applied to industrial production, in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large scale. 
Home Occupation. An occupation or profession for gain or support conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on solely by a resident or residents of the household, unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance, and that is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
Homesite. That portion of any lot or parcel of land covered by any structure, including but not limited to septic systems and reserve area, wells, buildings, pools, driveways and parking. 
Hospital. Any institutions receiving in-patients or public institutions that receives out patients that are authorized under Georgia State Law to render medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. The term hospital shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of the mentally disturbed, drug addicts, epileptic seizures, chronically ill and physically handicapped, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine, psychology, psychiatry, or dentistry. 
Hotel. A building where overnight accommodations are provided for ten or more individuals of the general public for compensation and where provisions for cooking are made in a central kitchen and not in individual rooms or suites and where ingress and egress to all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office. 
Houseboat. A floating structure which extends beyond the ordinary high-water mark of a navigable water way and is retained in place either by rope or cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway that is used or intended for human habitation either temporarily or permanently. 
Household. An individual or family living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of food within the dwelling unit. 
Improvement. Any manmade, immovable item which becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to the land. 
Industrial Park. A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a development plan in a manner that provides a park-like setting for industrial uses. 
Industrialized Building. A term used in Georgia, "industrialized building" replaces the now obsolete term "Factory-Built Housing" and describes certain manufactured housing regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Georgia law defines industrialized buildings as "any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof." Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Building Act," Georgia Law 1982 (O.C.G.A., Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). An industrialized building shall meet all requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. The term shall also include modular home and systems built home or unit.. 
Institution. Premises occupied by a non-profit corporation or non-profit establishment for public use. 
Intermediate Regional Flood (IRF). A 100-year frequency flood, as defined on the flood hazard maps, and that has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris including, but not limited to, junk vehicles, junk vehicle parts, junk boats, discarded appliances, and other mechanicals, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, recycled, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed or otherwise used. 
Junk Vehicles. Any vehicle that cannot be moved under its own power and that (1) does not have a current license plate, or (2) is not covered by a policy of liability insurance as required under Georgia Law for the operation of such vehicle upon the public roads, streets and rights-of-way. 
Junk Yard, Junk Business, Salvage Operation. An uncovered lot or part thereof, whether enclosed or not, used for: (1) the collection, storage, keeping, sale, abandonment, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap material, used lumber, salvage house wrecking and structural steel material and equipment; (2) the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, not bearing current tags/decals, mobile or manufactured homes, boats or other machinery, appliances or parts thereof. 
Kennel. Facility for the overnight boarding of domestic animals, usually limited to dogs and cats. Breeding and training of dogs and cats and the sale to the public of puppies and kittens are classified as a kennel activity. 
Land Use Plan. This term shall refer to a professionally prepared and formally adopted document and map depicting the desirable existing and future location of residential, commercial, public and industrial land uses and thoroughfares. Also, narrative text describing present and future land use needs of the local government for which it is prepared. 
Light Manufacturing Structure or Use. An establishment or use for production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products that does not produce or emit offensive or environmentally unsafe noise, odor, fumes, or smoke and does not require flammable materials for resale or storage. Examples of light manufacturing include, but are not limited to, warehouses, distribution centers, manufacturing and assembly of clothing, electric appliances, etc. 
Livestock. Any cattle, sheep, goat, swine, poultry, or equine animals used for food or in the production of food, fiber, feed, or other agricultural-based consumer products; wild or domesticated game; or other non-plant life, except such term shall not include aquatic animals or bees for the production of food, fiber, feed, or other agricultural-based consumer products, or domesticated animals traditionally kept as pets. 
Live/work unit or live/work space. A building or spaces within a building used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work. 
Lot. A parcel or portion of land of varying size and shape, described as a single unit of property and held in single ownership by one person or in common ownership by more than one person or corporation. 
Lot, Corner. This term shall refer to a lot having frontage on two or more public roads or streets. The front of a corner lot shall be the lot line where the principal building shall orient the primary entrance. 
Lot, Line. (1) Front lot line: the forward most line of any lot separating it from the frontage street right-of-way and across which the primary access to the property passes. The front lot line shall be used to identify the street address of the property; (2) The rear lot line is generally opposite the front lot line and that intersects with the side lot lines. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the side lot lines come to a point then the rear lot line shall be considered to be the point parallel to the same point in the front lot line; (3) Side lot line: Any property line not opposite the front lot line. 
Lot of Record. An area designated as a separate and distinct lot or parcel of land that have all necessary approvals from the Troup County Board of Commissioners and has been lawfully recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia by subdivision plat or deed. See also "Parcel." 
Manufactured Home or Office. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. Such term shall also include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufacturing Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. Manufactured homes shall meet all requirements of article 10, section 10.2 of this ordinance. 
Manufactured Home Community (a.k.a. Mobile Home Park). This term shall refer to a lot or parcel of land where three or more manufactured homes are parked for residential purposes and where space is delineated and offered for rent to place a manufactured home. Lots shall be served by appropriate and adequate community services, recreational facilities, utilities, streets and sidewalks provided by the owner of the park property and shall be in compliance with the standards as set forth in these regulations. 
Manufactured Portable Office. See "Manufactured Home or Office." 
Mini-Warehouses or Storage. A building or portion thereof used for storage, mainly of excess personal property of an individual or family and also for small amounts of goods or merchandise for businesses. Mini-warehouses or storage units shall not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use other than the storage of articles as defined herein. 
Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and built prior to June 15, 1976. 
Modular (Systems Built) Home or Building. Factory fabricated dwelling which is constructed in one or more sections and is manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the rules of the commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Each modular home shall meet the standards of an industrialized building and shall bear the seal of approval as issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Modular homes are transported to the site and installed onto a permanent foundation, never having an axel or a tongue (hitch). 
Motel. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms, offered to the general public for compensation, having separate entrances for each room or suite of rooms, and for which automobile parking is provided for each room or suite of rooms. 
Nonconforming Use. Any building, structure or land use that lawfully exists at the time of the adoption of these regulations or subsequent amendment thereto that does not conform, after passage of these regulations and/or amendments to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nursing Home. A facility of aged or ill persons in which persons not of the immediate family of the operator are provided with food, shelter, and care for compensation but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
Official Zoning Map. A map adopted by the governing body of a political jurisdiction that illustrates the various zoning districts of the jurisdiction. 
Open Space. The required portion of a lot at ground level that is available for use by all residents of the property or members of an established and working homeowners association, and where no accessory uses are constructed. This space shall not be used to construct driveways or off-street parking. The space shall be used for passive recreation, nature trails, or remain in its natural state. 
Overall Density. This term refers to no increase in the number of lots allowed in a development, but allows for smaller than lots to allow for open space. 
Owner. This term shall refer to the record title holder of fee simple interest in property, or a vendee under contract or purchase agreement. The owner if a sole proprietorship; the proprietor, if a partnership; all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors or persons holding at least ten percent of the outstanding shares; and any agent who has been legally authorized in writing to act for the owner. 
Parcel. A piece of real property described in legal terms, uniquely numbered for appraiser's uses. See also "Lot of Record." 
Person. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership or cooperation, or any other legal entity capable by law of ownership. 
Personal Care Home. A profit or non-profit facility, home or structure this term refers to a residence providing the protective care of residents who do not require chronic or convalescent medical or nursing care. Personal care involves responsibility for safety of the resident while inside the building and may include daily awareness by the management of the resident's functioning and whereabouts, making and reminding a resident of appointments, the ability and readiness for intervention in the event of a resident experiencing a crisis, supervision in the areas of nutrition and medication, and the actual provision of transient medical care. Personal care homes are distinguished from nursing homes in that personal care homes do not have a comprehensive or full-time medical staff. Personal care homes shall not provide services to any person who would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term "personal care home" shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing facilitates services as an alternative to incarceration. 
See also, "Group and Personal Care Home," "Congregate and Personal Care Home, Family." 
Personal Care Home, Congregate. This term refers to a personal care home for adults in a single-family residence or other type building, non-institutional in character and appearance, offering care to 16 or more persons. 
Personal Care Home, Group. A personal care home for adults in a single-family residence or other type building, non-institutional in character and appearance, offering care to seven through 15 persons. 
Personal Care Home, Family. This term refers to a personal care home for adults in a single-family residence non-institutional in character and appearance offering care to no more than six persons. 
Plat, Final. A complete and exact drawing of a parcel of land or a subdivision located in whole or in part in Troup County that is prepared to record in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia, and that meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended, and all other laws governing the preparation and recording of maps or plats of real property of the State of Georgia. 
Plat, Preliminary. See "Subdivision Regulations." 
Playground. An area developed for active play and recreation that may contain courts such as for tennis or basketball, etc. or fields, such as for baseball, soccer, etc. 
Porch. A roofed open area, that may be screened usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from a building or structure. 
Portable Building. A structure often purchased pre-built or as a kit in pre-fabricated sections. It is not designed to be served by heat, electricity or plumbing and does not required placement on a permanent foundation. These structures are accessory structures for storage only and are not allowed as principal buildings. 
Portable Concession Vending Structure. A portable non-permanent structure for the distribution, merchandising or selling from a non-permanent location. 
Portable Office Trailer. See "Manufactured Home or Office." 
Principal Use. This term refers to the primary use and main purpose of a lot or structure. 
Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants. Regulations and/or requirements imposed on land by the private landowners in a subdivision or other type of housing, commercial or industrial development. These regulations/requirements are binding on present and subsequent owners of the property. The regulations/requirements are enforced by through a homeowners association, private persons or other private entities and not by the County or other public agency. 
Professional Office. Structure wherein services are performed involving predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations. 
Property Line. Property line describes the legal boundary of a parcel of land. 
Property Record Card (PRC). A record maintained by the Troup County Property Appraisal Office (formerly tax assessors office) which contains a wealth of information regarding a specific parcel of land such as unique identifying numbers, ownership, acreage, improvements, conservation covenants if any, square feet of improvements, and more. 
Racetrack. (1) A track designed for the racing of vehicles, motorcycles, bikes, ATV's, go carts, horses, dogs or other animals and may include drag strips or demolition tracks; (2) A facility consisting of a paved or unpaved roadway used primarily for the sport of automobile racing. A racetrack may include seating, concession areas, bathrooms, parking facilities, vendor areas, and sponsor areas but does not include residences or offices other than the office for the racetrack.. 
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle or portable structure transportable on a mobile chassis, designed to be a temporary dwelling not hooked to any permanent utilities such as electricity, water or sewerage. It includes travel trailers, motorized dwellings, pop-up campers, pickup campers, coaches and other similar recreational equipment. 
Remodeling. This term refers to constructing an addition or altering the design or layout of a building or making substantial repairs or alterations so that a change or modification of the entrance facilities, toilet facilities or vertical access facilities is achieved. 
Replacement Manufactured Home Unit. A manufactured home or office unit that is substituted for another manufactured home unit that is existing on the lot. 
Resident. An individual whose principal place of living and sleeping is in a particular location is a resident of that location. 
Restaurant. An establishment however designed where food is sold or distributed for consumption on and/or off the premises. However, a snack bar, or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground or park operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant. 
Right-of-Way. A.k.a. ROW. A strip of land that is granted, through a deed, statute or platting process or other mechanism, for transportation purposes, such as for a rail line or highway or pedestrian or biking trail. A right-of-way is reserved along the transport infrastructure for the purposes of maintenance or expansion of existing services with the right-of-way. Utilities and communications lines typically are located on the ROW. 
ROW. An acronym for right-of-way, or plural rights-of-way. 
Salvage Operation/Salvage Yard. For the purposes of this ordinance, a salvage operation or yard is a business where the principal activity is buying, selling, exchanging, storing, sorting, packing or dismantling of waste, used or secondhand material or junk 
School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, including any playgrounds, stadiums or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include, but not limited to, public and private schools used for primary, secondary or post secondary education. 
Secondary Detached Residence. A subordinate building on the same lot with the main building that is used designed or intended for dwelling purposes. Examples of secondary detached residences include guest houses and employee quarters. Dwellings on the premises that are rented, leased or occupied by anyone other than the occupant of the main building or his guests or employees are not permitted. 
Service Station. Any building or land used primarily for the dispensing, servicing or offering for retail sale of any automobile fuels, oils, grease, batteries, tires, or general automotive servicing as distinguished from automobile repairs, but where no part of the premises is used for the storage or dismantling of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
Setback Line. The minimum required distance from the street right-of-way line or any other property line that the principal building or other structure shall observe. See "Building Line" as defined in this section. 
Setback Line, Front. A required open space on a lot or parcel of land where no building or structure is located except as permitted by the ordinance. The front setback area (or front yard) shall be the shortest distance measured by a perpendicular line from the lot or building line or centerline of the fronting street, highway or road to the nearest load bearing wall of the principal building or structures on a lot. Load bearing walls do not include cornices, steps, open terraces, or open entrance hoods. These appurtenances should not project more than six feet from the closest load-bearing wall. 
Setback Line, Rear. The interior boundary of the rear setback area (or rear yard) being a line equidistant from the rear property line to and extending from the side property lines at the minimum depth specified by the appropriate zoning district requirements. 
Setback Line, Side. The interior boundary of a side setback area (or side yard), being a line equidistant from the side property line(s) and extending from the front setback line to the rear setback line at a minimum depth as specified by the appropriate zoning district requirements. 
Sewage, Individual Disposal System. A septic tank and seepage tile sewerage disposal system or any other sewerage treatment device for one lot as authorized by this ordinance and approved by the Troup County Health Department. 
Sewerage System, Central. This term shall refer to a community sewerage system including widespread collection and treatment facilities serving more than one lot in a subdivision. These types of systems are usually owned and operated by a local government. 
Sewerage System, Decentralized. A community sewerage system with a localized collection and treatment system serving more than one lot in a subdivision owned and operated by a local governmental or public authority. This type of system is intended to provide sewer facilities for a localized area and will connect to a central system when lines are available to the area. 
Sexually Oriented Business. Sexually oriented business means any business enterprise that: 
(1)  Has as a regular and substantial business purpose the sale, display or rental of goods that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities," or that emphasize matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," or 
(2)  Has one of the following as a regular and substantial business purposes: the providing of entertainment where the emphasis is on performances, live or otherwise, that depict, portray, exhibit or display "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities;" or the providing of services that provide "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" ancillary to other pursuits, or allow participation in "specified sexual activities" ancillary to other pursuits. 
Shopping Center. Two or more commercial establishments planned and constructed with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on site. 
Site Built Home. A dwelling constructed on a lot or parcel from materials delivered to the site and that is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the International Building Code as adopted by Troup County. Also called "stick-built home." 
Site Plan. A drawing, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel or parcels of land and structures on the land as required by the regulations. Includes lot lines, streets, buildings, reserved undisturbed, open or recreational space, existing and proposed buildings, natural and manmade landscape features, and possibly, depending on specific uses, utility lines, topographic lines, sidewalks or trails. 
Special Exception Variance. A variance that is not based on hardship but rather on the existence of conditions that are not viable for the applicant. 
Special Use. A use for a particular lot or parcel that may be allowed by the Troup County Commissioners when specifically listed in and provided for by this ordinance. Special uses are uses that sometimes pose adverse impacts to the surrounding neighborhood or change significantly the use of the parcel, but are considered appropriate uses for the zoning district under certain conditions and circumstances. These uses are subject to such restrictive requirements as may be deemed necessary by the Troup County Commissioners to insure the use is not detrimental to the surrounding property owners or neighborhood. 
Storage Building. A subordinate building on the same lot with the main building that is used designed or intended for the storage of inert materials and is not used for residential purposes. See also accessory building or structure. 
Store (Consumer Fireworks). A building classified as a mercantile occupancy that contains a variety of merchandise, that is not used primarily for the retail sale of consumer fireworks (NFPA 1124, 3.3.74), and is treated as a Retail store offering common merchandise in the permitted use chart, Table 7.4. Seventy-five (75%) percent or more of the merchandise contained therein must be unrelated to consumer fireworks or fireworks. 
Street. A public right-of-way whether designed as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane or other way that is dedicated or devoted to public vehicular use and that is a means of getting from one place to another and may afford a principal access to abutting property. Troup County roads are defined in the functional classification map of Troup County and located in the offices of planning and zoning. 
1.  Arterial —These streets are intended to provide higher travel speeds between or within communities or to and from collectors and expressways. 
2.  Collectors —Are major and minor roads that connect local roads and streets with arterials. Collectors provide less mobility than arterials at lower speeds and for shorter distances. They balance mobility with land access. 
3.  Local Roads —Local roads provide limited mobility and are the primary access to residential areas, businesses, farms, and other local areas. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires a fixed location on or in the ground or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
Subdivision. A subdivision shall be defined as all divisions of a tract or parcel of land under common ownership into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development. 
Subdivision, Major. A major subdivision shall be defined as all divisions of a tract or parcel of land under common ownership into more than four lots. 
Subdivision, Minor. A subdivision shall be defined as all divisions of a tract or parcel of land under common ownership into more than two and less than five lots where no new streets are constructed. 
Suspended Sign. This term shall refer to a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by that surface. 
Temporary Emergency Structure. A residence which may be a manufactured unit that is (i) located on the same lot made an uninhabitable by fire, flood or other natural disaster and occupied by persons displaced by such disaster (ii) located on the same lot as a residence that is under construction or undergoing substantial repairs or reconstruction and occupied by the persons intending to live in such permanent residence when complete (iii) located on a non-residential construction site and occupied by persons having construction or security responsibilities over such construction site. 
Through Lot. This term shall refer to a lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two public streets or highways. 
Towing/Wrecker Service Business. Includes any licensed person or entity that engages in or who owns or operates a business which engages, in whole or in part, in the towing or removal of vehicles for compensation. 
Trailer, Travel. This term shall refer to a vehicular portable, temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses and is considered a recreational vehicle. 
Travel Trailer Park. See definition of a "Recreational vehicle park." 
Undisturbed Natural Buffer. A tract of land in its natural state as required around state waters where no vegetation can be removed or planted without approval. No herbicides, pesticides, or other chemicals, either natural or manmade may be used in this buffer. 
Urban Area Boundary; (a.k.a. Urban Growth Boundary). A line drawn between urban and rural lands defining the limits to which the urban area is expected to grow. See "Troup County Functional Classification Map." 
Use, Permitted. Those uses specifically listed in this ordinance as "uses permitted inherently" not to include uses herein defined as nonconforming. 
Use, Principal. The predominate purpose for which a lot or the main building or structure on a lot is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained. 
Use, Special or Conditional. Those uses that are permitted in a particular zoning district only under certain specified conditions. 
Variance. See "Hardship" or "Special Exception Variance." 
Vending. Any activity by any person involving the display, sale, offering for sale, offering to give a way or giving away anything of value including any food, beverage, goods, wares, merchandise, or services. 
Water System, Individual. A potable water supply (i.e., a well) serving a single building, residence or other facility designed and used for drinking. 
Water System, Public. A potable water system with distribution lines other than individual water systems owned and operated by Troup County or any municipality or public authority within the political boundaries of Troup County. 
Wildlife Habitat. Living and nonliving components which interact forming a complete environmental unit. 
Yard Sale. A one-day or two-day sale of common household items from a residential lot or lots. This definition includes garage sale, carport sale or rummage sale. 
Yard. A space on the same lot with a principal building or structure, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures, except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. Yards shall be delineated by the setback or setback lines of front, side, and rear yard. 
Zoning. This term refers to the delineation of districts and establishment of regulations regarding the use, placement, spacing, bulk and height of land and buildings in unincorporated Troup County. 
Zoning Map. The legally adopted "Official Troup County Zoning Map" that is made part of this document by reference. 
( Ord. No. 2010-11 , § IA., 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 2013-06 , § I, 1-15-2013; Ord. No. 2013-08 , § I, 5-21-2013; Ord. No. 2013-09 , §§ I, II, 6-4-2013; Ord. No. 2015-02 , § I, 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 2015-04 , § I, 6-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § I, 3-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-01 , § I, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-14 , § I, 2-7-2017; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § I, 10-3-2017; Ord. No. 2018-13 , §§ I—III, 2-6-2018) 
State Law reference— Regulation of Fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Standards reference —National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition, 3.3.18, 3.3.29.1, 3.3.74. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

4.1. - Use of Land. 
No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
4.2. - Use of Buildings. 
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or structure is located. 
4.2-1. Location of Buildings. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall be located on lots as herein defined except as approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission in the form of a variance. 
4.2-2. Height of Buildings. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which it is located except for the following: 
Public and semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions and schools, may be erected to a height not to exceed 100 feet and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, provided the required side yard and rear yards shall be increased by at least three feet for each one-foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
4.2-3. Dimensional Regulations. No building or use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the minimum space requirements (i.e., the lot area, floor area, building height, etc.) for the district in which such building is located. 
4.3. - Interpretation and Application. 
In interpreting and applying this ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance. Except as hereinafter provided, this ordinance shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. Troup County is not responsible for enforcing any private covenants, easements or other agreements between property owners. 
4.4. - Zoning Affects all Land and Buildings. 
No buildings, structures or land shall be used or occupied, and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered, unless in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
4.5. - Principal Building and Use Per Lot. 
Unless provided for elsewhere in this ordinance, there shall be no more than one principal building, structure or use upon any lot in any residential zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 2014-04 , § I, 2-18-2014) 
4.6. - Required Open Space May Not be Used by Another Building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure. 
4.7. - Reduction of Yards or Lot Areas. 
Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

5.1. - Lots of Record. 
Any lot of record which is legal prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance may be used subject to the following: 
5.1-1. Use of Substandard Lots. Provided the owner has the approval in writing of Troup County Building Inspection, Zoning and Planning Department, the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance may use such lot as a building site for a structure or use permitted in the zone where it is located even though such lot is of insufficient area, shape or size to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance. 
5.1-2. Residential Use of Substandard Lots. In addition to section 5.1-1, any lot of record in any residential district existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that has a width or area less than that required by this ordinance may be used as a building site for permitted use in residential districts. In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling the board of zoning appeals/planning commission is empowered to hear the request for a side yard variance provided there is at least a ten-foot side yard. If a minimum ten-foot side yard is not possible then a variance from minimum width requirement for single-family dwelling may also be requested. 
5.1-3. Lot frontage and Width. Each lot containing a principal building shall have frontage of at least 100 feet on a publicly owned or maintained right-of-way except where otherwise specified. In special cases, such as a lot on a cul-de-sac, provided the lot width at the minimum building line is maintained, lot frontage may be reduced to not less than 45 feet. 
5.2. - Area, Yard and Height Regulations. 
5.2-1. Lot Area. Except when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose or family homestead as provided in section 5.16, no lot shall be reduced in size in violation of the lot width, size of yards or lot area per requirements of this ordinance. 
5.2-2. Yards and Open Space. 
1.  Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. 
2.  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky so that projections such as sills, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features may not extend into a required yard. 
3.  Other provisions of this ordinance notwithstanding, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street sides of corner lots shall violate the corner visibility provisions of this ordinance. 
4.  Where a lot or parcel abuts U.S. Army Corps of Engineers property yard requirements do not apply on that portion of the parcel. 
5.2-3 Front Yards. 
(a)  Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts (the right-of-way line), the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
(b)  On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. 
(c)  Corner lots shall meet the minimum front yard requirements on the side adjacent to both streets and the remaining yards shall be considered side yard requirements. 
(d)  Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces, which are not covered by a roof or canopy and do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the required setback area six feet or less. 
(e)  Within the same block and zoning district, when 25 percent or more of the existing buildings that are located within 200 feet on each side of a lot have less than the minimum required setback, the required front setback of such lot should not exceed the average of the existing front setbacks. 
5.2-4. Rear Yards. Where a structure is erected abutting U.S. Army Corps of Engineer's property the rear yard may be considered that part of the parcel that faces the public street and the front yard may be considered that part of the parcel that faces the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer's property. 
5.2-5 Side Yards. 
5.2-5(a) For the purposes of the side yard regulations, a group of commercial buildings separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
5.2-5(b) The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches and other public or semi-public buildings in residential districts shall be 25 feet. Where a side yard is adjacent to a business or commercial district, then the width of that yard shall be as required for the district in which the building is located. 
5.2-6 Fences and Walls. No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight feet in height in rear and side yard and no more than six feet in the front yard. No fence shall have more than one sign every 20 linear feet of a size not to exceed four square feet. Fences may have one decoration or group of decorations besides allowed signs for every 20 linear feet that shall not exceed nine square feet. 
5.3 - Corner Visibility. 
No sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting or other obstruction to vision, extending to a height in excess of three-feet above the established street grade, shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at 25-feet distant from the intersection of the street lines. 
5.4 - Accessory Uses and Structures. 
Placement of all accessory structures in excess of 120 square feet on a parcel shall require a building permit. 
5.4-1 No mobile home or manufactured home unit may be converted to use as an accessory or storage building. 
5.4-2 An accessory structure shall not be permitted in any required front yard except for well houses. 
5.4-3 No accessory building or structure shall be erected beyond a required front building setback line along any street. 
5.4-4 Residential accessory uses such as guest houses, garages, greenhouses or workshops shall not be rented, used or occupied for commercial purposes. 
5.4-5 All accessory buildings must be located at least ten feet from the property line and principal building. 
5.4-6 Areas in which the accessory storage of a boat, boat trailer or travel trailer is permitted shall not include the required front yard. 
5.4-7 Gasoline station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided that they shall not be less than 15 feet from street lines; canopies, whether attached or detached from the principal building must be at least 14 feet in height and the outermost edge shall be at least five feet from any property line. 
5.4-8 All non-residential accessory buildings shall only be used by the owners, employees, lessee or tenants of the premises, and shall meet the setback requirements of the principal building. 
5.4-9 Any accessory structure exceeding 120 square feet shall require approval from the Building Official and Zoning Administrator. 
5.4-10 Accessory structures, such as a barn, intended for housing livestock whether commercially or for personal use; or a kennel for commercially housing pets, shall observe a 200-foot setback from any property line. 
5.4-11 Tractor trailers or shipping containers may be used as storage units only if located on a parcel two acres or greater, not visible from any public street. Old school buses may not be used as storage units. 
5.4-12 Guest house(s) shall: 
a.  Be located a minimum of 20 feet from the principal residence; 
b.  Be used by a bona fide non-paying guest or relative of the occupants of the premises; 
c.  Not be rented or otherwise occupied as a principal residence; 
d.  Be occupied for temporary guest purposes only; and 
e.  Require a building permit and meet all residential building codes. 
There is no minimum square footage requirement for a guest house. 
( Ord. No. 2010-11 , § IB., 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 2013-06 , § II, 1-15-2013; Ord. No. 2015-04 , §§ II, III, 6-16-2015) 
5.5 - Home Occupations. 
Home occupations may be permitted in residentially zoned districts according to standards for the zoning district of the business activity's proposed location. Each residentially zoned district shall have home occupations permitted as listed in the following subsections. Any home occupation not listed in the following subsections must be approved by the Troup County Board of Commissioners after an application for home occupation is received and the fees paid as posted in the Troup County Building and Inspections Department. The application shall be presented to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission for recommendation to the board of commissioners for final approval. 
(a)  Home occupations may not be approved on lots or parcels that do not have a home existing on the lot or parcel at the time of application for a home occupation. Home occupations do not run with the land and are dependent on the applicant. When a home occupation is discontinued for more than six months, and an approved homeowner with an approved home occupation does not renew the required business license or the property changes owners a new application and approval is required to continue any home occupation. 
(b)  A change in residence requires an approved home occupation application for each new location. 
(c)  Home Occupation certificates will be evaluated at each business license renewal to ensure conditions such as number of employees, acreage, square feet, equipment or inventory storage have not changed. 
(d)  Home Occupations involving sales must provide a current Georgia Sales Tax certificate prior to business license being issued. 
(e)  Home Occupations conducted in residential units in non-residential zoning districts shall comply with the regulations applicable to that district. 
(f)  Home occupations that require storage of equipment, where permitted shall be in an enclosed structure not visible from the public or private street. 
(g)  No home occupation certificate shall be issued in a CRVP. 
(h)  Upon finding extenuating circumstance regarding a home occupation certificate application, the zoning administrator may require board of commission consideration. In such cases the application date shall be considered the date of the zoning administrator's review as so dated on the application. 
5.5-1 Residential Home Occupations. The conduct of business in single-family medium density (SFMD), lakeside residential (LR), mobile home parks (MHP), multi-family (MFR), and unrestricted subdivision (USD) zoned districts. Other districts include: Agricultural/Residential District (AGR), Rural Residential (RR) or Lakeside Rural Residential (LRR), and Agricultural (AG). When subject parcels are under two acres the provisions of this section shall apply regardless of zoning district. It is the intent of this section to ensure the following: 
1.  The compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in residential zoning districts; 
2.  The maintenance and preservation of the character of residential neighborhoods and the preservation of peace, quiet and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods. 
Residential home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
5.5-2 A home occupation is subordinate to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. No more than 25 percent of the total square feet as recorded on the property record card of the dwelling unit may be used in connection with a home occupation or for storage purposes in connection with a home occupation. 
5.5-3 No more than two home occupations shall be permitted within a single dwelling unit. 
5.5-4 Onsite employment for the residential home occupation/business is limited to residents of the household. 
5.5-5 A home occupation shall produce no noise or obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perceptions outside the principal structure. 
5.5-6 No traffic shall be generated by such home occupations in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. No more than one parcel delivery per day shall be permitted. 
5.5-7 There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal use. 
5.5-8 One home occupation related vehicle shall be permitted provided overnight parking of any commercially-equipped vehicle is within an enclosed area. A home occupation related vehicle is a passenger motor vehicle or light duty truck less than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight as registered by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicles. No home occupation related vehicle shall include any of the following: contractor's equipment or other heavy equipment regardless of weight, a garbage truck, trailer, tractor or trailer of a tractor-trailer truck, dump truck, tow truck, passenger bus, cement truck, and step vans or any vehicle used to carry hazardous materials. 
5.5-9 A residential home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal dwelling. No residential home occupation shall store goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation in accessory buildings or garage that are attached or detached. 
5.5-10 Permitted residential home occupations: 
• Design services; 
• Art studio (where no more than one model at a time); 
• Consulting services; 
• Off-site sales (pharmaceutical, etc.); 
• Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Mary Kay, Tupperware etc.) provided there is no production on premises; 
• Drafting and graphic services; 
• Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring, contract sewing (one machine); 
• Engineering office; 
• Home office only for occupations otherwise not permitted in the district, and for services including, but not limited to the following: 
 Bookkeeping; 
 Accounting; 
 Medical billing; 
 Process rebates; 
 Collections, telemarketing. 
• Realtor or real estate appraiser office as allowed by the State of Georgia; 
• Writing, editing, resume services, computer programming; 
• Photography studio (no more than one client at a time for on-site models); 
• Tutoring; 
• Any occupation conducted solely via telecommunications technology; 
• Cottage food operator as defined and licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture (for clarification, a cottage food operation does not include any farm business/operation that is not subject to local government regulation by federal or state law); 
• Any other similar occupations not listed here that may be approved by the zoning administrator upon the finding of no adverse impacts to the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.5-11 Prohibited residential home occupations include, but are not limited to: 
• Ambulance service; 
• Restaurants, food preparation for catering or distribution; 
• Veterinary services (including care, grooming and boarding); 
• Automobile repair, parts sales, upholstery, or detailing, washing services. 
( Ord. No. 2010-11 , § IC., 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 2010-12 , § IA., 6-16-2010; Ord. No. 2013-08 , § II, 5-21-2013; Ord. No. 2017-03 , § I, 7-5-2016) 
5.6 - Rural Home Occupations. 
Rural home occupations in the Agricultural/Residential District (AGR), Rural Residential (RR) or Lakeside Rural Residential (LRR), and in Agricultural (AG) when subject parcel is under two acres shall be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of the section to ensure the compatibility of rural home occupations with other uses permitted in lower density residential districts; maintain and preserve the rural character of the area and not create a nuisance for residents in the area through excessive traffic, smoke, or noise or through the creation of a fire hazard. Any rural home occupation applied for but not specifically stated in section 5.6-9 shall be required to obtain approval from the Troup County Board of Commissioners with a recommendation from the Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Board unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
5.6-1 The subject parcel minimum lot size is two acres. Acreages of multiple parcels may not be calculated together to achieve minimum. For lots less than two acres, home occupations must comply with the requirements of section 5.5. 
5.6-2 The rural home occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the principal use of the parcel and shall not change the residential character of the area. No more than 25 percent of the heated square feet of record on the property record card in the property appraisal office of the principal dwelling shall be used in connection with the home occupation or storage purposes. 
5.6-3 The rural home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling or within an accessory building provided all structures are harmonious in appearance with the district in which it is located. 
5.6-4 One accessory building not exceeding 1,000 square feet may be used in connection with the rural home occupation. 
5.6-5 The business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies or products shall not be conducted on premises except under the following circumstances: 
a.  Orders previously made by telephone or at sales parties may be filled on premises; and Internet sales, off-site trade-show sales, mail order, etc. 
b.  Incidental retail sales as may be necessary or in connection with the permitted home occupation that can be stored inside the residence or accessory building. 
5.6-6 The existence of the rural home occupation shall not be apparent outside the dwelling or accessory building where the rural home occupation is conducted, except that one un-lighted sign limited to nine square feet of sign area shall be permitted. The sign added to all other signs on the parcel shall not exceed the maximum signage allowed in the district. No sign shall obstruct the view of roadway traffic. All signs must be at least 20 feet from any property line and ten feet from any right of way line. 
5.6-7 No out of doors storage of materials, products, equipment or vehicles used in the conduct of the rural home occupation, other than trade vehicles, is permitted unless an accessory building is used to house the equipment, materials or vehicles. A rural home occupation related vehicle is a passenger motor vehicle or light duty truck less than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight as registered by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicles. Rural home occupation related vehicle include any of the following: contractor's equipment or other heavy equipment regardless of weight, a garbage truck, trailer, tractor or trailer of a tractor-trailer truck, dump truck, tow truck, passenger bus, cement truck, and step vans. 
5.6-8 Onsite employment (including contract employment) for the rural home occupation/business is limited to residents of the property and not more than two additional persons. 
5.6-9 Permitted rural home occupations are as follows: 
• All occupations permitted in section 5.5-10; 
• Appliance repairs (as long as an accessory building is capable of storage of all equipment and appliances); 
• Barber shops/beauty shops (limited to two stations) provided there is sufficient room on the lot for parking of client vehicles (one space for each station, plus one handicapped space) and operator has a Georgia State License to cut and style hair whether a barber or beautician; 
• Cabinet making; 
• Ceramics; 
• Contracting, masonry, plumbing or painting, electrical, general; 
• Upholstery; 
• Photography studio; 
• Pet grooming/boarding/kennel and operator has a Georgia State License from the Georgia Department of Agriculture; 
• Any other business as may be approved by the zoning administrator upon finding that the proposed rural home occupation does not pose adverse impacts to the surrounding neighborhood. 
( Ord. No. 2010-11 , § ID., 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 2010-12 , § IB., C., 6-16-2010) 
5.7 - Rural and Agritourism Development Standards and Procedures. 
The purpose of these standards is to allow agritourism uses in Troup County while maintaining the rural character and preserving farmland of the area and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Agritourism presents a unique opportunity to combine aspects of tourism and agriculture to provide a number of financial, educational and social benefits to tourists, producers and communities. Agritourism gives producers an opportunity to generate additional income and an avenue for direct marketing to consumers. It enhances the tourism industry by increasing the volume of visitors to an area and the length of their stay. Agritourism also provides communities with the potential to increase their local tax bases and new employment opportunities. In addition, agritourism provides educational opportunities to the public, helps preserve agricultural lands and allows the development of businesses that cannot later be outsourced to other countries. 
Allowing agritourism uses on parcels with working farms in Troup County provides: 
a.  Enhancement of the economic viability of the farm and provides on-site employment opportunities; 
b.  Generates additional income and/or off season income for the farmer; 
c.  Interaction and education of local citizens and visitors about the importance of farming in Troup County; 
d.  Increased awareness of local agricultural products; and 
e.  Develops a new consumer market. 
5.7-1. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular, the word may is permissive and the word shall is mandatory. Words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in other sections of the ordinance, shall be given the meaning set forth in that section. All other words and phrases shall be given the meaning as defined in Section 1-4, Chapter 1, the Code of Troup County, Georgia. 
Agritourism is defined as the activities conducted on a working farm and offered to the public or to invited groups for the purpose of recreation, education and/or active involvement in the farm operation. These activities link agricultural production and/or processing with tourism in order to attract visitors onto a farm, ranch, or other agricultural business for the purposes of entertaining and/or educating the visitors and generating supplemental income for the farm or ranch owner. Agritourism activities are linked directly to the primary agricultural use of the property and any recreation, education or active involvement in the farm operation is secondary and shall constitute only a percentage of the total working farm. 
Agribusiness. The businesses collectively associated with the production, processing, and distribution of agricultural products. 
Christmas Tree Farm/cut your own. A working farm that grows various types of trees used in celebrating Christmas where sales are made directly to the public and where the customers cut their own trees. 
Dinner on the Farm. A working farm (usually organic farm products) where meals are prepared for members of the general public from products of the working farm. 
Educational Demonstrations. Demonstrations that teach the ability to create a product where raw materials are grown from a working farm. 
Facility—Small Scale. Agritourism facility or use that poses minimal or small impact to surrounding farms and/or residential properties. 
Facility—Large Scale. Agritourism facility or use that may pose an adverse impact to surrounding farms and/or residential properties through noise, light, traffic congestion. 
Farmer's Market. A farmers market (a.k.a. greenmarket) is a place where a group (more than five) of farmers sells their products directly to consumers. Ultra-fresh produce, pastured meat and eggs, artisan cheeses, hand-harvested honey, and other fresh, small-batch foodstuffs are the hallmark (and benchmark) of the best farmers markets. They serve not just as a place for farmers to get the best price and consumers to get the best products, but as venues for producers and consumers of food to come together, forge relationships, and exchange information. Farmers markets are subject to all state health regulations and any other requirements from the state regarding the sale of food and produce. 
Farm Retail Sales. A working farm where products produced on the farm are sold directly to the public. 
Farm Tours. Tours where members of the public are shown working farm operations and teaches the attendees about farm processes. 
Farm, working. Any operation that sells at least one thousand dollars of agricultural commodities or that would have sold that amount of produce under normal circumstances. Working farms are also defined as those that have a valid farm number issued by the Farm Service Agency. 
Roadside Markets. A structure where five or less farmers on working farms get together and sell produce or other farm products directly to the general public. Roadside markets are different than roadside stands in that roadside markets are a group of farmers rather than just the owner of the property where the structure is located. 
Roadside Stands. A structure built on a working farm where the owner sells fresh produce or other farm products directly to the general public. Roadside stands differ from farm markets in that farm markets may utilize products from another farm to sell at the roadside structure. 
Rural Character refers to the patterns of land use and development established by a county in its comprehensive plan: 
In which open space, the natural landscape, and vegetation predominate over the built environment; 
That fosters traditional rural lifestyles, rural-based economies, and opportunities to both live and work in rural areas; 
That provides visual landscapes that are traditionally found in rural areas and communities; 
That is compatible with the use of the land by wildlife and for fish and wildlife habitat; 
That reduces the inappropriate conversion of undeveloped land into sprawling residential or commercial development; 
That generally do not require the extension of urban governmental services; and 
That is consistent with the protection of natural surface water flows and ground water and surface water recharge and discharge areas. 
Rural Tourism. Tourism enterprises that do not necessarily occur on a farm or ranch or at an agricultural plant and rural tourism does not generate supplemental income for an agricultural enterprise but provides an additional income for the property owner. 
Special Events, Private. A use or facility where events may have an impact to surrounding farms and residential property owners but has a definite number of attendees and does not pose an adverse impact to rural character. Private special events usually are of short duration (part of one day). 
Special Events, Public. A use or facility where events may have attendance that could cause excessive traffic or overburden public safety personnel. Special events that are open to the public may pose an adverse impact to rural character and therefore must adhere to the Special Events Ordinance of Troup County. These types of uses or facilities while not used every day will be open for longer periods of time than private special events. Examples include concerts, conferences, meetings, fund raisers, etc. 
Special Use Permit. A permit that allows a large scale use or facility to operate in unincorporated Troup County. This permit is issued by the Building, Zoning and Planning Department once approved by the Board of Commissioners. 
Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Board. Appointed members that make certain decisions as prescribed in the Troup County Zoning Ordinance. 
Troup County Board of Commissioners. The governing authority of Troup County, Georgia. 
U-Pick Operations. A working farm where the general public is invited to come and pick its own fresh fruits or vegetables. 
Urban Services. Public water and/or public sewer. Other services may be defined as services that are normal and usual in a municipality or urban center. These services could include but are not limited to cable, high-speed internet, cellphone service, major highways, proximity to shopping, mass transit and schools. 
Winery. A working farm where grapes are grown and wine is produced for commercial sales in other venues. 
5.7-2 Procedures. Agritourism uses and facilities are separated into three categories. Those categories are: 1) minimum 2) small scale; 3) large scale. Minimum and small scale agritourism uses and facilities may be approved administratively by the County Planner and/or Zoning Administrator and County Engineer upon finding that the facility or use meets the following conditions and any other standards in this section and other sections as may be referenced in this section. Large scale agritourism uses and facilities are approved by the Troup County Board of Commissioners. All agritourism uses or facilities shall be in compliance with all state regulations as required for a particular use. Tax certificates shall be applied for, when necessary, prior to submission of a business license. 
5.7-3 Business License. All agritourism operations are required to have a business license. The application for a business license is filled out and submitted to the Building Inspection and Zoning Department with the required fee as posted in the Building and Zoning Department. Business license applications will be reviewed by the County Planner, Zoning Administrator and County Engineer (if necessary) to determine whether the proposed use or facility is minimal, small or large scale activity. 
5.7-4 Exemptions to Business License Requirement. The requirement for a business license is for agritourism enterprises. Normal and usual farming activities are not required to obtain a business license. These activities include but are not limited to: 
a.  Selling produce grown on same farm (roadside stand, farmer's market, etc.); 
b.  Cattle farming; 
c.  Hay sold from farm where hay was grown; and 
d.  Raising livestock associated with farming. 
5.7-5 Conservation Use. Any property that wishes to start an agritourism business and has property in Conservation Use should check with the Troup County Property Appraisal Office prior to obtaining a business license. The Property Appraisal Office can let a property owner know if the proposed business will cause a violation of the conservation use covenant. If the Property Appraisal Office is unable to determine if the proposed use is a violation, then the property owner should get a determination from the Troup County Board of Assessors. 
5.7-6 Standards for Administrative Approval of Agritourism Uses or Facilities. 
1.  The facility or use is approved subject to maintaining a working farm as defined in Section II of this document. 
2.  The use is compatible with existing agricultural uses in the area and does not adversely impact neighboring agricultural operations or unduly disrupt the rural character of the area. 
3.  The use or facility does not require the extension of urban services (sewer and/or water service). 
4.  No motorized off road vehicles shall be used for recreational purposes, but may be used as a part of normal farming functions. 
5.7-7 Requirements for Agritourism Uses or Facilities. All agritourism uses or facilities are required to submit the following with the application of a business license: 
1.  Site Plan Requirements. All site plans are required to be drawn to scale. An aerial photograph with requirements drawn in may be used if that is the best way for applicant to show the requirements of the site plan. The following are required to be included on the site plan: 
North Arrow; 
Placement on property for all structures, including existing structures and residential dwellings; 
Placement on parcel of all parking spaces to adequately serve the agritourism use or facility; 
Placement and type of planting for any and all landscaping planned for the site; 
Distance from property line to all structures and parking areas including handicapped accessible parking space or spaces; 
Show the nearest county or state highway; and 
Show setbacks from any proposed structures and the property line of the parcel where the proposed use or facility will be located. 
2.  Floor Plan. The floor plan should show all rooms in the facility, to scale. The floor plan shall include: 
The size of each room; 
Location of handicapped accessible rest rooms; 
Location of handicapped access to building; 
Layout of all rooms in the facility; and 
Location of any kitchen facilities in the structure. 
3.  Narrative Requirements. This required narrative should answer the following questions in detail: 
What is the proposed use for the property? 
How is the property zoned now? 
What is the zoning of adjacent property owners? 
What is the nearest county or state highway? 
Explain in detail why you want to have this agritourism use or facility and how does it promote education of the public on farming or increase economic development in Troup County? 
How many acres of land do you propose to use in this agritourism use or facility? 
How will this use of facility protect and preserve rural character of Troup County? 
Do you need a tax certificate to engage in this business? 
What steps do you plan to take to ensure that you do not adversely impact neighboring farms or residents? 
If this narrative is being written for a Rural Tourism use please answer the following in addition to the questions listed in Narrative Requirements: 
How is this use or facility going to promote farming and/or tourism? 
What is the economic value to the community of this use or facility? 
How does this use or facility fit in a rural setting? 
5.7-8. Minimum Impact Agritourism Uses or Facilities. These are uses or facilities that pose minimal impact to surrounding properties and farms. They may be administratively approved with the approval of the County Planner and Zoning Administrator that the proposed use of facility meets the intent of this ordinance and poses no threat to health, safety or general welfare of the general public. Uses or Facilities that may be approved administratively under this definition include but are not limited to: 
Pick your own; 
On-Farm sales; 
Roadside Stand; 
Agricultural crafts/gifts sales from primary residence only; 
Fee Fishing/Hunting; 
Wildlife viewing and photography; 
Horseback riding for a fee; 
Wagon Rides; 
School Tours; 
Garden/Nursery Tours; 
Farm Technical Demonstrations and sales (canning, weaving, soap-making, etc.) 
Hunting/working dogs trials/training. 
Other uses of facilities may be approved administratively by the County Planner and Zoning Administrator that meet the intent of this section and where it is determined that there will be minimal impact to surrounding properties and farms. 
5.7-9. Small Scale Use or Facilities are uses or facilities that do not adversely impact surrounding farm uses but may involve an accessory building for storage or demonstration purposes. The application will be reviewed by the Troup County Planner, the Zoning Administrator and the Troup County Engineer based on the required site plan, floor plan of any proposed new or existing structures and a detailed narrative describing all activities planned for the parcel and any structures that will be built. The application for a business license may be approved administratively if the proposed use meets the following: 
a.  The proposed use or facility meets all setbacks and buffering requirements; and 
b.  The proposed use or facility is approved by the County Planner, Zoning Administrator and County Engineer as meeting all requirements as set forth in the zoning ordinance for that parcel and will not significantly increase traffic in the surrounding area. 
Other proposed uses or facilities that are defined as small scale but are outside the scope of a and b above or require a variance of any kind will be required to get approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission prior to issuance of a business license. 
5.7-10. Permitted Small Scale Facilities or Uses. Small scale uses are allowed in any zoning district as long as the parcel meets the criteria of a working farm. Permitted small scale facilities or uses include but are not limited to: 
Bed and Breakfast Home (must meet the requirements in the zoning ordinance for bed and breakfast home); 
Clay Bird Shoot; 
School Tours; 
Garden and Nursery Tours; 
Historical Farm Museum or exhibit; 
Roadside Market. 
Other similar facilities or uses may be considered for approval as determined by the zoning administrator. 
5.7-11. Large Scale Facilities or Uses. These are facilities or uses that may impact the surrounding farms or property owners. These uses must be approved by the Board of Commissioners. Large scale facilities or uses may increase traffic, require health department approval for bathrooms, ADA requirements and food service or require public safety presence for traffic control. Large Scale facilities or Uses include but are not limited to: 
Farm vacations; 
School Tours that are more than one day; 
Winery Tastings or Tours; 
Historical Exhibit; 
Farm Technical Tours; 
Rodeos/Horseshows. 
Other similar facilities or uses may be considered as determined by the Board of Commissioners. 
5.7-12. Rural Tourism. Rural tourism is considered to be any of the agritourism facilities or uses, but is not secondary to an agricultural use. Rural Tourism is most often considered a special events venue, but may include other uses as well. Rural tourism uses may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission or Board of Commissioners depending on the standards for the use. These uses are allowed on rural properties that no longer function as a working farm but may have tourism or income value. Rural Tourism Facilities and Uses shall comply with all of the following standards: 
1.  Must have a business license. 
2.  Must submit all requirements of agritourism facilities or uses (site plan, floor plan, narrative). 
3.  Any rural tourism use or facility that intends to stay open to the public (concerts, festivals, fairs, conferences, etc.) on a year round basis requires a special use permit as outlined in the Troup County Zoning Ordinance and must be approved by the Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
4.  Any rural tourism use or facility that meets the requirements of a small or large scale agritourism facility or use but does not have a primary agricultural use may be approved by the Troup County Board of Commissioners provided: 
a.  The facility or use conforms to a standard agricultural use (syrup making demonstrations, soap making, weaving demonstrations., historical exhibit, etc.); and 
b.  The facility or use does not diminish the rural character of the surrounding area or adversely impact neighboring farms or properties. 
5.  Any rural tourism venue that intends to be open for special occasions not open to the public such as family reunions, birthday parties, family reunions, etc. may be permitted as long as it meets the requirements of the Troup County Special Events Permit Ordinance. 
6.  Rural tourism uses will be reviewed by the County Planner, Zoning Administrator and County Engineer to determine the impact of the rural tourism and direct the applicant to which path for approval the owner must follow. 
7.  Under no circumstances will a rural tourism use be approved where the applicant is leasing the property from an absentee owner. 
Rural tourism uses or facilities may be determined to be small or large scale. Small scale uses or facilities may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission. Large scale uses or facilities must be approved by the Board of Commissioners after a review and recommendation from the County Planner and Zoning Administrator. 
5.7-13. Variances. Variances may be applied for as necessary under the provisions for variances as stated in Article 16, Section 16.5, of 6/27/2011 [of] the Troup County Zoning Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02 , § I, 8-16-2011) 
Editor's note— Section I of Ord. No. 2012-02 , adopted Aug. 16, 2011, repealed the former § 5.7, and enacted a new § 5.7 as set out herein. The former § 5.7 pertained to farm-based business and derived from Ord. No. 2010-12 , §§ ID., E., adopted June 16, 2010. 
5.8 - Bed and Breakfast Home. 
This use is allowed as a special use in residential districts as provided for in this section. 
5.8-1 Rooms for rent shall be located in single-family dwelling units. 
5.8-2 The bed and breakfast must be occupied by the owner as his/her principle residence. 
5.8-3 The same rental occupants shall not reside at the bed and breakfast for more than seven consecutive days. 
5.8-4 Breakfast shall be the only meal served and only to registered overnight guests. 
5.8-5 No person who is not a resident shall be employed at the bed and breakfast. 
5.8-6 The exterior appearance of the dwelling unit shall not be altered from its residential character except for safety purposes. 
5.8-7 The freestanding sign shall be no larger than 16 square feet and not internally lighted. 
5.9 - Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
This use, when the requirements of this section are met, is allowed as a special use in residential districts (including Agriculture) and is a use of right in the NHC zoned district. 
5.9-1 A bed and breakfast inn is a building or dwelling unit, not necessarily owner-occupied, that offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for four or more guest rooms for compensation provided: 
a.  There is compliance with the same licensing, inspection and taxation requirements as hotels, motels and restaurants. 
b.  If within a residential district, the dwelling or building shall maintain and conform to the residential character of the neighborhood. 
c.  Breakfast is the only meal served and only to overnight guests. 
d.  The owners may have employees other than owner and owner's family. 
e.  One off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee. 
f.  One off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental room. 
g.  In residential zoned districts signage shall be limited to one sign no more than 16 square feet. 
5.10 - Family Personal Care Homes or Group Personal Care Homes. 
Family personal care homes and group personal care homes, as defined in article III, may be established in residential districts as a special use as listed in the table 7.3. The following requirements shall apply, in addition to the entire applicable zoning district requirements in which such uses are located: 
1.  The facility must be approved by the appropriate state licensing agency for personal care homes. 
2.  All new construction or exterior alterations of existing buildings shall be in harmony with the scale and design of surrounding buildings. 
3.  A floor plan to scale, health department approval, and fire marshal's approval shall be submitted with application/permit request to the building/zoning/planning office. The floor plan shall show the basic layout including, but not limited to, bedrooms, kitchen, living area, and bathrooms. 
4.  Smoke detectors shall be installed on each floor level and in all sleeping areas. 
5.  There shall be two exits per floor level at least one of which per floor level must be handicapped accessible. All exit doors will be able to be opened from the inside. Deadbolt locks rather than key lock systems shall be used on all exit doors. 
6.  Emergency lighting with battery backup shall be installed in all facilities. 
7.  Fire extinguishers shall be included, type and size to be determined by the fire marshal. 
8.  Exit lights shall be placed in appropriate areas and will be hard wired with battery backup. 
9.  All personal care facilities will meet occupancy load requirements as per building official and fire marshal requirements. 
10.  A personal care home of any type (family, group or congregate) in a residential zoning district shall be at least 1,000 feet from any other personal care home (of any type) in the same or any other zoning district. 
11.  The managing caregiver of a family or group personal care home must be a full-time resident of the facility. 
( Ord. No. 2018-13 , § IV, 2-6-2018) 
5.11 - Racetracks. 
Racetracks are allowed as a use of right in the Heavy Commercial District. The standards for a racetrack are as follows: 
a.  Racetracks shall be no less than 20 acres. 
b.  All racetracks shall be at least 500 feet from the nearest residence. 
c.  Racetrack owners will be responsible for mitigating any disturbance to the surrounding community including, but not limited to: 
1.  Installing noise barriers. 
2.  On race days, track owners shall provide for proper traffic control by having public safety personnel on site to assist with parking related issues. 
3.  Installing perimeter buffers as required in article 9. 
5.12 - Churches. 
Churches are a special use and the decision of the board of commissioners will consider the following as to any regulation placed on churches as per the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Person Act subject to the following: 
1.  Whether the regulation imposes a substantial burden on the exercise of religion; 
2.  Whether the regulation serves a compelling government interest; and 
3.  Whether the regulation is the least restrictive means to serve that interest; or 
4.  Whether the request can be granted without harming that interest. 
5.13 - Cemeteries. 
No cemeteries, whether public, private or in conjunction with a religious or non-profit institution, shall be located in a floodplain area as delineated by FIRM maps for Troup County. Cemeteries shall be set back not less than 50 feet from any right-of-way line. Cemeteries shall comply with all applicable state laws. Minimum lot size one acre. 
5.14 - Property Maintenance. 
To prevent the creation of public nuisances and to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Troup County the following regulations shall be established for the maintenance of property in the County: 
5.14-1 Non-functioning appliances shall be stored in an enclosed accessory or principal building. Any non-functioning appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, stoves, etc., shall have doors removed prior to storage. 
5.14-2 Any major auto repairs such as building motors, transmissions or heavy body work shall be done in an enclosed accessory building or on a section of property not visible from any public street. 
5.14-3 Except as allowed by section 5.15(a) of this article, there shall be no storage of inoperable vehicles as defined in section 34-32 of this Code on private property except as follows: 
a.  That any person lawfully engaged in the repair of a damaged or inoperable vehicle may temporarily store one such vehicle on private property without the necessity of screening for a period not to exceed 30 days; 
b.  Two inoperable vehicles may be stored when fully screened from public street and surrounding properties; and/or 
c.  Three or more inoperable vehicles may be stored in an enclosed accessory structure. 
5.14-4 Yard sales at the same location shall last for no more than two consecutive days twice annually. There shall not be any continuous yard sales in Troup County. Storing of yard sale items shall be in an enclosed accessory or principal building and shall not be on display in any yard except during the hours of the yard sale. 
5.14-5 No abandoned mobile or manufactured homes shall be used as a storage or accessory building. Abandoned mobile/manufactured homes shall be removed from property at owner's expense. Upon determination by the code enforcement officer that the said mobile/manufactured home is abandoned and is a health and/or safety hazard to surrounding property owners, the owner shall be notified to remove such mobile/manufactured home from the property within 30 days. Failure to remove such mobile/manufactured home shall be in violation of this section and ordinance and subject to the penalties set forth in chapter 1, section 1-19 of the Troup County Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § II, 12-2-2014) 
5.15 - Junkyards, Junk Business, Salvage Operation and/or Towing/Wrecker Service Business. 
(a)  Junkyards, Junk Business, Salvage Operation. To prevent the creation of public nuisances and ensure the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of Troup County, all junkyards, junk businesses and salvage operation/salvage yards in unincorporated Troup County shall be no less than ten acres in area and shall be screened and buffered from view in accordance with article 9, table 9.1. 
(b)  Towing/Wrecker Service Business. 
1.  Outdoor work/storage area where any towed vehicles are stored shall be in the rear yard only surrounded by an eight-foot solid visual barrier fence or wall. The visual barrier shall be painted or constructed of one color and material providing a consistent appearance. The fence or wall shall provide screening of the outdoor work/storage area from view of the public street and all surrounding properties. The fence or wall shall be maintained perpetually and immediately repaired as needed. There shall be sufficient distance between stored vehicles and fence or wall to allow for proper maintenance. 
2.  Vehicles shall not be stacked. Only one vehicle height shall be permitted within the vehicle storage areas. 
3.  Towing/wrecker services shall not allow objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse impacts on adjoining properties or the county. No burning of any waste materials is permitted unless it is part of an approved contained heat system specifically for reuse of waste materials. 
4.  Any draining of fluids or removal of batteries from wrecked or towed vehicles must be completed in an enclosed structure on a concrete pad or floor or other impervious surface approved by the zoning administrator, senior building official or county engineer. Any drained fluids shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with Georgia Rules of Hazardous Waste Management and applicable Federal Regulations. 
5.  Towing/wrecker services are subject to Article 25 Development and Design Standards, Section 25.6 Basic Commercial and Industrial Design Standards. 
6.  The site plan submitted with application for building permit, land disturbance or special use showing the location of structures, storage area, fencing and/or wall materials and parking plan for employees, customers and compliance with American with Disabilities Act, shall be reviewed by the Troup County Health Department, Troup County Engineer, Troup County Planner and Troup County Senior Building Official for compliance with these standards. 
7.  The construction or operation of the towing/wrecker service shall not add to the contamination of the soil, create additional drainage runoff or alter topography in such a way that creates hazards to the site, adjoining properties or the County. 
8.  The ground surface in the outdoor work/storage area shall be covered with gravel, asphalt or concrete or other material as approved by the Zoning Administrator, Senior Building Official and/or county engineer. 
9.  Vehicles may not be stored at an outdoor work/storage area for longer than 12 months. Code enforcement officer, zoning administrator or senior building official may inspect records at any time the business is open for compliance with this requirement. 
10.  No wrecked or towed vehicles may be towed to the tow truck operator's residence for any reason. 
11.  Towing and wrecker service businesses are a separate type of business from salvage yards and junk yards. Towing and wrecker service businesses that store and resell used vehicle parts or dismantle, demolish, and abandon inoperable vehicles shall comply with all Troup County Ordinances that are applicable to salvage and junk yards. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § III, 12-2-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-02 , § III, adopted Dec. 2, 2014, changed the title of § 5.15 from "Junkyards, Junk Business, or Salvage Operation" to read as herein set out. 
5.16 - Special Density Lots for Homesteads. 
In order to encourage and preserve the homestead in rural areas, each parcel in single ownership may be subdivided for use solely as a homestead by an individual who is grandparent, parent, stepparent, sibling, child, stepchild, adopted child or grandchild of the owner of the original parcel to be subdivided at a density not to exceed one unit per acre; provided, however, that an adequate water and septic system shall be located on each one acre. The Troup County Health Department shall set the final lot size to be adequate for such water and septic systems. This provision supersedes other land use district density requirements except that it may not be used within an otherwise platted and approved subdivision. In order to qualify as a homestead the following criteria must be met: 
The property being transferred shall be used as a primary residence of the eligible grantee only. 
The deed for transferred property shall state the relationship of the grantee to the grantor. A plat designating the property as a family homestead shall be recorded at the clerk of court and the deed shall reference the plat book and number. 
Transferred property may be either designated or deeded in the heirs (grantee) name or jointly deeded in the grantor/grantee names. The transferred property may not be deeded solely in the grantor's name. 
This special density provision shall be utilized on only one occasion per eligible individual grantee. The grantor may exercise this special density provision for other eligible individual grantees so long as the maximum density for the parcel is not exceeded. 
Required road frontage for this special density is 100 feet on a public or private road. 
All roads constructed as a result of this provision shall meet the Troup County standards for rural residential district roads. 
5.17 - Livestock raising for personal pleasure. 
Where chickens are kept as pets structure for housing those chickens shall not be more than 150 square feet in size and at least 50 feet from the property line. 
5.18 - Occupancy Standards. 
The number of people allowed to live in one single-family household shall not exceed public health standards as defined by the Troup County Health Department. 
5.19 - Dog/Cat Kennel, Boarding Facility, Grooming or Shelter. 
These uses are allowed as home occupations in the AG, AGR, LRR, zoning districts subject to the following: 
a.  No business license issued until state license has been approved by Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
b.  Boarding/Kennel facility is limited to ten dogs/cats. 
c.  Facilities (grooming equipment, etc., located in enclosed, accessory structure. 
d.  Accepted sanitary waste methods used to prevent the runoff of any waste products into any stream or neighboring property. 
e.  All dogs/cats boarded at the facility shall be inside facility structure from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. each day. 
f.  Inside runs are required in order to house dogs/cats inside. 
g.  The property has a minimum of five acres. 
h.  All structures for housing or other uses shall be setback 200 feet from all property lines. 
i.  Site plan to scale that shows: north arrow, placement on property of any accessory structures and distances from the property line, number and design of dog runs, any cat facilities design and a narrative describing how the property owner or operator of facility will comply with the standards as stated in [subsection] 5.19a.—h. 
Any application for a business license that involves a dog/cat kennel, board facility, grooming or shelter shall be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Board. These uses cannot be approved administratively, advertised and sign posted. 
( Ord. No. 2010-12 , § IF., 6-16-2010) 
5.20 - Child Care, Family Day Care Home. 
This use is allowed as a home occupation in all residential zoning districts subject to the following: 
a.  No business license until state license is issued by the Department of Human Services of the State of Georgia. 
b.  No more than six children (see definition in Article III of this ordinance [appendix]). 
c.  Property shall have sufficient driveway space so that no car has to back into a public street. 
d.  Day care operation does not begin before 6:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 2010-12 , § IF., 6-16-2010) 
5.21 - Lawn Care Business. 
This use is allowed in the AGR, LRR, RR, and AG zoning districts subject to the following: 
a.  All equipment is stored in an accessory building. 
b.  No repairs of equipment for the public is allowed as part of a lawn care business. 
c.  No storage of excess equipment is allowed. 
d.  Property shall be maintained as a residence and no outward visible signs of a business. 
This use may be approved in SFMD zoning district provided approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Board, advertised and sign posted. 
( Ord. No. 2010-12 , § IF., 6-16-2010) 
5.22 - Variances. 
Any request from the standards listed for home occupations in this section shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Board and treated as a Special Exception Variance according to procedure as set forth in Article [sections] 16.5-3—16.5-7 except that a home occupation may ask for a variance from any of the standards and [section] 16.5-4 does not apply to home occupation variance requests. 
( Ord. No. 2010-12 , § IF., 6-16-2010) 
5.23 - Live/Work Units. 
  
A.  Purpose. The purposes of this section are to: (i) provide for the appropriate development of units that incorporate both living and working space; (ii) provide flexibility for the development of live/work units, particularly within existing buildings; (iii) provide locations where appropriate new businesses can start up; and (iv) provide opportunities for people to live in mixed-use industrial and commercial areas where compatible with existing uses. 
B.  Where Live/Work Units Are Permitted. 
(1)  Live/work units are permitted in all commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(2)  A live/work unit may be at street level, in the rear of the building only or on upper floors. 
(3)  Where permitted, live/work units located at street level are subject to the development standards for ground-floor retail or commercial establishments, including Quality Development Overlay requirements and Article 25, Section 25.6 of the Troup County Zoning ordinance and the following: 
(a)  Live/work units at street level may have the entrance to the residential use at the rear of the building, which is preferred, so that from the front the use appears commercial or industrial. Any commercial or industrial structure with the entrance to a residential use at the front shall not be more than 20 percent of the total façade. 
(b)  A minimum of 51 percent of the portion of a structure's street front facade that contains required nonresidential use shall be at or above sidewalk grade. 
(c)  In live/work units at street level, parking for live-work units is prohibited in front of the building. 
(d)  Live/work units that exceed [2,000] square feet must have at least two exits. 
(e)  All live/work units shall comply with State of Georgia minimum standard building code, fire and life safety codes appropriate for the mixed use. 
C.  Business License Required. At least one resident in each live/work unit shall maintain a valid business license for a business on the premises. 
D.  Parking. For live/work units of less than 2,500 square feet, one parking space is required for each unit. For live/work units greater than 2,500 square feet, required parking will be based on the applicable parking standard for the nonresidential use or the closest similar use as determined by the zoning administrator/building official. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § IV, 12-2-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-02 , § IV, adopted Dec. 2, 2014, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 5.23 was at the discretion of the editor. 
5.24 - Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Facilities. 
  
1.  Sales and storage of fireworks shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
2.  Facility and site must meet the Commercial/Industrial Design Requirements, and QDC requirements if applicable. 
( Ord. No. 2016-03 , § II, 3-5-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-03 , § II, adopted March 5, 2016, enacted provisions designated as § 5.23. Inasmuch as section so numbered already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as § 5.24, at the discretion of the editor. 
5.25 - Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Stands. 
  
1.  Sales and storage of fireworks shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
2.  Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Stands are prohibited in the Quality Development Corridor overlay zoning district. 
3.  There must be an existing lawfully permitted business located on the premises. 
( Ord. No. 2016-03 , § II, 3-5-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-03 , § II, adopted March 5, 2016, enacted provisions designated as § 5.23. Inasmuch as section so numbered already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as § 5.25, at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE VI. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

6.1 - Establishment of Districts. 
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance, unincorporated Troup County is hereby divided into the following districts: 
AG Agricultural District (AG-5) 
AGR Agricultural/Residential (AGR-2) 
RR Rural Residential (RR) 
LR Lakeside Residential District (LR-2) 
LRR Lakeside Rural Residential District (LRR-3) 
SF-MD Single-Family—Medium Density (R-3) 
MFR Multi-Family Residential District (MFR-1) 
MHP Manufactured Home Park District (R-500) 
USD Unrestricted Subdivision (R-300) 
CRVP Commercial Recreational Vehicle Park District (CRVP) 
CA Commercial Adult—CA100 
GC General Commercial (GC-100) 
HC Heavy Commercial (HC-100) 
LC Limited Commercial (LC-200) 
NHC Neighborhood Commercial District (NHC 300) 
GI General Industrial District (GI-100) 
LI Light Industrial District (LI-200) 
FH Flood Hazard Overlay (FH) 
HA Historic Area Overlay (HA) 
PUD Planned Unit Development District (PUD) 
SC Scenic Corridor Overlay District (SC) 
6.1-1 Agricultural District (General Farming) (AG-5). The purpose of this district is to maintain the integrity of agricultural activities predominate in the rural area of Troup County. The regulations are to discourage the subdivision of land for urban development and to encourage the maintenance of the general rural characteristics of openness, low density single-family residential use, appropriate agri-business and extensive agricultural and livestock production. 
6.1-2 Agricultural/Residential (AGR-2). The purpose of this district is to allow for less intense agricultural uses and low density single-family residential use. This district is intended to assist in preserving the rural character of Troup County and the district has no availability of infrastructure for high or medium density uses. 
6.1-3 Rural Residential (RR). This district is intended to be utilized by existing lots or parcels for low density single-family residential purposes. The primary purpose of this district is to allow legal lots or parcels that exist without adequate public road frontage or have been subdivided prior to these regulations without constructing adequate roads. This district may also be used to subdivide property and provide lower density developments on well and septic tanks. 
6.1-4 Lakeside Residential District (LR-2). The purpose of this district is to provide a medium density single-family residential area where overall densities are allowed with decentralized sewer systems and community or public water systems. This district is in close proximity to West Point Lake. 
6.1-5 Lakeside Rural Residential District (LRR-3). The purpose of this district is to provide a low density single-family residential district in close proximity to West Point Lake and where individual wells and septic systems are utilized due to lack of infrastructure that allows for higher densities. 
6.1-6 Single-Family—Medium Density District (R-4). The purpose of this district is to provide for medium density single-family residential growth with densities that adhere to smart growth principles and allow for decentralized sewer or public sewer and community or public water systems for major subdivisions. 
6.1-7 Multi-Family Residential District (MFR). This district is designed to provide high density multi-family residential areas with decentralized sewer or public sewer and community or public water systems. This district is in close proximity to urban areas. 
6.1-8 Manufactured Home Park District (MHP). This district is designed for the development of manufactured home parks and related facilities within a well planned environment. 
6.1-9 Unrestricted Subdivision (USD R-300). This district is designed to allow single-family manufactured homes as a permitted use along with single-family site built homes in platted subdivisions. 
6.1-10 Commercial Adult (CA). This zoning district allows for sexually oriented businesses. 
6.1-11 Commercial Recreational Vehicle Park, Campgrounds and Cabins (CRVP). This district is designed to provide for areas where recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds and cabins may be developed in a well planned environment and in accordance with adopted development standards. 
6.1-12 Heavy Commercial (HC-100). This district is designed to provide for intense commercial uses and include amusement parks, racetracks and other uses that may create large numbers of attendees. 
6.1-13 Neighborhood Commercial (NHC-200). This district is established to provide a location for commercial growth in neighborhoods creating commercial nodes that are the least intense commercial uses providing limited service to rural areas. These districts are usually located in and around intersections of local roads and serve established neighborhoods. 
6.1-14 General Commercial (GC-100). The purpose of this district is to provide areas for more intense commercial uses. Usually located along major arterials and used primarily as a gateway into municipalities. 
6.1-15 Limited Commercial (LC-300). The purpose of this district is to provide for slightly more intense commercial districts usually located at major intersections. 
6.1-16 General Industrial (GI-100). This district is established to provide appropriate locations for industrial operations. 
6.1-17 Limited Industrial (LI-100). This district is established to provide areas for less intense industrial uses. 
6.1-18 Planned Unit Development (PUD). This district is designed to allow mixed or multiple uses and greater density for a mix of residential and commercial development. This district shall allow for conservation subdivisions, developments containing apartments or town houses in conjunction with single-family residential use, and commercial and industrial uses in a design that enhances the surrounding areas. This district allows for flexibility of design to enhance and protect natural features of the property. 
6.1-19 Flood Hazard District (FH). The limits of the flood hazard district are hereby determined to be areas subject to frequent periodic flooding and areas of delineated alluvial soils. These areas are also defined by the floodplain management department of the department of natural resources and delineated by the flood insurance rate map as part of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
6.1-20 Historic Area Overlay (HAO). This is an overlay district is designed to preserve, protect and promote historic areas in the county and provide guidelines for rehabilitation of these areas. 
6.1-21 Scenic Corridor (SC). This district is designed to protect the viewshed of corridors in Troup County that have historical, cultural and natural resources. 
6.1-22 Watershed Protection District. The purpose of the watershed protection district is to establish measures to protect the quality of the present and future water supply for Troup County; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to a water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This ordinance shall apply to the portions of the watersheds which occur within the jurisdiction of Troup County and are herein identified as water supply watersheds of West Point and Hogansville. 
6.1-23 Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District. The purpose of the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas adjacent to the Chattahoochee River. 
6.1-24 Wetlands Protection District. The purpose of this district is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce the primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, ground water recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas 
6.1-25 Groundwater Recharge Area Protection District. The purpose of the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection District is to establish measures to protect Troup County's identified recharge areas from potential sources of contamination by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundment's, application of chemicals, injections and other development pressures. 
6.2 - Zoning District Map. 
The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the official zoning district map of unincorporated Troup County. The zoning map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein, which zoning district map is properly attested and is on file with the Troup County Zoning Administrator and available for public review. 
6.3 - District Boundaries. 
The district boundaries shown on the zoning district map are generally intended to follow streets, alleys or lot lines; where the districts designated on said map are bounded by such streets, alleys or lot lines, the centerline of the street, alley or lot line shall be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the map. In all other cases, the district boundary line shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the official zoning map. 
6.3-1 When the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of adoption of this ordinance, the boundary line may be allowed to extend a distance of not more than 100 feet to the least restrictive zoned district. 
ARTICLE VII. - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES 

7.1 - District, Lot and Height Standards. 
The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zoning district shall be met as indicated in Article 5 General provisions and table 7.1: Zoning District Area, Yard and Height Requirements. Please note the districts not listed in this table have standards in separate articles of this ordinance. This table is provided for quick reference and such standards are set forth in greater detail in Article 25 Development Standards. For front yard setbacks please refer to functional classification map for road designations. For all non-residential zoning districts, refer to the quality development corridor overlay for enhanced development standards along designated roads. 
Table 7.1: District Area, Yard and Height Requirements 

 
Notes  * Public Road Frontage Requirements.  ** This measurement is from the centerline of the road. 
7.2 - Appearance Standards. 
Appearance standards shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings including site-built housing, industrialized (systems-built) housing, and manufactured houses. Building permits shall be granted upon finding that such development shall meet or exceed the appearance standards as shown on table 7.2: Appearance Standards for Single-Family Detached Dwellings. 
Table 7.2: Appearance Standards for Single-Family Detached Dwellings and Offices 

 
Notes: 
1. The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other materials approved by the Offices [of] Building and Inspections and Planning and Zoning of Troup County. 
2. The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete lap, stucco, masonite, metal lap, vinyl lap, or other materials of like appearance approved by the Offices of Planning and Zoning and Building and Inspections of Troup County. 
3. Permanent foundations shall meet the requirements of standard building code. 
4. For manufactured homes, a masonry curtain wall solid except for the required ventilation and access must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to the ground level. 
5. For all homes, a landing area is required and its width and length must be greater than or equal to the width of the entrance doorway and shall have a roof on the landing in the same material as on the roof of the dwelling. 
6. Manufactured homes are required to remove all towing devices. 
7. Manufactured homes in manufactured home parks that cannot remove towing devices shall be screened by plantings and the structure shall be skirted. 
8. Manufactured offices shall have a minimum 500 heated square feet. 
( Ord. No. 2010-11 , § IE., 6-1-2010) 
7.3 - Permitted Uses. 
No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in tables 7.3 and 7.4. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. The letter "P" indicates a permitted use in that zoning district. A principal use denoted by the letter "S" is permitted only if a special use permit is granted by the Troup County Commission. Special use permits are subject to standards for special uses stated in Article XV. Uses not permitted are indicated by "NP" in that zoning district. "N/A" means not applicable. For uses not included on this list where the Zoning Administrator is unable to determine clear placement, application shall be made to the Troup County Board of Commissioners for an amendment to the text of this table under provisions of this Ordinance for text amendments to the zoning ordinance and in accordance with the Zoning Procedures Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

 
( Ord. No. 2010-11 , § IF., 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 2010-12 , § IG., 6-16-2010; Ord. No. 2015-04 , § V(Exh. A), 6-16-2015; Ord. No. 2017-14 , § V(Exh. A), 2-7-2017; Ord. No. 2018-13 , §§ V, VI, 2-6-2018) 
  

 
( Ord. No. 2015-04 , § V(Exh. A), 6-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § III, 3-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-02 , § I, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-14 , § V(Exh. A), 2-7-2017; Ord. No. 2018-13 , §§ VII—IX, 2-6-2018) 
ARTICLE VIII. - TROUP COUNTY HISTORIC AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT 

8.1 - Intent. 
The purpose of this article is to recognize, help protect and plan for Troup County's historic areas. The county finds that its historic areas and their scenic surroundings are important cultural, recreational and economic assets, critical to the public's long-term interest. Zoning standards and regulations should protect these areas while advancing community development goals and furthering and protecting the public's health, safety and welfare. New construction in these areas should complement rather than interrupt, obscure, or otherwise damage or destroy the historic areas. 
8.2 - Description of District. 
Historic Areas shall be those areas listed and described herein and further delineated on the Official Zoning Map, which is incorporated and made a part of this ordinance. 
8.3 - Applicability. 
Historic areas shall function as overlay districts. They may include, be contiguous with, or later become, local historic districts (adopted in accordance with the Georgia Historic Preservation Act of 1980), designated National Register properties or districts, or portions thereof. The regulations of such underlying districts and of the underlying zoning districts shall be maintained and not affected, except in the event of conflict or discrepancy between the historic area and the underlying district or districts. In that case, the more stringent requirements shall be observed, unless noted otherwise in this article. 
8.4 - Definitions. 
Historic Area means a geographically definable area that possess form, character, and visual qualities derived from arrangements or combinations of topography, vegetation, space, scenic vistas, architecture, appurtenant features, or places of natural or cultural significance, that create an image of stability, comfort, local identity, and livable atmosphere, and which is listed and described within this article, and further delineated on the official zoning map. 
8.5 - Local Government Policy Directives. 
Because Troup County finds that its historic areas are of special interest deemed desirable and necessary to conserve for present and future owners, the county shall: 
8.5-1 Incorporate into the Troup County Comprehensive Plan updates and short-term work plans, specific goals for the historic areas relative to land use, housing, community facilities, economic development and natural and historic resources; 
8.5-2 As part of such planning, have special regard for and give special attention to the design, construction and maintenance needs of public thoroughfares, pedestrian ways, open spaces, landscape elements (including trees), recreation areas and comparable amenities of the area, and prepare plans, designs, sketches and/or models proposing public improvement of these facilities and areas; 
8.5-3 Prepare special and detailed recommendations with respect to improved housing, education, employment, health, protection and other human resource requirements of the historic areas; 
8.5-4 Ensure appropriate communication among interested public agencies, and provide for the active participation by residents of the historic areas in the preparation of plan elements and program elements noted above; 
8.5-5 Designate a responsible local government official to coordinate these activities; 
8.5-6 Recommend to the county board of commissioners, by a certain date, ways and means by which the county should improve its maintenance and operating programs within the designated historic areas, if applicable; and 
8.5-7 Ensure that no county program of any kind results in adverse impacts on the designated historic areas. 
8.6 - Visual Compatibility Standards. 
8.6-1 Buffer Zones. Any land lot proposed to be subdivided or otherwise developed that is contiguous to a designated historic area shall include a vegetative buffer between the lot to be developed and adjacent historic area. The buffer shall be provided by the owner of the property proposed to be developed. 
8.6-2 If the lot proposed to be developed is located within the historic area itself, then the buffer shall be between the lot to be developed and other adjacent lots in the historic area. 
8.6-3 If the proposed development and adjacent historic area fall within different zoning districts, then the buffer shall be as specified in Article IX, table 9.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
8.6-4 If the two lots are both within the same zoning district, then the minimum buffer area of 50 feet shall apply. The county board of commissioners may waive this requirement, however, if it is found that: 
1.  The proposed new construction will be visually compatible with the Historic Area, 
2.  The historic area already has sufficient buffer area to protect it from visual intrusions, and/or 
3.  This buffer would adversely affect the character of the historic area, by isolating it from its larger compatible surroundings, for example. 
8.6-5 Other Visual Compatibility Standards. In addition to any other provisions of this article, zoning ordinance or other applicable law, anyone who lives in, or owns property within, an existing or proposed historic area may request additional visual compatibility standards for that historic area, relating to new construction within that historic area, landscaping, sign placement, demolition protocols, or other. Any such proposal must originate from a person living in or owning property in the affected historic area. 
Such requests shall be submitted to the Troup County Historic Preservation Commission, on forms available at the Troup County Planning and Zoning office. The historic preservation commission will review each request and forward the request (with comments) to the Troup County Planning Commission. The planning commission will then review the request, schedule a public hearing before the Troup County Board of Commissioners, and provide a recommendation at that hearing, prior to decision by the board of commissioners. 
8.7 - Administration of this Article. 
8.7-1 Provisions of the Overlay District shall be administered by the Troup County Planner and or the Troup County Zoning Administrator or person designated by the Troup County Planner or Zoning Administrator. 
8.7-2 Proposals to designate historic rural areas may be submitted by the Troup County Historic Preservation Commission, Troup County Planning Commission, Troup County Board of Commissioners, Troup County residents, or owners of property in Troup County. 
8.7-3 Proposals to establish special visual compatibility standards for proposed or designated historic areas may be submitted only by persons living in or owning property within those historic areas, other provisions of this zoning ordinance and other applicable law notwithstanding. 
8.7-4 All proposals to designate historic rural areas and/or establish visual compatibility standards for those areas must be submitted to the historic preservation commission on forms available at the Troup County Planning and Zoning office. 
8.7-5 Proposals to designate historic rural areas and/or establish visual compatibility standards shall be reviewed by Troup County Historic Preservation Commission and Troup County Planning Commission, and approved or disapproved by the Troup County Board of Commissioners after public hearing per requirements of Article XVI of this ordinance. Notice of the public hearing on the proposed designation of the historic area shall be mailed to all owners of property within the proposed area, as well as to the owners of property adjacent to the proposed area. Originator of proposal to designate historic rural areas shall be responsible for providing a list of all property owners to be notified. 
8.7-6 The Troup County Board of Commissioners, after consultation with the Troup County Historic Preservation Commission and Troup County Planning Commission, may revoke the designation of any historic area that subsequently loses its historic character or visual integrity. 
8.7-7 Decisions by the Troup County Board of Commissioners may be appealed in the manner described in this zoning ordinance. 
ARTICLE IX. - BUFFER AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS 

9.1 - Purpose. 
It is recognized that the adjacent location of certain land uses may create an incompatible situation that can be mitigated by the installation of a planted buffer. An incompatible situation can arise due to the location of commercial or industrial uses adjacent to residentially zoned land or to a lesser extent due to location of multifamily residences adjacent to single-family residential districts. 
Therefore, when land is to be developed for a use creating an incompatible situation, or when a use deemed incompatible is modified or expanded, a buffer shall be provided along all side and rear property lines to insulate adjacent properties from adverse impacts. The required buffer shall provide necessary visual privacy for the conduct of residential lifestyles in an undisturbed environment, and shall provide for the protection and preservation of property values in residential districts. 
9.2 - Land Disturbing. 
Prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit it will be determined by the Zoning Administrator if a buffer is required. 
9.3 - Situations Requiring Buffers. 
The following situations constitute creation of incompatibilities and are subject to the buffer requirements of this ordinance: 
1.  The location of commercial or industrial land use directly adjacent to or abutting residentially used land. 
2.  The location of manufactured home parks or multifamily developments directly adjacent to or abutting land zoned for single-family residences. 
3.  The Troup County Board of Commissioners may require a buffer as a condition to zoning approval between other districts or land uses when it is determined that an incompatible situation exists or may occur and result in adverse impact to the surrounding neighborhood. 
9.4 - General Requirements. 
Buffers shall be established and maintained by the owner of the property containing the incompatible land use. The determination of incompatibility shall be based upon the existing character of the area in which the proposed action takes place. For example, proposed development or modification of commercial or industrial land use adjacent to an area developed as residential shall require the owner of the commercial or industrial property to install and maintain the buffer. If however, non-residentially zoned land is rezoned for development of residences and this property is located adjacent to land developed as, or zoned for, nonresidential use, the owner of the property to be rezoned for residences shall be required to install and maintain the buffer. 
9.4-1 The requirements for buffers are as follows: 
1.  Where commercial or industrial land uses are contiguous, adjacent to land zoned for single-family residential use or across public right-of-way the minimum width shall be as shown in table 9.1. 
Table 9.1 Buffers 

 
2.  Where commercial or industrial land uses land uses are contiguous with land zoned for manufactured home parks, or multifamily residences, the minimum width of the required buffer shall be 25 feet. 
3.  Where manufactured home parks, or multifamily land uses, are contiguous with land zoned for single-family residences, the minimum width of the required buffer shall be 30 feet. 
4.  The minimum width of the required buffer for sanitary landfills shall be 500 feet. In all other instances, the minimum width of a buffer as required by the board of commissioners shall not be less than 30 feet. 
9.4-2 Setbacks. All setbacks are measured from the nearest single-family residential zoning district line. The required buffer may be incorporated into the yard setback as specified in the appropriate zoning district. Also, drainfield lines for septic systems are allowed within required buffer areas that are 50 feet or greater in width, provided those drainfield lines are set back as follows: 
1.  Setback 25 feet when a 50-foot buffer width is required. 
2.  Setback 35 feet when a 75-foot buffer width is required. 
3.  Setback 50 feet when a 100-foot or greater buffer width is required. 
9.4-3 Existing Vegetation. Where a buffer is required, the zoning administrator shall evaluate the existing vegetative and topographic conditions, development, and zoning to make a determination as to whether a natural buffer or planted buffer is to be required. If the zoning administrator determines that the existing vegetation in the area where the buffer is required is of sufficient height, density, and width as to accomplish the purpose of the buffer and substantially comply with the buffer specifications stated herein, then the zoning administrator may require a natural buffer. However, if the zoning administrator determines that the existing or natural vegetation is not sufficient, then a planted buffer (possibly including a fence, earth berm or similar such barrier) may be required. 
9.4-4 Undisturbed Buffer. Once the developer/property owner has staked the natural buffer or, in the case of the planted buffer, installed the buffer and the zoning administrator has approved the buffer, then this buffer is to be considered to be an undisturbed buffer. Minor maintenance or development activity (such as a drainage easement, sewer line connection, etc.) may be authorized by the building official upon request. No area where a buffer is required by this ordinance shall be disturbed without first obtaining approval from the building official. 
9.5 - Minimum Specifications. 
The following are minimum specifications for required buffers. All required buffers shall: 
9.5-1 Be depicted in detail (the type and location of natural and planted vegetation are to be illustrated) on each site plan prior to approval for structures in the quality development corridor, and shall be designated as a permanent buffer. 
9.5-2 Not be disturbed by grading, property improvements or construction activities except where necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin such natural growth, where too dense to permit normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous and decayed timbers. Any contemplated disturbance shall first be brought to the attention and approval of the zoning administrator prior to initiating activity within required buffer areas. 
9.5-3 Utilize existing vegetation in an undisturbed state where it has been determined that existing vegetation is appropriate for inclusion within the buffer strip, or when required be supplemented with approved, additional planting. 
9.5-4 Retain the natural topography of the land, except when a portion must be cleared and graded as required by law to prevent soil erosion or sedimentation. 
9.5-5 Be completely installed in accordance with the approved plan prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
9.5-6 Not be used for temporary or permanent parking or loading, other than for provision of drainage improvements as mandated by local law, or for a structure other than a fence. 
9.5-7 Attain a minimum height of six feet within three years of the planting date for all uses other than landfills. Landfills shall have perimeter buffers attaining a height of ten feet in three years. 
9.5-8 Be subject to plan approval by the building official prior to installation of a planted buffer. 
9.5-9 All planted buffers shall be comprised of a minimum of three genera of approved plant material. If three genera of plant material are to be utilized within the buffer, then each genus shall be provided in as close to equal quantities as possible. If more than three genera of plant material are to be utilized within the buffer, then no genus shall comprise more than 33 percent of the total number of plants within the buffer. 
9.6 - Buffer Composition. 
The following table indicates plant materials which may be used in buffers: 
Trees 
Carolina Cherry Laurel (Prunus genus) 
Magnolias (Magnolia genus) 
Eastern Red Cedar (Juniperus genus) 
Atlantic White Cedar (Chamaecyparis genus) 
Pines (Virginia) (Pinus genus) 
Shrubs 
Wax Myrtle (Myrica genus) 
Burford Holly (Ilex genus) 
Dwarf Burford Holly (Ilex genus) 
Lusterleaf Holly (Ilex genus) 
Viburnums (Viburnum genus) 
Ligustrums (Ligustrum genus) 
Arborvitae (Thuja genus) 
Elaeagnus (Elaeagnus genus) 
  
Additional plants may be approved for use in buffers by submitting a letter to the county planner. Plants shall be approved based on their growth rates and habits, form, and hardiness within the planting zone. Generally faster growing plants with dense, drought resistant, evergreen foliage shall be preferred. 
9.7 - Maintenance of Required Buffers. 
The buffers required under the provisions of this article shall be guaranteed for the duration of the incompatible land use, or until such use changes to a compatible type. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide a natural pleasing appearance, and to assure that the buffer serves the purpose for which it was intended. 
9.8 - Required Screening. 
Certain uses such as junkyards and salvage yard or recycling operations and other commercial and industrial operations requiring the storage of inoperative equipment or vehicles for prolonged periods of time present unsightly views or health hazards and require screening. 
9.8-1 Fences. In order to ensure that unsightly views from junkyards and recycling facilities do not occur, the building official shall require owners of junkyards and salvage yards to completely enclose such operations by a solid fence which completely obscures views of the property from adjacent properties, built to a height greater than that of the height of the highest piece of equipment or vehicle stored on the property. No fence shall be less than six feet in height. In no case, shall a fence have less than such height as will screen all junk or other materials or vehicles from view and provided that such fence shall be at least 40 feet from any street right-of-way or any zoning district boundary line. In cases where the grade of the property prevents the installation of a fence high enough to screen equipment from public view then other measures as may be deemed appropriate by the building official shall be installed to enclose the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling operations. 
9.8-2 Inspections. Many operations that involve the stacking of inoperative or obsolete equipment or vehicles pose a direct health hazard to the public. The county commission shall require all such operations to submit to annual inspection by the Troup County health department. The results of such inspections shall be delivered to the county commission for review. If a business fails to pass such inspection it shall have 30 days to comply or it shall cease operations until such time that it is in compliance. 
9.9 - Screening Barriers. 
In those instances when extraordinary or exceptional conditions pertaining to the property exist, resulting from its size, shape, topography or other features, screening barriers such as walls, fences or berms may be allowed in place of a 50-foot buffer upon approval and provided the following standards are met: 
1.  Walls or fences shall be ornamental or decorative and constructed of brick, stone, treated wood, stucco or other materials approved by the building official and shall not be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk or other discarded materials or see through fabric or fabric of any kind. The wall or fence shall provide an opaque screen of at least six feet in height or as specified by the building official. 
2.  If a wall or fence is designed so that its structural supports are primarily on one side, that side must always remain within the interior of the property. 
3.  No wall or fence shall be installed within any public right-of-way. 
4.  Any wall or fence damaged, whether by accident or act of God or other cause shall be properly repaired within 90 days of occurrence. 
5.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which a wall or fence is located to maintain that wall or fence in good and proper repair so that it presents a neat and orderly appearance at all times to surrounding property owners and to the general public. 
6.  If a property owner does not take appropriate action to maintain or repair a damaged screening barrier within 90 days after receiving a notice to comply, the county shall take any action provided by law, including the issuance of a citation, to correct the violation in a proper and prompt manner. 
7.  Berms may also be used as screening barriers and must be designed by a registered landscape architect and built by a professional landscaping firm. 
ARTICLE X. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section I of Ord. No. 2010-07 , adopted Dec. 15, 2009, repealed the former Art. X., §§ 10.1—10.11, and enacted a new Art. X as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to communication tower regulations and derived from Ord. No. 2009-08 , adopted June 2, 2009. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

10.1 - Purpose. 
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the authority of Troup County concerning the placement, construction and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. Troup County finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and environment of the county and its inhabitants. Troup County also recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic development asset and of significant benefit to the county and its residents. In order to insure that the placement, construction or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with the land use policies, Troup County is adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless telecommunications facilities application and permit process. The intent of this article is to minimize impact of wireless telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of the visual and environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Troup County. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.2 - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited as "Article 10 Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Facilities." 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.3 - Severability. 
(A)  If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this article or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this article, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(B)  Any special use permit issued under this article shall be comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be invalid or unenforceable in any material respect, by a competent authority, or is overturned by a competent authority, the permit shall be void in total, upon determination by the Troup County Board of Commissioners ("BOC"). 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.4 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, and where consistent with the context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When consistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
Accessory Equipment means any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless facility or wireless support structure and includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets, and storage sheds, shelters, or similar structures. 
Accessory Facility or Structure means an accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, including but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communication services. 
Applicant means any wireless service provider submitting an application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
Application means a formal request submitted to the local governing authority to construct or modify a wireless support structure or a wireless facility. An application shall be deemed complete when all documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the local governing authority's regulations, ordinances, and forms pertaining to the location, construction, modification, or operation of wireless facilities are submitted by the applicant to the authority. 
Camouflage (or Stealth ) means disguising a tower or wireless telecommunications facility so as to make it less visually obtrusive and not recognizable to the average person as a wireless telecommunications facility. 
Co-location means the use of an existing Tower or structure to support Antenna for the provision of wireless services. 
Collocation means the placement or installation of new wireless facilities on previously approved and constructed wireless support structures, including monopoles and towers, both self-supporting and guyed, in a manner that negates the need to construct a new freestanding wireless support structure. Such term includes the placement of accessory equipment within an existing equipment compound. 
Commercial Impracticability or Commercially Impracticable means the inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce; the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to achieve a financial return on investment or profit deemed satisfactory by an applicant may be considered, but, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be "commercial impracticable" and shall not in and of itself render an act or the terms of an agreement "commercially impracticable." 
Completed Application means an application that contains all information and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an application. 
Commission means the Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
DAS or Distributive Access System means a technology using an antenna combining technology allowing for multiple carriers or wireless service providers to us the same set of antennas. 
Equipment Compound means an area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless support structure within which accessory equipment is located. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
Height means, when referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device. 
Local Governing Authority means a municipality or county that has adopted land use or zoning regulations for all or the majority of land uses within its jurisdiction or has adopted separate regulations pertaining to the location, construction, modification, or operation of wireless facilities. 
Modification or Modify means the improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing wireless facilities on an existing wireless support structure or within an existing equipment compound, provided such improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement does not increase the height of the wireless support structure or increase the dimensions of the equipment compound. 
Need means anything that is technically required for the wireless service to be provided primarily and essentially within Troup County and creates the least physical and visual impact. This does not necessarily mean the internal design standards of the applicant, as companies' standards can vary greatly and normally reflect preferences. Rather, need relates to the ability of the user-equipment to function as designed. 
NIER means nonionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
Person means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity. 
Personal Wireless Facility. See definition for "Wireless telecommunications facilities." 
Personal Wireless Services or PWS or Personal Telecommunications Service or PTS shall have the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
Repairs and Maintenance means the replacement or repair of any components of a wireless facility where the replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without the addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility that will add to the visible appearance of the facility as originally permitted. 
Special Use Permit means the official document or permit by which an applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to construct and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted or issued by Troup County. 
Stealth, Stealth Technology or Camouflage means to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of a wireless telecommunications facility, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. Stealth technology expressly includes such technology as DAS or its functional equivalent. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Stealth (or Camouflage ) means disguising a tower or wireless telecommunications facility so as to make it less visually obtrusive and not recognizable to the average person as a wireless telecommunications facility. 
Telecommunications means the transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
Telecommunication Site. See definition for "Wireless telecommunications facilities." 
Telecommunications Structure means a structure used in the provision of services described in the definition of "Wireless telecommunications facilities." 
Temporary means temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this Article, something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than 90 days. 
Troup County Board of Commissioners. Local Governing Authority of Troup County ("BOC") 
Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission. The body designated by the BOC to make recommendations on special use permits ("BOZA/PC"). 
Tower means any structure designed primarily to support an antenna for receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal. 
Wireless Facility means the set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the underlying wireless support structure, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and accessory equipment, used to provide wireless data and telecommunication services. 
Wireless Support Structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or suitable existing or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include any electrical utility pole or tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. 
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities means and includes a telecommunications site and personal wireless facility. It means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without limit, towers of all types, kinds and structures, including, but not limited to, buildings, church steeples, silos, water towers, signs or other structures that can be used as a support structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It further includes all related facilities and equipment such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, personal communications services (PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services and any commercial wireless telecommunication service not licensed by the FCC. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009; Ord. No. 2011-02 , § I(Exh. A), 10-19-2010) 
10.5 - Overall Policy and Desired Goals for Special Use Permits for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities protects the health, safety, public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this article, Troup County adopts an overall policy with respect to a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the following goals: 
(A)  Requiring a special use permit for any new, co-location or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility. 
(B)  Implementing an application process for person(s) seeking a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(C)  Establishing a policy for examining an application and issuing a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that is both fair and consistent. 
(D)  Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities among service providers. 
(E)  Requiring, promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner, including but not limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances. 
(F)  In granting a special use permit, the BOC has found that the facility shall be in the most appropriate site as regards being the least visually intrusive among those available in the county. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.6 - Exceptions from a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(A)  No person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify or prepare any site for the placement or use of a wireless telecommunications facility as of the effective date of this article without having first obtained a special use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility as defined in section four (10.4) of this article or an administratively granted authorization granted under section nine (10.9) of this article, whichever is applicable. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities that existed on or before the effective date of this article shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist, provided however, that any visible modification of an existing wireless telecommunications facility will require the complete facility, including the tower if applicable, and any new installation to comply with this article, as will anything changing the structural load. 
(B)  Any repair and maintenance of a wireless facility does not require an application for a special use permit. However, no additional construction or site modification will be permitted. 
(C)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section and all subparts thereof, the co-location and/or shared use of antennas on existing telecommunication towers or other tall structures or compatible use structures, such as utility poles, water towers, and other towers, shall be exempt from the public hearing requirement otherwise required for a tower, and shall be subject only to an administrative review process as set forth under section 10.9 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.7 - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(A)  The fire, sheriffs or other public service facilities owned and operated by Troup County. 
(B)  Any facilities expressly exempt from the county's siting, building and permitting authority. 
(C)  Over-the-air reception devices including the reception antennas for direct broadcast satellites (DBS), multichannel multipoint distribution (wireless cable) providers (MMDS), television broadcast stations (TUBS) and other customer-end antennas that receive and transmit fixed wireless signals that are primarily used for reception, but not including microwave dishes. 
(D)  Facilities used exclusively for private, noncommercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, licensed amateur radio and other similar noncommercial telecommunications. 
(E)  Facilities used exclusively for providing unlicensed spread spectrum technologies, such as IEEE 802.11a, b, g services (e.g., Wi-Fi and Bluetooth) where the facility does not require a new tower. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.8 - Special Use Permit Application and Other Requirements for a New Tower or for Increasing the Height of the Structure to be Attached to. 
(A)  All applicants for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities or any modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this article. The Troup County Board of Commissioners is the officially designated agency or body of the county whom applications for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not granting or revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. The county may at its discretion delegate or designate the BOZA/PC, other official agencies or officials, or outside expert consultants to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and make recommendations to the BOC with respect to the granting or not granting or revoking special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(B)  The nonrefundable application fee for attaching to an existing tower or other structure without increasing the height shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees as posted in the building and inspection department. 
(C)  All applicants shall closely follow the instructions for preparing an application that shall be provided prior to the submittal of an application or at any time upon request. Not closely following the instructions without permission to deviate from such may result in the application being returned without action and forfeiting the application fee, but not the escrow deposit. 
(D)  When placing wireless facilities on government-owned property or facilities, only noncommercial wireless carriers and users are exempt from the permitting requirements of this article. 
(E)  The county may reject applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are otherwise not complete. 
(F)  No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed, constructed or modified until the application is reviewed and approved the special use by the BOC and a building permit has been issued. 
(G)  Any and all representations made by the applicant to the county on the record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the application and will be deemed to have been relied upon in good faith by Troup County. Any verbal misrepresentation shall be treated as if it were made in writing. 
(H)  An Application for a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. 
(I)  The applicant must provide documentation to verify it has the right to proceed as proposed on the site. This requires an executed copy of the lease with the landowner or landlord or a signed letter of agency acknowledging authorization. If the applicant owns the site, a copy of the ownership record is required. 
(J)  The applicant shall include a statement in writing: 
(1)  That the applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the special use permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by the county in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable county, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and 
(2)  That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is legally permissible including, but not limited to, the fact that the applicant is authorized to do business in the state. 
(K)  Where a certification is called for in this article, such certification shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
(L)  In addition to all other required information as stated in this article, all applications for the construction or installation of new wireless telecommunications facilities or modification of an existing facility shall contain the information hereinafter set forth. Note that an applicant will be granted permission for anything that it can conclusively prove the technical need for, but that there is often a significant difference between "need" and "want" or "desire." For example, an assertion that the "need" is based on an applicant's own design criteria shall not suffice to prove the technological need for what is requested. For purposes of permitting under this article, "need" shall mean what is technologically needed for the equipment to function as designed by the manufacturer and that anything less will result in prohibiting or acting in a manner that prohibits the provision of service as intended and described in the narrative of the application. 
10.8-1. Proof of Need for the Facility. 
(A)  A detailed narrative description and explanation of the specific objective(s) for the new facility, or the modification of an existing wireless facility, expressly including and explaining the purpose and need for the facility, such as coverage and/or capacity needs or requirements, and the specific geographic area of intended coverage; 
(B)  Technical documentation that proves the need for the wireless telecommunications facility to provide service primarily and essentially within the county. Such documentation shall include a propagation study of the proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed or existing sites, that demonstrates a significant gap in coverage and/or, if a capacity issue is involved, to include an analysis of the current and projected usage (traffic studies) using generally accepted industry methods and standards, so as to conclusively prove the need for what is proposed. A desire to change, upgrade, or improve the technology of the service shall not be deemed a need in the context of this article; 
(C)  All of the modeling information (i.e., data) inputted into the software used to produce propagation studies including, but not limited to, any assumptions made, such as ambient tree height; 
(D)  A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the wireless telecommunications facility, as well as a copy of the five- and ten-year build-out plan required by and filed with the FCC; 
(E)  The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting equipment; 
(F)  The maximum transmission power capability of all radios, as designed, if the Applicant is a cellular or functional equivalent carrier, or the maximum transmission power capability, as designed, of all transmission facilities if the applicant is not a cellular or functional equivalent carrier; 
(G)  The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum effective radiated power (ERP) both in dBm's and watts. 
10.8-2. Ownership and Management. 
(A)  The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the application; 
(B)  The name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the applicant, including the legal name of the applicant. If the owner of the structure is different than the applicant, the name and all necessary contact information shall be provided; 
(C)  The physical address and tax map parcel number of the property; 
(D)  A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the wireless telecommunications facilities. 
10.8-3. Planning and Zoning. 
(A)  The zoning district or designation in which the property is situated; 
(B)  The size of the property on which the structure to be attached to is located, stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines; 
(C)  The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the property on which the structure is located and that is the subject of the application; 
(D)  If attaching to an existing tower, a site plan showing the vertical rendition of the tower identifying all users and attachments to the tower and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and lighting; 
(E)  If attaching to a building or other structure, a site plan showing the proposed attachments and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above the roof or balustrade, whichever is appropriate; 
(F)  The azimuth, size and center line height location of all proposed and existing antennas on the supporting structure; 
(G)  The number, type and model of the antenna(s) proposed, along with a copy of the specification sheet(s) for the antennas; The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing landscaping, and fencing; 
(H)  The number, type and design of the telecommunications tower(s) and antenna(s) proposed and the basis for the calculations of the telecommunications tower's capacity to accommodate multiple users; 
(I)  The applicant shall disclose in writing any agreement in existence prior to submission of the application that would limit or preclude the ability of the applicant to share any new telecommunication tower that it constructs. 
10.8.4. Safety/Requirements. 
(A)  If attaching to an existing tower, the age of the tower in years, including the date of the grant of the original permit or authorization for the tower; 
(B)  If attaching to an existing tower, a description of the type of tower, e.g., guyed, self-supporting lattice or monopole; 
(C)  If attaching to an existing tower, the make, model, type and manufacturer of the tower and the structural design calculations, certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state, proving the tower's capability to safely accommodate the facilities of the applicant without change or modification; 
(D)  If any change or modification of the tower or other structure to be attached to is needed, a detailed narrative explaining what changes are needed, why they are needed and who will be responsible to assure that the changes are made; 
(E)  If the structure proposed to be attached to is a tower that has not previously been permitted under this law, or unless the applicant can provide proof that this was provided at the time of the initial application for the tower or other structure, the applicant shall provide a copy of the installed foundation design, as well as a geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation recommendation for the tower site or other structure; 
(F)  If increasing the height of an existing structure, or a tower that is five years old or older, or for a guyed tower that is three years old or older, a copy of the latest ANSI report done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EINTIA 222F—Annex E for any self-supporting tower. If an ANSI report has not been done pursuant to the preceding schedule, an ANSI report shall be done and submitted as part of the application. No building permit shall be issued for any wireless facility where the structure being attached to is in need of remediation, unless and until all remediation work needed has been completed or a schedule for the remediation work has been approved by the building department; 
(G)  If not attaching to an existing tower, a structural report signed by a professional engineer licensed to do business in the state and bearing that engineer's currently valid stamp, showing the structural adequacy of the structure to accommodate the proposed wireless facility(s), including any equipment shelter, unless the equipment shelter is located on the lowest floor of a building; 
(H)  If attaching to a structure and thereby increasing the height of the structure, other than a tower, to which the public has or could reasonably have or gain access to, documentation shall be provided, including all calculations, proving that the potential exposure to RF radiation (i.e., NIER or non-ion emitting radiation), will be in compliance with the most recent Federal Communications Commission regulations governing RF radiation and exposure thereto, and further denoting the minimum distance from any antennas an individual may safely stand without being exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC's permitted standards and any portion(s) of the structure that would be exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC's permitted standards . In compliance with the FCC's regulations, in such an instance, the RF radiation from all wireless facilities at that location shall be included in the calculations to show the cumulative effect on any area of the building or structure deemed accessible by the public or workers. Such report or analysis shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state; or 
(I)  In an instance involving a tower where the new wireless facilities will be ten meters or more above ground level, signed documentation such as the FCC's "checklist to determine whether a facility may categorically excluded" shall be provided to verify that the wireless telecommunication facility with the proposed installation will be in full compliance with the current FCC's RF emissions regulations. If not categorically excluded, a complete RF emissions study is required to enable verification of compliance, pursuant to subsection (E)(21) of this section, including providing all calculations so that such may be verified; 
(J)  In certain instances, the may deem it appropriate to have an RF survey of the facility done after the construction or modification and activation of the facility, such to be done under the direction of the county or its designee, and an unredacted copy of the survey results provided, along with all calculations; 
(K)  If any section or portion of the structure to be attached to is not in compliance with the FCC's regulations regarding RF radiation, that section or portion must be barricaded with a suitable barrier to discourage approaching into the area in excess of the FCC's regulations, and be marked off with yellow and black plastic chain and striped warning tape, as well as placing RF radiation signs as needed and appropriate to warn individuals of the potential danger; 
(L)  A signed statement that the applicant will expeditiously remedy any physical or RF interference with other telecommunications or wireless devices or services; 
(M)  The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified individual or organization, to determine if the proposed new tower or existing structure intended to support wireless facilities is in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77 and if it requires lighting. This requirement shall also be for any existing structure or building where the application increases the height of the structure or building. If this analysis determines that an FAA determination is required, then all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided with the application; 
(N)  Application for new tower versus co-location. 
(1)  In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit a written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of existing tower(s) or the use of alternative buildings or other structures within the county that are at or above the surrounding tree height or the tallest obstruction and are within one mile of the proposed tower. Copies of written requests and responses for shared use shall be provided to the county in the application, along with any letters of rejection stating the reason for rejection. 
(2)  In the case of a new telecommunication tower, to inform the public, the applicant shall hold a "balloon test" prior to the initial public hearing on the application. The applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a minimum of a ten-foot in length brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed new tower. 
(3)  At least 14 days prior to the conduct of the balloon test, a sign shall be erected to be clearly visible from the road nearest the proposed site and shall be removed no later than 14 days alter the conduct of the balloon test. The sign shall be at least four feet by eight feet in size and shall be readable from the road by a person with 20/20 vision. 
(4)  Such sign shall be placed off, but as near to, the public right-of-way as is possible. 
(5)  Such sign shall contain the times and date(s) of the balloon test and the date, time and location of the required hearings, as well as a copy of the proposed site plan. 
(6)  The dates, (including a second date, in case of poor visibility or wind in excess of 15 m.p.h. on the initial date) times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant seven and 14 days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the county and as agreed to by the county. The applicant shall inform the county in writing, of the dates and times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive hours between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date shall be on a weekend, but the second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date, may be on a weekday. A report with pictures from various locations of the balloon shall be provided with the application. 
(7)  The applicant shall notify all property owners and residents located within 1,500 feet of the nearest property line of the subject property of the proposed construction of the tower and wireless facility and of the date(s) and time(s) of the balloon test. Such notice shall be provided at least 14 days prior to the conduct of the balloon test and shall be delivered by U.S. Certified Mail. 
(8)  The tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least five additional antenna arrays equivalent to those of the applicant as regards the load and stress created on the tower, and located as close to the applicant's antenna as possible without causing interference. A claim of interference because of a need to have greater than six feet of vertical clearance between facilities, measured from the vertical centerline of one array to the vertical centerline of another, must be proven by technical data and not merely verbal or written assertions. This requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provisions of future shared usage of the tower is not technologically feasible, is commercially impracticable or creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon: 
a.  The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and structure proposed; 
b.  Available space on existing and approved towers; 
c.  The need for more than six feet of vertical clearance between antenna arrays, measured from the vertical centerline of one array to the vertical centerline of another, such that there would not be adequate vertical space to accommodate a total of four carriers. 
(9)  The owner of a proposed new tower, and his/her successors in interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed tower by other wireless service providers in the future, and shall: 
a.  Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential shared-use applicant; 
b.  Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new tower by other telecommunications providers; 
c.  Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications provider agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges. The reasonable charges may include, but are not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design, construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, less depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing electromagnetic interference; 
d.  Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds for revocation of the special use permit. 
(O)  The applicant shall provide certification with documentation (i.e., structural analysis) including calculations that the telecommunication facility tower and foundation and attachments, rooftop support structure, water tank structure, or any other supporting structure as proposed to be utilized are designed and will be constructed to meet all local, state and federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads and including, but not limited to, all applicable ANSI (American National Standards Institute) guidelines. 
(P)  All proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a demonstration that the facility be sited so as to create the least visual intrusiveness reasonably possible given the facts and circumstances involved, and thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and its character, on existing vegetation, and on the residences in the area of the wireless telecommunications facility. The county expressly reserves the right to require the use of stealth or camouflage technology or techniques such as DAS (distributive antenna system technology) or its functional equivalent to achieve this goal and such shall be subject to approval by the BOC. 
(Q)  If the application is for a new tower, or a new antenna attachment to an existing structure other than a tower, or for a modification, that noticeably changes the appearance of the structure, the applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall include: 
(1)  If a new tower or increasing the height of an existing structure is proposed, a computer generated "zone of visibility map" at a minimum of one-mile radius from the proposed structure shall be provided to illustrate locations from which the proposed installation may be seen, with and without foliage; 
(2)  Pictorial representations (photo simulations) of "before and after" views from key viewpoints inside of the county as may be appropriate and required including, but not limited to, state highways and other major roads; state and local parks; other public lands; historic districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to the public; and from any other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided concerning the appropriate key sites at the pre-application meeting. The applicant shall provide a map showing the locations of where the pictures were taken and the distance(s)of each location from the proposed structure; 
(3)  A written description of the visual impact of the proposed facility, including, as applicable, the tower base, guy wires, fencing and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets as relates to the need or appropriateness of screening. 
(R)  The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related equipment and structures of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility. 
(S)  The wireless telecommunications facility and any accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall include the utilization of stealth or camouflage or concealment technology as may be required by the county. 
(T)  All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall be installed underground and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the county including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where appropriate. 
(U)  At a wireless telecommunications facilities site an access road, turn around space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion. 
(V)  All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, provided for removal of, modified or restored in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the county, state, or United States including, but not limited to, the most recent editions of the ANSI Code, National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices and recommended practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding, the more stringent shall apply. 
(W)  A holder of a special use permit granted under this article shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law, ordinance, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the county or other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant. 
(X)  There shall be a pre-application meeting for all intended applications. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to address issues that will help to expedite the review and permitting process and certain issues or concerns the county may have. A pre-application meeting shall also include a site visit, if there has not been a prior site visit for the requested facility. Costs of county consultants to prepare for and attend the pre-application meeting will be borne by the applicant and paid for out of the required escrow deposit. 
(Y)  An applicant shall submit to the county the number of completed applications determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting. However, applications will not be provided to the county, other than for staff, until the application is deemed complete. 
(Z)  If the proposed site is within three miles of another municipality or county, written notification of the application shall be provided to the legislative body of all such adjacent municipalities as applicable and/or requested. 
(AA)  The holder of a special use permit shall notify the county of any intended modification of a wireless telecommunication facility and shall apply to the county to modify, relocate or rebuild a wireless telecommunications facility. 
(BB)  An application to increase the height of a tower or other structure shall be deemed a new tower and shall not qualify for treatment as an attachment to an existing tower or other structure under this section. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.9 - Requirements for an Application to Attach to an Existing Tower or other Structure without Increasing the Height or Width of the Tower or Structure Being Attached to or Increasing the Dimensions of the Equipment Compound. 
(A)  The nonrefundable application fee for attaching to an existing tower or other structure without increasing the height shall be as set forth in the county's schedule of fees. 
(B)  To prevent the taxpayers from having to pay for the expert technical assistance needed by the county that is necessitated by the application, an applicant shall be required to place with the county an escrow deposit of no less than $2,500.00. After all invoices have been paid and the certificate of completion or occupancy has been granted, any unexpended balance of the escrow deposit shall be returned to the applicant upon request. 
(C)  An application to increase the height or width of a tower or other structure or to increase the dimensions of the equipment compound shall be deemed a new tower and shall not qualify for treatment as an attachment to an existing tower or other structure under this section. 
(D)  Applications to attach to existing towers or other structures or to modify an existing wireless telecommunications facility, as long as there is no proposed increase in the height or width of the tower or other structure to be attached to, including attachments thereto, nor increase in the dimensions of the equipment compound, shall not generally require a public hearing. However, the BOC or Troup County Planner may for good cause choose to hold a public hearing and decision. If no public hearing is conducted, the modifications may be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator or the Troup County Planner. 
(E)  An application for a collocation permit for attaching wireless facilities to an existing structure including, but not limited to, cellular or PCS facilities and microwave facilities, shall contain the following information and comply with the following requirements. 
(F)  If the applicant is not the owner of the tower or structure being attached to, documentation shall be provided proving that the applicant has the legal right to proceed as proposed on the site, including an executed copy of the lease with the owner of the facility proposed to be attached to, or a letter of agency, showing the right of the applicant to attach to the structure. 
(G)  A pre-application meeting may be held upon the request of the applicant and at or before the pre-application meeting, the applicant shall be provided instructions for completing an application. Said instructions are to be controlling as regards the form and substance of the issues addressed in the Instructions and must be followed. 
(H)  The applicant shall include a written statement that: 
(1)  The applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facility shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of all applicable permits and authorizations, without exception, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all applicable county, state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and 
(2)  The construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is legally permissible including, but not limited to, the fact that the applicant is authorized to do business in the state. 
(I)  An application for attaching to an existing structure or for modifying an existing facility without increasing the height or width of the structure or the dimensions of the equipment compound shall contain the information as required in section 10.9-1—10.9-4. 
( Ord. No. 2011-02 , § I(Exh. A), 10-19-2010) 
10.9-1. Proof of Need. Troup County requires co-location wherever possible. Accordingly, proof of need shall not be required as part of and in support of an application for co-location unless the zoning administrator determines that one or more of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The proposed co-location would increase the height or width of the tower or structure being attached to; or 
(2)  The proposed co-location would increase the amount of land used to accommodate the support structure and related equipment enclosures or cabinets. 
Should the zoning administrator find that one or more of the foregoing circumstances exist, he/she may deem a co-location application to be incomplete and require an applicant to supplement and/or amend its application to satisfy the requirements of section 10.8-1 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009; Ord. No. 2011-02 , § I(Exh. A), 10-19-2010) 
10.9-2. Ownership and Management. 
(A)  The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the application; 
(B)  The name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the applicant, including the legal name of the applicant. If the owner of the structure is different than the applicant, the name and all necessary contact information shall be provided; 
(C)  The physical and postal address and tax map parcel number of the property; 
(D)  A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the wireless telecommunications facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.9-3. Planning and Zoning. 
(A)  The zoning district or designation in which the property is situated; 
(B)  The size of the property on which the structure to be attached to is located, stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all lot lines; 
(C)  The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the property on which the structure is located and that is the subject of the application; 
(D)  If attaching to an existing tower, a site plan showing the vertical rendition of the Tower identifying all users and attachments to the tower and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and lighting; 
(E)  If attaching to a building or other structure, a site plan showing the proposed attachments and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above the roof or balustrade, whichever is appropriate; 
(F)  The azimuth, size and center line height location of all proposed and existing antennae on the supporting structure; 
(G)  The number, type and model of the antenna(s) proposed, along with a copy of the specification sheet(s) for the antennas. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.9-4. Safety/Requirements. 
(A)  If attaching to an existing tower, the age of the tower in years, including the date of the grant of the original permit or authorization for the tower; 
(B)  If attaching to an existing tower, a description of the type of tower, e.g., guyed, self-supporting lattice or monopole; 
(C)  If attaching to an existing tower, the make, model, type and manufacturer of the tower and the structural design calculations, certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state, certifying and adequately demonstrating to the county a tower's capability to safely accommodate the facilities of the applicant without change or modification, taking into account the geotechnical situation and the foundation design; the proposed collocation shall not exceed the applicable weight limits for the wireless support structure, as demonstrated by a letter from a structural engineer licensed to practice in this state; 
(D)  If any change or modification of the tower or other structure to be attached to is needed, a detailed narrative explaining what changes are needed, why they are needed and who will be responsible to assure that the changes are made; 
(E)  If the structure proposed to be attached to is a tower that has not previously been permitted under this article, or unless the applicant can provide proof that this was provided at the time of the initial application for the tower or other structure, the applicant shall provide a copy of the installed foundation design, as well as a geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation, evaluation report and foundation recommendation for the tower site or other structure; 
(F)  If attaching to an existing tower, a copy of the latest ansi inspection report done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EIA/TIA 222F—Annex E for any self-supporting tower that is five years old or older or for any guyed tower that is three years old or older. If an ANSI inspection report has not been done pursuant to the preceding schedule, an ansi report shall be done and submitted as part of the application; 
(G)  If not attaching to an existing tower, but rather a different type of structure, a structural report signed by a professional engineer licensed to do business in the state and bearing that engineer's currently valid stamp, showing the structural adequacy of the structure to accommodate the proposed wireless facility(ies), including any equipment shelter, unless the equipment shelter is located on the ground or on the lowest floor of a building; 
(H)  If attaching to a structure other than a tower, to which the public has or could reasonably have or gain access to, an applicant shall provide documentation, including all calculations, proving that the potential exposure to RF radiation (i.e., NIER or non-ion-emitting radiation), will be in compliance with the most recent Federal Communications Commission regulations governing RF radiation and exposure thereto, and further denoting the minimum distance from any antennas an individual may safely stand without being exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC's permitted standards and any portion(s) of the structure that would be exposed to RF radiation in excess of the FCC's permitted standards. In compliance with the FCC's regulations, in such an instance the RF radiation from all wireless facilities shall be included in the calculations to show the cumulative effect on any area of the building or structure deemed accessible by the public. Such report or analysis shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state; or 
(I)  In an instance on a tower where the new wireless facilities will be ten meters or more above ground level, signed documentation such as the FCC's "checklist to determine whether a facility may categorically excluded" shall be provided to verify that the wireless telecommunication facility with the proposed installation will be in full compliance with the current FCC's RF emissions regulations. If not categorically excluded, a complete RF emissions study is required to enable verification of compliance, pursuant to subsection (E)(21) of this section, including providing all calculations so that such may be verified; 
(J)  If any section or portion of the structure to be attached to is not in compliance with the FCC's regulations regarding RF radiation, that section or portion must be barricaded with a suitable warning barrier to discourage approaching into the area in excess of the FCC's regulations, and be marked off with yellow and black striped warning tape or a suitable warning barrier, as well as placing RF radiation signs as needed and appropriate to warn individuals of the potential danger; 
(K)  A signed statement that the applicant will expeditiously remedy any physical or RF interference with other telecommunications or wireless devices or services; 
(L)  To protect the nature and character of the area and create the least visually intrusive impact reasonably possible under the facts and circumstances, any attachment to a building or other structure with a facie, the antennas shall be mounted on the facie, unless it can be proven that such will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service, and all such attachments and exposed cabling shall use camouflage or stealth techniques to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the structure to which such equipment is attached; 
(M)  If attaching to a water tank, mounting on the top of the tank or the use of a corral shall only be permitted if the applicant can prove that to locate elsewhere will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. The provisions of the preceding subsection (J) of this section shall also apply to any attachment to a water tank; 
(N)  The applicant shall provide a certification by a professional engineer licensed in the state, along with documentation, that prove that the tower or other structure and its foundation as proposed to be utilized are designed and were constructed to meet all local state, federal and ANSI structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads and the placement of any equipment on the roof a building after the addition of the proposed new facilities; 
(O)  If the application is to attach to or modify existing facilities on a tower, the applicant shall provide signed documentation of the tower condition; specifically a report done pursuant to the latest edition of ANSI-EINTIA 222F (or 222G if adopted by the state)—Annex E for any self-supporting tower that is five years old or older or for a guyed tower that is three years old or older. Any deficiencies, other than strictly cosmetic ones, must be completed or remedied prior to the issuance of a building permit for the attachment of any component of the proposed wireless facilities; 
(P)  So as to be the least visually intrusive as is reasonably possible given the facts and circumstances involved, and thereby have the least adverse visual effect and create the least intrusive or lowest profile or visual silhouette reasonably possible, unless it can be proven that such would be technologically impracticable. So as minimize the visual profile of the antennas all antennas attached to a tower or other structure shall be flush mounted or as near to flush mounted as is possible without prohibiting or having the effect of prohibiting the provision of service, or prove technically, with hard data and a detailed narrative, that flush mounting or other low profile antenna cannot be used and would serve to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service; 
(Q)  Unless it is deemed inappropriate or unnecessary by the county given the facts and circumstances, the applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related equipment and structures of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility up to a height of ten feet; 
(R)  The wireless telecommunications facility and all accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall include the utilization of stealth, camouflage or concealment technology as may be required by the county and as is practicable under the facts and circumstances; 
(S)  All utilities installed for a new wireless telecommunications facility shall be installed underground and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the county including specifically, but not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where appropriate; 
(T)  If the facility currently has an access road or turn around space, but such is deemed in disrepair or in need of remedial work to make it serviceable and safe and in compliance with any applicable regulations, the application shall contain a commitment to remedy or restore the road or turn around space so that it is serviceable and safe and in compliance with applicable regulations; 
(U)  The applicant, and the owner of record of any structure or tower attached to, shall, jointly or separately, at its cost and expense, be required to place with the county a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the county as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $25,000.00 for attaching to an existing structure or existing tower and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the county to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this law and conditions of any special use permit issued pursuant to this law. Said bond or other security shall also serve as a removal security to prevent the taxpayers from bearing the cost of removal in the event of the abandonment or cessation of use for more than 90 consecutive days. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the special use permit and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of the original special use permit. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009; Ord. No. 2011-02 , § I(Exh. A), 10-19-2010) 
10.10 - Location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(A)  Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate, site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the following priorities, one being the highest priority and five being the lowest priority. 
(1)  On existing towers or other structures without increasing the height of the tower or structure. 
(2)  On properties in areas zoned for GI, Ll, CA. 
(3)  On properties in areas zoned for HC, GC, LC, NHC. 
(4)  On properties in areas zoned for AG. 
(5)  On properties in areas zoned for USD, MHP, MFR, RR, AGR, LRR, SFMD, PUD, CRVP, LR. 
(B)  If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above, then a detailed explanation and justification must be provided as to why a site of any higher priority designations was not selected. The applicant seeking a special use permit must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why the proposed site was chosen and the reasons why higher priority locations were deemed unfit or undesirable. 
(C)  An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the site proposed is the only site leased or selected or because there is an existing lease with a landowner. An application shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the county why co-location is commercially impracticable or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship. 
(D)  Notwithstanding the above, the county may approve any site located within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the county finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the county and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood. Conversely, the county may direct that the proposed location be changed to another location that is more in keeping with the goals of this article and the public interest as determined by the BOC. 
(E)  If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included with the application, including the technical justification for such. 
(F)  Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest available priority, the county may disapprove an application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements; 
(2)  Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or district; 
(3)  The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation; 
(4)  The placement and location of wireless telecommunications facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the county, or employees of the service provider or other service providers; 
(5)  The placement and location of a wireless telecommunications facility would result in a conflict with, compromise in or change of the nature or character of the surrounding area; 
(6)  Conflicts with the provisions of this article; 
(7)  Failure to submit a complete application as required under this article. 
(G)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, for good cause shown, such as the ability to utilize a shorter or less intrusive facility elsewhere and still accomplish the primary service objective, the county may require the relocation of a proposed site, including allowing for the fact that relocating the site chosen by the applicant may require the use of more than one site to provide substantially the same service if the relocation could result in a less intrusive facility or facilities, singly or in combination, so long as such does not prohibit or serve to prohibit the provision of service. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.11 - Shared use of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and other structures. 
(A)  The county, as opposed to the construction of a new tower, requires wireless facilities to be located on existing towers or other suitable structures without increasing the height of the tower or structure, unless such is proven to be technologically impracticable. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying all existing towers and other suitable structures within one mile of the location of any proposed new tower, unless the applicant can show that some other distance is more appropriate and reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable structure cannot be used. 
(B)  An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of the existing owner to permit its use by the applicant. 
(C)  Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially within the county, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.12 - Height of Telecommunications Tower(s). 
(A)  All new towers shall be of the monopole type, unless such is able to be proven to be technologically impracticable. No new towers of a lattice or guyed type shall be permitted, unless relief is otherwise expressly granted. 
(B)  The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the technical need by the service provider for the total height of any tower, facility and/or antenna requested and the basis therefore. To enable verification of the need for the requested height, documentation in the form of propagation studies must include all backup data used to produce the studies at the height requested and at a minimum of ten feet lower height. Such documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the county, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(C)  The maximum permitted total height of a new tower shall be 120 feet above pre-construction ground level, unless it can be proven that such height would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service in the intended service area. The 120-foot maximum permitted height is not as-of-right height, but rather the maximum permitted height, absent proof of the technological need for a greater height. 
(D)  Notwithstanding the 120-foot maximum permitted height, telecommunications towers and facilities shall be no taller than the minimum height technologically necessary to enable the provision of wireless service coverage or capacity as needed within the county and only within the county. 
(E)  Spacing or the distance between towers shall be such that the service may be provided without exceeding the maximum permitted height. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.13 - Visibility of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(A)  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except as required by the FAA. 
(B)  Stealth: All new wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to towers, shall utilize stealth or camouflage techniques and technology to the extent practical, unless such can be shown to be either commercially or technologically impracticable. 
(C)  Dual Mode: In order to minimize the number of antenna arrays and thus the visual impact, the county may require the use of dual mode antennas to be used, including by two different carriers, unless it can be proven that such will not work technologically and that such would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service. 
(D)  Tower Finish/Color: Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(E)  Lighting: If lighting is required, applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. All towers requiring lighting shall be lighted to effectively eliminate the ground scatter effect of the lighting and to prevent the light from being seen from the ground. 
(F)  Antenna Profile: All new or replacement antennas, except omnidirectional whip antennas, shall be attached to create the smallest profile reasonably possible under the facts and circumstances, unless it can be proven that to do so would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the service. 
(G)  Placement on Building—Facie: If attached to a building, all antennas shall be mounted on the face of the building and camouflaged to match the color and, if possible, texture of the building or in a manner so as to make the antennas as visually innocuous and undetectable as is possible given the facts and circumstances involved. 
(H)  Lighting—Preventing Ground Scatter Effect: For any wireless facility for which lighting is required under the FAA's regulations, or that for any reason has lights attached, all such lighting shall be affixed with technology that enables the light to be seen as intended from the air, but that prevents the ground scatter effect so that it not able to be seen from the ground to a height of at least 12 degrees vertical for a distance of at least one mile in a level terrain situation. Such device must be compliant with or not in conflict with FAA regulations. A physical shield may be used, as long as the light can be seen from the air, as intended by the FAA. 
(I)  In the event a lighted tower is modified, at the time of the modification the county may require that the tower be retrofitted with the technology set forth in the preceding subsection (F). 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.14 - Security of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located, fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. Specifically: 
(A)  All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy anchor points and wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and 
(B)  Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed in such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them. 
10.15 - Signage. 
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF radiation or to control exposure to RF radiation within a given area. A sign of the same size installed to contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. On tower sites, an FCC registration site, as applicable, is also to be present. The signs shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation requires lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.16 - Lot Size and Setbacks. 
(A)  All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications facility attachment structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: A distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless telecommunications facility structure plus ten percent of the height of the tower or structure, otherwise known as the "fall zone," or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Any accessory structure shall be located to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. The fall zone or setback shall be measured from the nearest portion of the right-of-way of any public road or thoroughfare and any occupied building or domicile. Further, the nearest portion of any access road to a wireless facility shall be no less than 15 feet from the nearest property line. 
(B)  There shall be no development of habitable buildings within the Fall Zone or setback area set forth in the preceding subsection (A). 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.17 - Retention of Expert Assistance and Reimbursement by Applicant. 
(A)  The county may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the county in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any site inspections. To the extent this article requires the applicant to provide documentation prepared by a trained certified professional licensed to practice in Georgia (professional engineer, architect, radio frequency engineer), the review of such documentation shall be carried out by a similarly qualified professional. 
(B)  An applicant shall deposit with the county funds sufficient to reimburse the county for all reasonable costs of: 
(1)  Consulting and expert evaluation and consultation with the county or the applicant in connection with the submission and/or review of any application; 
(2)  Any lease negotiations, the pre-approval evaluation, and including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. 
The initial deposit shall be $5,000.00 in the case of a new facility application governed by section 10.8 and $2,500.00 in the case of a co-location or equipment modification application as governed by section 10.9. 
The placement of the initial deposit with the county shall precede the pre-application meeting or any work being done as regards processing an application. The county will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The county's consultants/experts shall invoice the county for its services in reviewing the application, including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall not be increased without action by the application review committee finding that the initial application request has been modified, that the scope of the review is unique, or the applicant has failed to cooperate with the review causing additional staff/consultant time and effort to complete the evaluation of the application. However, if at any time during the process this escrow account has a balance less than $1,000.00, and the application review committee finds that the increase is warranted, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the county, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000.00 in the case of a new facility application governed by section 10.8 and $2,500.00 in the case of a co-location or equipment modification application governed by section 10.9. The applicant may appeal the decision of the application review committee to require the replenishment of an escrow account to the board of commissioners by providing notice to the zoning administrator within five days of notification of the decision of the application review committee and the decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the county before any further action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the applicant upon written request. 
(C)  No work shall be done on an application for which the full amount of the escrow deposit as set forth in the preceding subsection (B) of this section has not been placed with the county. In the event the escrow deposit minimum balance as set forth in this subsection (B) is not maintained, all work on the application shall cease until the deposit is replenished as required. 
(D)  The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in subsection (B) of this section may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the completeness of the application, necessary discussions with the applicant and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any construction or modification. 
(E)  Records of all outside costs associated with the review and permitting process shall be maintained and available for public inspection, in compliance with applicable Georgia law. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.18 - Public Hearing and Notification Requirements. 
(A)  Prior to the approval of any application for a Special Use Permit for a new tower or for any facility that increases the height of the structure to which it is to be attached, a public hearing shall be held by the county, notice of which shall be published in the official newspaper of the county no less than 15 calendar days and no more than 45 days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing. In order that the nearby landowners are aware of the public hearing, the Applicant shall notify all landowners within 1,500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new wireless telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located and the application shall contain the names and address of all such landowners. Such notification shall be by certified U.S. Mail. 
(B)  The county shall schedule the public hearing referred to in subsection (A) of this section once it finds the application is complete and is not required to set a date if the application is not complete. The county, at any stage prior to issuing a special use permit, may require such additional information as it deems necessary as such relates to the issue of the siting, construction or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.19 - Action on an Application for a Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(A)  The county will undertake a review of an application pursuant to this article in a timely fashion, consistent with its responsibilities, and shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative complexity of the application and the circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be involved, and the applicants desire for a timely action on the application. 
(B)  The county may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory or other committee of its choice for a nonbinding recommendation. 
(C)  After the public hearing and after formally considering the application, the county may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a special use permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the grant of the permit shall always be upon the applicant. 
(D)  If the county approves the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such approval in writing within ten calendar days of the county's action, and the Special use Permit or other appropriate authorization shall be issued within 30 days after such approval. Except for necessary building permits, once a special use permit has been granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the county, such as site plan or zoning approvals, shall be required by the county for the wireless telecommunications facilities covered by the special use permit. 
(E)  If the county denies the special use permit or other appropriate authorization for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such denial in writing within ten calendar days of the county's action and shall set forth in writing the reason or reasons for the denial. Re-application for special permits shall be allowed per the requirements set forth in Article 16 of Appendix "A" to the Troup County Code. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.20 - Extent and Parameters of Special Use Permit for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
The extent and parameters of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be as follows: 
(A)  Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the express prior written notification to the county. 
(B)  In the event of a violation of this article, following an opportunity to cure and, if not cured within the time frame set forth in the notice of violation, a hearing shall be held upon due prior notice to the applicant. Following such hearing, if found to be in violation of this article, the special use permit may be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the special use permit, or for a material violation of this article or other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
(C)  Notice of a violation and of the date, time and place of a hearing shall be provided by registered mail to the last known address of the holder of the special use permit. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.21 - Application Fee. 
At the time that a person submits an application for a special use permit or other appropriate authorization for a new tower or a co-located facility, such person shall pay a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in the county's fee schedule as may be amended or changed from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.22 - Removal and Performance Security. 
The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless telecommunications facilities site shall, at its cost and expense, be jointly required to execute with the applicant and file with the county a bond, or other form of security acceptable to the county as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000.00 for a tower with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the county to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this article and conditions of any special use permit issued pursuant to this article. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the special use permit and/or until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that, which existed prior to the issuance of the original special use permit. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.23 - Reservation of Authority to Inspect Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities and any and all lessees, renters, and/or licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities, place and construct such facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws, ordinances and regulations and other applicable requirements, the county may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities including, but not limited to, towers, antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or located on the permitted site. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.24 - Liability Insurance. 
(A)  All permitted wireless telecommunications facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the permit in amounts as set forth below: 
(1)  Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and property damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate; and 
(2)  Automobile coverage: $1,000,000.00 per occurrence/ $2,000,000 aggregate; and 
(3)  A $3,000,000 umbrella coverage; and 
(4)  Workers compensation and disability: Statutory amounts. 
(B)  For a wireless telecommunications facility on county property, the commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically include the county and its officers, commissions, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional insured. 
(C)  The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a best's rating of at least A. 
(D)  The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the county with at least 30 days' prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance. 
(E)  Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the county at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such policies are to renew or replace. 
(F)  Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the grant of the special use permit, the holder of the special use permit shall deliver to the county a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts. 
(G)  A certificate of insurance that states that it is for informational purposes only and does not confer rights upon the county shall not be deemed to comply with this section. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.25 - Indemnification. 
(A)  Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that is proposed for county property, pursuant to this article, shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by the article, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the county and its officers, commissions, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising there from, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility, excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the county, or its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by the county. 
(B)  Notwithstanding the requirements noted in subsection (A) of this section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the county itself applies for and secures a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.26 - Fines. 
(A)  In the event of a violation of this article or any special use permit issued pursuant to this article, the county may impose and collect, and the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall pay to the county, fines or penalties as set forth below. 
(B)  If the holder of a special use permit fails to comply with provisions of this article such shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $350.00 per day per violation following due and proper notice and, further, each day or part thereof that a violation remains uncured after proper notice shall constitute a separate violation, punishable separately. 
(C)  Notwithstanding anything in this article, the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with this article or any section of this article. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the special use permit to termination and revocation of the special use permit. The county may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this article, without limiting other remedies available to the county. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.27 - Default and/or Revocation. 
If a wireless telecommunications facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, re-located, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of this article or of the special use permit, then the county shall notify the holder of the special use permit in writing of such violation. A permit holder in violation may be considered in default and subject to tines as in section 10.24 and if a violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the county in a reasonable period of time the special use permit is subject to revocation. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.28 - Removal of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
(A)  The owner of any tower or wireless facility shall be required to provide a minimum of 30 days' written notice to the county clerk prior to abandoning any tower or wireless facility. 
(B)  Under the following circumstances, the county may determine that the health, safety, and welfare interests of the county warrant and require the removal of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(1)  Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit have been abandoned (i.e., not used as wireless telecommunications facilities) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any 365-day period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall commence within 90 days; 
(2)  Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard; 
(3)  Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located, constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required special use permit, or any other necessary authorization and the special permit may be revoked. 
(C)  If the county makes such a determination as noted in subsection (A) of this section, then the county shall notify the holder of the special use permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities within 48 hours that said wireless telecommunications facilities are to be removed. The county may approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(D)  The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facilities, and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible. Such restoration limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the county. However, if the owner of the property upon which the wireless telecommunications facilities are located wishes to retain any access roadway to the wireless telecommunications facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of the county. 
(E)  If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or substantial progress has not been made to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the permit holder has received notice, then the county may order officials or representatives of the county to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities at the sole expense of the owner or special use permit holder. 
(F)  If, the county removes, or causes to be removed, wireless telecommunications facilities, and the owner of the wireless telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful location within ten days, then the county may take steps to declare the wireless telecommunications facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components. 
(G)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the county may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless telecommunications facilities, for no more than 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities shall be developed by the holder of the special use permit, subject to the approval of the county, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the special use permit and the county. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the 90-day time period, then the county may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this section and utilize the bond in section 10.21. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.29 - Relief. 
Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this article may request such at the pre-application meeting, provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the submitted application for either a special use permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted special use permit a request for modification of its tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete. However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove. The applicant shall bear all costs of the county in considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted, the relief, waiver or exemption will have no significant affect on the health, safety and welfare of the county, its residents or other service providers. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.30 - Periodic Regulatory Review by the County. 
(A)  The county may conduct at any time a review and examination of this entire article. 
(B)  If after such a periodic review and examination of this article, the county determines that one or more provisions of this article should be amended, repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, then the county may take whatever measures are necessary in accordance with applicable ordinance in order to accomplish the same. It is noted that where warranted, and in the best interests of the county, the county may repeal this entire ordinance [article] at any time. 
(C)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the county may at any time and in any manner (to the extent permitted by federal, state, or local law), amend, add, repeal, and/or delete one or more provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.31 - Adherence to State and/or Federal Rules and Regulations. 
(A)  To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a special use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
(B)  To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the duration of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such a special use permit shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.32 - Conflict with Other Laws. 
Where this article differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the county, state or federal government, this article shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.33 - Effective Date. 
This article shall be effective immediately upon passage, pursuant to applicable legal and procedural requirement. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
10.34 - Authority. 
This local ordinance is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the State and federal government. 
( Ord. No. 2010-07 , § I, 12-15-2009) 
ARTICLE XI. - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

11.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the article is to provide standards and regulations to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Troup County. Troup County recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing and is compatible with site-built housing if developed in accordance with comparable standards. These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes on single lots or within parks used for permanent residential occupancy in unincorporated Troup County, Georgia. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the Troup County Planning Commission, the Troup County Health Department, and the building and zoning office to review the development of manufactured home sites and manufactured home parks within the unincorporated areas of Troup County for compliance with standards as stated in this ordinance. 
11.2 - Manufactured Homes. 
11.2-1 Nonconforming Use. Nonconforming mobile/manufactured home parks lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 90 days, the manufactured home park shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations prior to its being occupied again. Any expansion or addition to an existing manufactured home park shall be in compliance with these regulations, as amended. 
11.2-2 Placement Application. An application for placement approval shall be completed and review, processing and advertising fees paid. No manufactured housing unit shall be moved, placed, added to the Troup County property digest, issued a decal or building permit until a placement approval is provided by said application. Application shall be available in the planning and zoning office and/or building inspections office. 
11.2-3 Issuance of Permit. Any owner of a manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said manufactured home, shall obtain a building permit from the Building and Inspections Department of Troup County indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person or persons are authorized to occupy any newly installed manufactured home. 
11.2-4 Permit Procedures. A manufactured home permit to move a manufactured home into or within the county shall not be issued until the following conditions have been met in accordance with established procedures. 
11.2-5 All manufactured homes must be located at an approved manufactured home space, or in an approved manufactured home park subject to the requirements of this ordinance. 
11.2-6 For individual lots outside of a manufactured home park, a septic tank certificate shall be obtained from Troup County Health Department for onsite sewage disposal, or in the event that sewer will be provided, a letter shall be provided by the local government providing the service verifying they will allow public sewer hookup. 
11.2-7 For purposes of this section, the building and inspections office shall issue the aforementioned building permit, and the health department shall issue the aforementioned septic tank certificate. Upon issuance of the required permits, a manufactured home may be moved into the county or within the county and installed for occupancy provided it has obtained approval either from the Troup County Board of Commissioners or the zoning administrator if it is a replacement manufactured home. 
11.2-8 All manufactured homes located in the unincorporated county shall adhere to the appearance standards for type I (individual housing lots outside manufactured home parks) or type II housing (for manufactured homes located in manufactured home parks) set forth in Article VII. 
11.2-9 All manufactured homes or offices located on individual lots that meet or exceed the housing appearance standards for type I houses may be considered for approval at the discretion of the zoning administrator, provided that the proposed manufactured housing unit (MHU) meets all of the following: 
a.  The proposed MHU meets the standards for type I houses; 
b.  The lot on which the MHU is to be sited is a conforming lot and the site meets the zoning district's requirements; 
c.  The MHU is a replacement manufactured home or office unit; 
d.  Reserved; 
e.  Reserved; 
f.  A permit for the demolition shall be issued for any residential structure existing on the lot, parcel or tract on which the manufactured unit is to be located prior to any replacement manufactured unit; 
g.  No existing MHU to be replaced may be converted for use as an accessory structure (storage); 
h.  The MHU is a replacement home located on a parcel where a manufactured home has not been physically located for more than ten years and a site inspection by the zoning administrator has been conducted to determine if conditions of the original approval have changed. Some conditions that may cause denial of administrative approval are: 
1.  Changes in zoning of the subject or surrounding parcels 
2.  Area has been developed with uses not compatible with manufactured home placement. 
3.  Property owner being in violation of nuisance or other county ordinances at the time of application. 
4.  Other conditions that require a variance. 
i.  Decal and property taxes are current. 
11.2-10 All other manufactured home placement applications shall be approved by the Troup County Board of Commissioners prior to being issued a permit. Application for Manufactured Home Placement may be obtained from the Building and Inspections Office. The application will be put on the next regularly scheduled Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission agenda for a recommendation from that body to the Troup County Board of Commissioners for approval, denial or continuance. There will be a public hearing as per sections 16.10 and 16.11 and notice posted as per section 16.8. 
( Ord. No. 2010-11 , § IG., 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 2010-12 , § IH., 6-16-2010; Ord. No. 2013-04 , § I, 11-20-2012) 
11.3 - Minimum Construction Standards. 
Each newly installed manufactured home in Troup County shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD), as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C., section 5401, et seq., before that manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service to said manufactured home. It is the intent of this section of this ordinance to prohibit moving manufactured homes into Troup County that do not conform to the applicable housing and urban development construction standards, as expressed in 42 U.S.C. section 5401 et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that Act. To that end, no manufactured home shall be allowed to locate or relocate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this County unless that manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by HUD, which compliance must be evidenced by the affixation of a permanent label or tag certifying the compliance. Manufactured homes that do not display certification compliance shall not be eligible for a Troup County building and/or occupancy permit. Any manufactured home in Troup County that legally exists at the time of adoption of this ordinance that does display certification compliance shall not be required to have certification. However, any manufactured home that does not display certification shall be considered a nonconforming structure and shall not be relocated to any other site within the county. 
11.4 - Installation Requirements. 
All newly installed manufactured homes shall be permanently connected to water, sewerage and electrical service in compliance with applicable health codes and department of human resources (DHR) rules in chapter 120-3-7 Rules and regulations for manufactured homes, including rules made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. All manufactured homes shall be installed on an approved pier system and secured with approved tie-downs devices, an approved plumbing system, an approved electrical system and an approved landing at each exit as required by the aforementioned rules, regulations and in compliance with appearance standards for the appropriate zoning district. Each manufactured home shall be installed such that the finished floor level of the manufactured home shall not exceed an average height higher than 80 inches in elevation from the finished grades, in accordance with chapter 120-3-7 Rules and regulations for manufactured homes. All manufactured homes shall be installed to meet the manufacturer's regulations. At the time of inspection, the space beneath each manufactured home shall be enclosed by cement blocks with mortar with the exception of ventilation and access openings, and in compliance with appearance requirements in Article VII. The residential zone of each manufactured home will dictate which type it must meet (see permitted use table 7.3). The enclosing materials shall extend from the lower edge of the exterior walls of the manufactured home to the ground surface level of the pad on which it is located. All ventilation and access openings shall be covered with wire mesh screen or its equivalent. 
11.5 - Inspection for Manufactured Homes. 
The following requirements shall pertain to the installation of manufactured homes on individual lots or in parks. 
11.6 - Foundation. 
The building inspector shall require the foundation to be inspected to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations for manufactured homes, as may be subsequently revised. These rules and regulations for manufactured homes are incorporated as a part of this ordinance by reference. Until the foundation is inspected and approved by the building inspector, no additional work will be approved. 
11.7 - On-Site Sewerage. 
Where individual on-site sewerage systems are installed with public or community water systems, the minimum lot size shall be no less than required in the zoning district in which the home is located. All on site sewerage systems shall be subject to the Troup County Health Department approval. 
11.8 - Electrical. 
The building inspector shall require inspection of the external electrical system to ensure compliance with current National Electrical Code, as amended. 
11.9 - Gas. 
The building inspector shall require inspection of the external gas system to ensure compliance with the current standard gas code, as amended. 
11.10 - Inspections/Certificate of Occupancy. 
Until these inspections have been made and the manufactured home is found to be in compliance with all applicable codes, no permanent power may be installed, and no occupancy shall be permitted. Evidence of compliance will be shown by written documentation provided to the applicant and a sticker attached to the electrical meter base. 
11.11 - Occupancy of Recreational Vehicles. 
No recreational vehicle shall be permanently occupied within any manufactured home park development nor connected to permanent water or electrical power and no manufactured home location permits shall be issued for recreational vehicles. 
11.12 - Manufactured Home Parks. 
11.12-1 Procedures for Development. Manufactured home parks may be developed on any parcel of land that is zoned or may be zoned manufactured home park (MHP). Where three or more homes are located on one tract of land it shall be defined as a manufactured home park and any expansion of existing manufactured home parks shall meet the requirements of this section. All manufactured home parks developed after adoption of this ordinance shall meet the following site plan requirements: 
11.12-2 Site Plan Approval Required. All manufactured home park developments shall require site plan approval by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission in accordance with the procedures and requirements established herein. Site plans required herein for the placement of three or more residential units shall contain the seal of a Georgia registered engineer or surveyor. No building permits shall be issued for sites within any development until final approval is granted subject to all park plan requirements. 
11.12-3 Park Plan Submittal Requirements. All park plans shall be submitted to the zoning administrator accompanied by the required fee payment as established by Troup County. 
11.12-4 The name of the proposed park, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
11.12-5 Location map and legal description of the manufactured home park, north arrow (designated magnetic or true). 
11.12-6 Complete plans to scale of one inch equals not more than 100 feet and specifications of the proposed park showing: 
a.  The area and dimensions of the tract of land; including topographic data at a contour interval of not more than five feet or an interval appropriate for decision making on the tract; and including the location and type of soils on the tract. Statement of accuracy signed by surveyor, engineer or soil scientist as applicable. 
b.  The number, location and dimensions of all manufactured home lots. 
c.  The location and width of streets; the location and size of drainage mechanisms proposed, including the size of each application drainage area. 
d.  The location of service buildings (laundry service, office, community building etc.) and other proposed structures. 
e.  The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
f.  The plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse disposal facilities. 
g.  The plans and specifications of all buildings to be constructed within the park. 
h.  The location of street lights, if applicable. 
i.  The locations of bulk refuse containers, perimeter walls, and park signs. 
j.  A soil erosion and sedimentation plan meeting the requirements of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act. 
k.  The certification from the appropriate authority on water and sewer acceptability. 
11.12-7 Development Compliance. All required improvements, according to the site plan approved by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission, shall be installed in each phase before the issuance of building permits. 
11.13 - Regulations. 
11.13-1 Soil and Ground Cover Requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall adhere to the following: 
a.  All streets shall be paved with curb and gutters, and in accordance with Troup County standards. 
b.  All areas designated as yards shall be planted with grass or acceptable vegetative shrubs or flowers. 
c.  Any walkways to front or back entrances shall be covered with stone or other solid material capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust. 
11.13-2 Location and Frontage. A manufactured home park development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 100 feet on a public street. 
11.13-3 Site Drainage Requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every park site shall be graded and equipped to drain all water in a safe, efficient manner. 
11.13-4 Streets. All manufactured home parks shall contain a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park, and shall have at least one unobstructed access to a public street or highway for every 30 homes. The following requirements shall apply to the development of the park street system. 
11.13-5 All internal streets shall meet the minimum requirements of Troup County standards for roads. 
11.13-6 All cul-de-sacs shall be constructed with a minimum 50-foot radius. 
11.13-7 All park streets shall be maintained in good repair at all times by the owner(s) of the park if roads are private. 
11.13-8 Street design, base preparations, and surface construction materials shall meet the requirements of the county street and road standards. Written approval of the street system by the county engineer shall be required and any required maintenance or performance bonds shall be received by the roads and engineering department before any building permit is issued. 
11.13-9 Street naming, address assignment and display shall comply with the Troup County Comprehensive Address Assignment and Display Guide. 
11.13-10 Off-Street Parking Requirements. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per lot shall be provided in all manufactured home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. 
11.13-11 Lot Area and Width. A manufactured home park development shall have a minimum area of ten contiguous acres with 30 percent for streets and other improvements including the requirements of 11.3-8. Individual unit spaces shall consist of a minimum 1,200 s.f. per unit. 
11.13-12 Recreation and Other Community Facilities. Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other facilities such as a laundry, community center or other similar facilities. 
11.13-13 Setbacks Required. 
11.13-14 No manufactured home or accessory building or structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any park perimeter property boundary. 
11.13-15 Each manufactured home shall be setback from any other manufactured home by at least 40 feet. 
11.13-16 There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between any individual manufactured home and an adjoining street, common parking areas, or other common areas. 
11.13-17 Perimeter Buffer Required. An undisturbed buffer consisting of trees and other landscaping material at least 50 feet in width shall be provided and maintained around the entire perimeter of a manufactured home park. Provided, however, any underground utilities may be placed within this buffer, but no closer than 25 feet from the perimeter of the park boundary. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the buffer, which shall be so maintained as to present a neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
11.13-18 Lighting. All manufactured home parks shall have lighting of height, spacing and intensity so that each home site is accessible and parking is appropriately illuminated. 
11.13-19 Water Supply. 
11.13-20 Governmental Water System: All manufactured homes parks shall connect to an existing public water system if such system is located within 1,000 feet of the proposed park. The availability and adequacy of a public water supply shall be confirmed by the applicable agency having jurisdiction. If the public water supply is determined to be unavailable or inadequate for service, the board of zoning appeals/planning commission may waive the requirement and allow an alternative water supply source. 
11.13-21 Non-Governmental Water System: Well and water distribution system must meet the standards for a community water system in accordance with the rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, chapter 391-3-5, "Rules for safe drinking water", as amended and be approved by the Troup County Health Department. 
11.13-22 Sewerage Disposal and Treatment: All manufactured home parks shall be required to provide either: 
a.  A public sewerage treatment system approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources; or 
b.  An onsite sewerage management system approved by the Troup County Health Department. 
c.  An onsite sewerage treatment system that is approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. On site, decentralized systems shall meet the requirements of Troup County. 
11.13-23 Electrical: All electric installations shall meet the requirements of the current National Electric Code, as amended. 
11.13-24 Refuse Collection Facilities: Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and adequately distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents, or at least two individually covered refuse containers having a capacity of 30 gallons or more for each occupied lot. Bulk containers shall be enclosed with a minimum of four feet high chain link fence and placed upon a concrete pad, extending at least 18 inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
11.13-25 Service Buildings. Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well being of park residents. Such structures shall conform to the International Building Codes adopted by Troup County, as amended, and may include, but are not limited to, the following uses: 
Park management offices and storage; 
Community postal facilities; 
Indoor community recreation areas; 
Others as listed in Article VII section 7.4 of the permitted use table. 
11.13-26 Restrictions on Occupancy: A manufactured home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it has met the installation requirements in this ordinance. The manufactured home shall require the approval and inspection by a Building Inspector of Troup County. 
ARTICLE XII. - COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS, CAMPGROUNDS AND RENTAL CABINS 

12.1 - Commercial Recreational Vehicle Parks. 
Any recreational vehicle park in Troup County will require zoning to that district. The CRVP zoning district shall encompass CRV parks, campgrounds and rental cabins. CRV parks are for the convenience of tourists, transient visitors to Troup County and are not intended to provide permanent housing for citizens of the county. Therefore, no RV shall be set up at any residence for occupancy on a permanent basis. Camp sites may be a part of a commercial recreational vehicle park or a campground may be developed separate from a CRV park. The camp sites and campground as a whole shall adhere to the same standards as those for a CRV park. 
12.2 - Recreational Vehicles. 
Recreational vehicles are allowed as a temporary residence. They shall be placed in a recreational vehicle park only and residents that own recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to rent RV's on property zoned for single-family residences. RV's may be located on site of single-family residences in an enclosed area or garage or carport and hooked to electricity for recharging batteries. RV's shall not be located in Manufactured Home Parks and rented as a permanent residence. 
12.3 - Site Plan Requirement. 
Any proposed CRV Park shall submit to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission for approval a site plan that shall conform to the regulations set forth in Article [section] 11.3-1. In addition the following standards are required. 
12.4 - Land Disturbance Permit. 
A permit shall be required prior to any grading, installation of facilities or advertising of proposed park. Land disturbance permits may be obtained from the Troup County Planning and Zoning office during normal business hours. 
12.5 - Development Standards. 
All RV Parks located in unincorporated Troup County shall conform to the following development standards. 
12.6 - Lot Area. 
Each individual space for use by a RV shall be 1,000 square feet. The lot area shall be graded and gravel inserted and surrounded on three sides by landscape timbers or other similar material, to ensure space provided for the RV to park is level and capable of sedimentation and erosion control. The maximum density for RV parks shall not exceed 20 units per acre. 
12.7 - Minimum Lot Size. 
For the purpose of the development of a CRV Park the minimum lot size shall be ten acres. The road frontage required for CRV parks, campgrounds or cabins is 300 feet. 
12.8 - Shower Facilities. 
Any CRV Park shall provide one shower and restroom facilities for every six rental spaces or every six campsites. This does not apply to cabins as each cabin should contain a minimum of one bathroom. 
12.9 - Electrical. 
Each individual space shall provide electrical hookup for the RV in accordance with current National Electrical Code as amended. 
12.10 - Water. 
Each individual space shall provide a water source for the RV to fill water storage tanks. Cabins shall be supplied with running water from an individual well, community water system or public water system. 
12.11 - Individual Spaces. 
Individual space in the park shall include a concrete picnic table, benches and a charcoal grill constructed of wrought iron or other similar material, permanently attached to a concrete pad. 
12.12 - Streets. 
Streets that provide access to the individual spaces shall be constructed to Troup County standards and shall be curb and gutter. The street system shall be maintained by park owner and is not the responsibility of Troup County. Each space shall be assigned and display an address for emergency response purposes. Street names and address assignment and display shall comply with the Troup County Comprehensive Address Assignment and Display Guide. 
12.13 - Solid Waste. 
Each CRV Park, campsite or cabin shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal. Collection facilities shall be either in the form of bulk containers (dumpsters) of sufficient size and adequately distributed throughout the park to meet the needs of the park residents, or at least two individually covered refuse containers having a capacity of 30 gallons or more for each occupied lot. Bulk containers shall be enclosed with a minimum of four feet high chain link fence and placed upon a concrete pad, extending at least 18 inches around each container perimeter. If individual containers are utilized, stands must be provided to hold the refuse containers upright. Collection services shall be provided at least once weekly and conveyed to the nearest approved sanitary landfill. Refuse areas shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner so as not to attract, harbor or breed insects, rodents or any manner of vermin or pest. 
12.14 - Frontage. 
The CRV park, campsite or cabin shall position individual spaces lots so the parcel has reverse frontage to U.S., State, county or local roads, with street system constructed and maintained by park owner. Interior street system for park shall be constructed to county standards and approved by the county engineer. 
12.15 - Waste Water Treatment Facility. 
All CRV parks shall construct a minimum of one wastewater treatment disposal system approved by the Troup County Health Department or the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. Each park shall have an approved on site waste water treatment system, either individual septic tanks, or onsite decentralized system approved in compliance with Troup County standards. 
12.16 - Service Buildings. 
Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well being of park guests. Such structures shall conform to the Georgia State Building Codes adopted by Troup County, as amended, and may include, but are not limited to the following uses: 
Park management offices and storage; 
Community postal facilities; 
Indoor community recreation areas; 
Other similar uses that may be necessary to meet the needs of guests as listed in the permitted use table for non-residential districts table 7.4. 
Any structure or use of a commercial nature shall be submitted with the site plan at the time of rezoning. If the property is already zoned for CRV park then the site plan approval by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission is required prior to any issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
12.17 - Rental Cabins. 
Each cabin area that is dependent on individual septic systems shall be approved by the Troup County Health Department for lot size. The size of the lot shall be the minimum required by the soil tests conducted by the health department, but in no case shall be less than 10,000 square feet. 
12.18 -   
Cabins shall be separated from each other by not less than 20 feet. 
12.19 -   
Cabin rentals shall comply in all buffer requirements as set forth in this section for CRV parks. 
12.20 -   
Cabin rentals shall comply with all development standards as set forth in this section for CRV parks. 
12.21 -   
Any area where cabins are built for rental on a temporary basis shall comply with the appropriate development standards as applicable in this section for CRV parks. 
ARTICLE XIII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

13.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations to foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians on private and public streets and to minimize nuisances from on-street parking. 
13.2 - Off-Street Parking. 
13.2-1 Off-Street Automobile Parking and Storage. Off-street parking and storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the uses mentioned in this section are established. Such automobile parking or storage space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth in table 13.1. Each automobile parking space shall be at least nine feet wide and 20 feet long. 
13.2-2 If the required automobile parking or storage space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, the board of zoning appeals/planning may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space is within 500 feet of such principal use. Such space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
13.2-3 All off-street automobile parking and storage space shall be so arranged that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public street, road or highway when leaving the premises. 
13.2-4 Gross Area. Gross leasable area (GLA) is the total building floor area in square feet that a developer may lease. Gross floor area (GFA) is the square feet sum of the areas of floors of a building, including all areas for human occupancy, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls but excluding unenclosed porches, interior parking spaces or any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet, six inches. 
13.2-5 Improvement and Maintenance. Off-street parking areas shall be graded to insure proper drainage, surfaced with all-weather gravel, asphalt or concrete materials and maintained in a clean, orderly and dust free condition. 
13.2-6 Bumper Guards. If the off-street parking area is surfaced with all-weather gravel materials, a bumper guard or wheel stop shall be installed to mark each space. 
13.2-7 Marking. If the off-street parking area is surfaced with concrete or asphalt, each parking space shall be painted with stripes, not less than three inches wide, running the length of each of the longer sides of the space or by other acceptable methods which clearly delineate the parking space within the parking lot. 
13.2-8 Handicapped Parking. Parking for the handicapped within a non-residential district shall be provided at a size, number and location according to the requirements of the ADA accessibility guidelines (ASAAG) published by the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barrier Compliance Board (ATBCB), as amended. 
13.3 - Residential Parking. 
All parking areas serving single-family detached or attached dwellings shall conform to the following requirements: 
13.3-1 No inoperable vehicle shall be permitted in any residential district for more than 14 days unless it is in an enclosed garage. All repairs shall be in an enclosed garage in residential districts. 
13.3-2 No commercial vehicle as licensed by the State with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) exceeding 11,000 pounds shall be allowed to park in single-family medium density, multi-family residential districts or townhouse developments unless it can be completely enclosed. 
13.3-3 Commercial vehicles, licensed by the state, busses and recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to park overnight on the street in single-family medium density, single-family high density, multi-family districts or townhouse developments. 
13.3-4 No driveway shall be constructed so as to require a vehicle to back into oncoming traffic. All driveways shall provide some mechanism for vehicles to turn and face oncoming traffic. 
13.3-5 Recreational vehicles are prohibited from parking in the front yard of any residential district and must be parked in an area of the yard least visible from any public street. 

 
( Ord. No. 2018-13 , §§ X, XI, 2-6-2018) 
13.4 - Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space. 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, a street. Such space shall be so arranged that no vehicle is required to back into a public street, road or highway in order to leave the premises. 
13.4-1 Retail Business and Services. A space ten feet by 25 feet for each 20,000 square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
13.4-2 Wholesale and Industry. One space ten feet by 50 feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor space plus one additional space for each 60,000 additional square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
13.4-3 Bus and Truck Terminal. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SIGNS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 15, 2017, repealed art. XIV in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. XIV, §§ 14.1—14.19, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2012-06 , § I(Exh. A), adopted March 30, 2012. 

14.1 - Findings and Objectives. 
14.1-1. Troup County finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. However, the number of signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring an increasing number and size of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
14.1-2. Troup County finds that the regulation of the size, height, number, location and spacing of signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the county, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential area, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the county's citizens. 
14.1-3. Troup County finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The county commission finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a propriety purpose, such as identifying markings on utility poles, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
14.1-4. Troup County finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of location addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Subdivision signs at the entrances to subdivisions favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate subdivision entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this ordinance, the bulk of the provisions of this chapter are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.2 - Intent and Purpose. 
14.2-1. The intent of this ordinance is to further the substantial governmental interests of correcting and avoiding multiple problems that would occur without the regulation of signs. The regulations contained herein are no more extensive than necessary to serve the substantial governmental interests identified in this ordinance. It is not the intent of this ordinance to apply regulation to signs based upon the message that they convey. 
14.2-2. The purposes of this section are: 
1.  To protect the rights of individuals and businesses to convey their messages through signs; 
2.  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; 
3.  To promote economic development; 
4.  To improve traffic and pedestrian safety as it may be affected by distracting signs; 
5.  To regulate signs by zoning district, size, height, location on a lot, number, methods of construction, maintenance and illumination; 
6.  To prevent the destruction of the natural beauty and environment of the county and to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment of the county; 
7.  To protect the public health, safety and general welfare; 
8.  To restrict the continued existence of abandoned or nonconforming signs unless in compliance with the terms of this section and to eliminate, over time, all nonconforming signs; and 
9.  To insure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign standards. 
10.  To further the objectives of the county's comprehensive plan. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.3 - Definitions. 
(a)  General interpretation. Except as specifically described herein, all words shall have their customary dictionary meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words used in the future tense include the present. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust, or partnership. The word "building" includes "structure". The word "may" is permissive, while the word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designated to be used or occupied". Doubt as to the precise meaning of any word used in this ordinance shall be resolved by the board of planning and zoning appeals of the county. 
(b)  Specific definitions. 
Abandoned sign. Cessation for a period of six months of the use of a sign by either the owner of the sign or the occupant of the property on which the sign is placed, or through the removal or relocation of the previous occupant of the property, or a sign that has ceased to be used for a period of six months through the removal of its copy or the deterioration of its copy through lack of maintenance, but excluding temporary or short-term period of remodeling, refurbishment or maintenance of the sign. 
Accessory use. A sign use which is authorized by virtue of a business operation on a particular site, which shall not require, by implication or otherwise, that the content of any such sign be in any way connected to said business operation. 
Animated sign. Any sign which all or any part thereof visibly moves, imitates movement, or changes appearance in any fashion whatsoever. For purpose of this chapter, the transition of a message on a changing sign shall not be considered "animation." 
Awning/canopy sign. Any sign that is a part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is intended to be hung either with a frame or without a frame. Neither flags nor canopy signs are considered banners. 
Beacon. Any light with one (1) or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one (1) or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or move. 
Building nameplate. A small plaque, usually made of metal or wood, affixed flush to an exterior wall near the main entrance to a building. 
Building sign. A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, canopy, awning or marquee of a building. The term "building sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Awning sign: A sign imposed, mounted or painted upon an awning. 
(2)  Canopy sign: A sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any canopy, such that the sign is mounted in such a manner that a continuous face with the canopy is formed. 
(3)  Mansard sign: A sign imposed, mounted or painted upon a mansard and not extending above the top of the mansard. 
(4)  Marquee sign: Any sign painted on or attached flat to the face of a marquee. 
(5)  Parapet sign: A sign imposed, mounted or painted on a parapet and not extending above the top of the parapet. 
(6)  Projecting sign: A sign affixed perpendicularly to a wall and extending more than 12 inches horizontally from the surface of such wall. 
(7)  Under-canopy sign: A sign attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and suspended over a sidewalk, either public or private. 
(8)  Wall sign: A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, protruding from the surface of the wall no more than 18 inches and not extending above or beyond the wall to which it is attached. 
Canopy. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting from the wall surface of a building or structure, generally located at or below the roof line and designed to provide shelter from the elements, or a freestanding roof-like structure supported by columns intended to shield a vehicular driveway or service area from the elements. A canopy shall include all structures commonly known as awnings. 
Canopy sign. A sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any canopy, such that the sign is mounted in such a manner that a continuous face with the canopy is formed. 
Changeable copy sign. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be manually changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than once a day shall be considered a changing sign for purposes of this ordinance. 
Changing sign. (Digital Multiple Message) A sign that is capable of changing the visible display of words, numbers, symbols, graphics and/or position or format of word messages or other displays when such changes are actuated by any type of remote control or automatic mechanism rather than manually. Changing signs shall include mechanically operated devices which change the message through rotation of any type of panel and signs which are illuminated partially or entirely by a matrix of electronic lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures, the use of light emitting diodes, back lighting, or any other light source that is electronically changed. Any changing sign that includes both mechanical and electronic elements shall be regulated as an electronically changing sign. A sign that changes no more frequently than once every twenty-four (24) hours shall not be considered a changing sign. 
Commercial sign. A sign which identifies, advertises or directs attention to a business, or is intended to induce the purchase of goods, property, or service, including without limitation, any sign naming a brand of goods or service and real estate signs. 
Copy. The permanent or removable wording or graphics placed on, painted upon, or bonded to the display surface of a sign. 
Dilapidated or neglected signs. A sign (including sign structure) is dilapidated or neglected if it manifests the following conditions: rust or holes on or in the sign, or broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, or non-operative or partially operative illuminating. 
Directory sign. A sign, distinguished from a project entrance sign, which is allowed on a premises with more than one tenant or occupant of a building. It may be freestanding or a building (wall) sign. Such signs are not usually visible from the public street right-of-way of a development which provides initial access to the property, but rather are located within the development, along a driveway, access way, or parking aisle. 
Dissolve. A mode of message transition on a changing sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the subsequent message. 
Double-faced sign. A sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another of no more than 60 degrees, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction. 
Face. That portion of a sign upon which the copy is placed, attached, bonded, or painted. 
Fade. A mode of message transition on a changing sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
Feather banner. (Blade sign, feather sign, teardrop sign and flag sign). A banner made from lightweight material and attached to a pole that is designed to wave in the wind. 
Festoons. Strings or ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, or other device or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material designed to move in the wind. 
Flag. Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, words, emblems or logos used as a symbol of a government or other entity or organization. 
Flashing sign. A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. 
Freestanding sign (permanent). Any sign (including any associated supporting materials) which is independent from any building and is entirely supported by structures that are permanently placed on or in the ground. The term "freestanding sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Monument sign (ground sign). A freestanding sign forming a solid, monolithic structure from the ground to the top of the sign. 
(2)  Pole, pylon or stanchion sign. A freestanding sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, pylon, stanchion, columns, or similar supports such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. 
Freestanding sign (temporary). A sign device, not otherwise specifically defined and permitted in this ordinance, which involves the expression of any idea. Temporary freestanding sign shall not be in the form of a banner. 
Frontage, building. The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular building in which an establishment is located. 
Frontage, road. The width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Hanging sign. Any sign which is attached to and projects down or hangs from a roof, canopy, or projecting attachment to a wall. 
Illuminated signs include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Internally illuminated means illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure and radiating outward toward the viewer, usually projected through a transparent or translucent sign face. 
(2)  Externally illuminated means illuminated only by an artificial light source that is external to, and independent of, the sign structure, and the illumination radiates toward the message area away from the viewer. 
(3)  Halo illumination means illumination where the source of light is external and integral to the sign structure; where the resultant illumination radiates toward the viewer, is interrupted by the opaque sign structure, letters, or symbols, and back lights the message area. 
(4)  Neon sign means an illuminated sign composed of exposed and visible tubes filled with neon gas, including signs of similar appearance but illuminated by other gases similar to neon. 
Incidental sign. A small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than two square feet in area. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, or in parking lots or loading areas, may be freestanding or building signs, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way. 
Inflatable sign. A sign or similar device that is intended to be expanded by pressurized air or other gas or by mechanical fan for its proper display or support. 
Interstate sign. A freestanding sign located immediately adjacent to an interstate highway. 
Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure of rigid materials supported by and extending from the façade of a building. 
Marquee sign. Any sign painted on or attached flat to the face of a marquee. 
Miscellaneous freestanding sign. A freestanding sign, other than a freestanding principal sign, temporary event sign or incidental sign, commonly found on multi-family and nonresidential use properties located at entrance and exit driveways, internal driving lanes, parking lots, designated handicap parking spaces, etc. 
Nit. A standard unit of luminance; a measurement of direct light (i.e. looking directly at the light source), used to describe displays. A "nit" is an amount of emanating light equal to one candela per square meter (cd/m 2 ). 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign that was lawfully permitted by the jurisdiction of record at the time and/or was legal at the time of its establishment but does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Obscene. Any form of speech which, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in sex, portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. See Miller V. California, 413 U.S. 15, 93 S. Ct. 2607 (1973). 
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or similar material designed to move in the wind; pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term "pennant" shall not include a banner as defined in this chapter. 
Portable sign. Any sign to be transported or easily relocated and not permanently attached to the ground, such as but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not anchored to it as otherwise required by the building code; 
(2)  A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels. 
(3)  For the purposes of this chapter, sidewalk signs, sandwich board signs, banners and feather banners as prescribed herein are not considered portable signs. 
Project entrance sign. A permanent freestanding sign located at a discernible entrance from a public or private road into a multi-family development or into a development containing multiple lots or buildings, such as but not limited to a particular residential or commercial subdivision, a business center, office park or industrial park or a mixed use planned center. 
Projecting sign. Any sign, containing not more than two (2) faces, which is affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the sign face extends outward from the wall surface. 
Revolving sign. See Animated sign. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained wholly upon or above the roof of any building or structure. 
Sandwich board sign (sidewalk sign or A-frame sign). Any moveable sign not permanently secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located, designed to be used on a sidewalk or pedestrian way, including within the public right-of-way, immediately adjacent to a building or structure. 
Sign. A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, illuminated, or colored visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bringing to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way, a driveway or parking lot with access to a public right-of-way, or from an adjacent property, except as specifically noted otherwise in this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" includes but is not limited to "banner", "balloons", "flags", "pennants", "streamers", "windblown devices" and "advertising devices." Furthermore, the term "sign" includes the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to draw the attention of the observers. 
Sign structure. Any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
Snipe sign. A sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, permanent freestanding sign, tree, fence, rock or other similar object located on public or private property. 
Standard Informational Sign. A sign with an area not greater than 32 square feet, with a placard made for short-term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags or projections, and which, erected, stands at a height not greater than 72 inches and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than 1½ inches. 
Temporary Event. An activity having a specific duration or the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time. Temporary events are included, but not limited to, such activities as: 
a.  The offering of a property or premises for sale or rent. 
b.  Special business promotions, such as, but not limited to, "grand openings", "close-out sales", and seasonal sales events. 
c.  Garage/yard sales. 
d.  The construction of a building or development project, or the rehabilitation, remodeling or renovation of a building. 
e.  A public announcement of a special event or seasonal activity by an individual or a non-profit organization. 
Temporary sign. Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or other permanent structure and designed and intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. This includes, but is not limited to, signs which are designed to be transported regularly from one location to another, signs which are designed with wheels, regardless of whether the wheels remain attached to the sign, signs placed into the ground on a temporary basis or nonpermanent foundation, or signs tethered to an existing structure. 
Traffic control sign. A sign or electronic device (such as a traffic signal, or signs denoting stop, danger, handicap parking, one-way traffic, no parking, fire lane, etc.) for the purpose of directing or regulating the movement of traffic and/or pedestrians. 
Transition. A visual effect used on a changing sign to change one message to another. 
Unlawful (illegal) sign. Any sign erected without a permit when a permit for the sign was otherwise required by this ordinance or previously adopted ordinance or code; a permitted sign which has not been properly erected in accordance with the permit application and approved sign permit; or an otherwise lawful and permitted sign that has become hazardous or a nuisance to the public due to poor maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment. 
Wall sign. Any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the horizontal roof line or vertical edges of the building. 
Window sign. A sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane or glass door and oriented to be viewed from outside the building. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.4 - Application of regulations. 
Jurisdiction: The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way, private streets or adjacent property, erected in the unincorporated areas of Troup County, Georgia or specifically exempted from compliance with this ordinance. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any sign not visible from public or private thoroughfares or adjacent properties and any sign within a business, office, or other totally enclosed area. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.5 - Signs not requiring a permit. 
The following are exempt from permitting requirements imposed by this article, but must meet all applicable regulations of this chapter: 
a.  Window Displays: Window displays of goods available on a site are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these regulations. 
b.  Window Signs: Window signs shall be allowed in the NHC, GC, CA, HC, LC, GI and LI zoning districts provided they do not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total window area. 
c.  Brand names and logos: Brand names or logos on products, product containers, or product dispensers (such as, but not limited to, a soft drink machine or gasoline pump) that are an integral part of the product or the product's packaging are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. 
d.  Official signs: Signs placed by or at the direction of a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority, such as, but not limited to traffic signs, signals, or regulatory devices or warnings; official emblems, public notices, or official instruments; signs providing directions to specific events or areas of architectural or historic significance or gateways; or other similar governmental signs or devices. Cush signs are authorized within all rights-of-way or other properties controlled by such governmental body, agency, or authority; and at such other locations as a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority may direct. 
e.  Street addresses: Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location. 
f.  Flags: Flags must meet the following requirements: 
i.  All flags shall be displayed on flagpoles, which may be vertical or mast arm flagpoles. For non-agricultural/non-residential properties, flagpoles shall not exceed the height limit of the applicable zoning district, or 50 feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles on agricultural or residential properties shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
ii.  Flags shall be limited to no more than 60 square feet in area. 
iii.  Each single or two-family residential lot shall be allowed one flagpole. 
iv.  Each multi-family, institutional, commercial, industrial or mixed-use lot shall be allowed a maximum of three flagpoles. 
v.  A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per flagpole. 
vi.  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable, shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used. 
vii.  On officially designated city, state, or federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations of the display of flags. 
viii.  This section shall not be construed to restrict the right to display eligible flags as banners as provided elsewhere in this article. 
g.  Incidental Signs: Small signs and postings as defined in this Section of no more than 2 square foot, provided that the aggregate of all such signs on a property may not exceed 16 square feet. 
h.  Temporary Freestanding Signs: Signs designed for temporary display and not permanently affixed to the ground that do not exceed an aggregate sign area of 9 square feet per lot in all zoning districts. Such signs shall have a maximum height of three feet from ground level and be set back at least two feet from any right-of-way. 
i.  Property approved for Agri-Tourism or Rural-Tourism will be allowed signs as permitted in the zoning district and any signage allowed as a condition of the special use permitting process. 
j.  Sidewalk and sandwich board signs: Each tenant space is permitted one sandwich board sign subject to the following requirements: 
i.  Each sign shall not exceed 30 inches wide by 45 inches tall. 
ii.  Each sign must be located within 10 feet of the pedestrian entrance of the premises. 
iii.  Each sign shall not obstruct a continuous through pedestrian zone of at least five feet in width. 
iv.  Such a sign may be utilized only during the hours of operation of the store or entity using it and shall be removed during the hours it is closed. 
k.  Weekend Signs: Weekend signs shall be allowed, subject to the following requirements: 
i.  Such signs shall be allowed only on Fridays from 12:00 PM through Tuesdays at 8:00 AM. 
ii.  No more than one (1) weekend sign per lot. 
iii.  No sign shall be located on any public right-of-way, and it must be on private property with the consent of the property owner. 
iv.  Signs shall not exceed a maximum area of six (6) square feet each. 
v.  Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
l.  Standard Information Signs: Standard Information Signs shall be allowed subject to the following requirements: 
i.  Sign area not to exceed 32 square feet with a placard made for short-term use. 
ii.  No reflective elements, flags or projections. 
iii.  Height not to exceed 72 inches. 
iv.  Mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than 1.5 inches. 
v.  No more than one per road frontage. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.6 - General Regulations. 
The following standards shall apply unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
a)  A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or reconstruction of any sign unless otherwise noted in Section 14.5 - Signs Not Requiring a Permit. Permits shall be issued by the Department of Building, Planning and Zoning in accordance with the regulations contained in this Article. 
b)  Design, material, and maintenance. Any sign not meeting with the following provisions shall be repaired or rebuilt in accordance with the specifications of this Article: 
a.  All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the International Building Code and the National Electrical Code. 
b.  The area on private property around the sign on which it is erected shall be properly maintained, clear of brush, trees and other obstacles as to make signs readily visible. 
c.  All burned-out bulbs or damaged panels must be replaced. 
d.  All sign copy shall be maintained securely to the face and all missing copy must be replaced. 
e.  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times so that the public and traffic safety are not compromised, and 
f.  It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to maintain and ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
c)  Permanent signs shall be made of high quality durable material. Approved materials are metal with a minimum thickness of six (6) mm, high density urethane (HDU) or wood. If plywood is to be used, it must have exceptionally smooth and weather resistant surfaces, such as those with medium-density overlay (MDO) board. Other high quality materials shall be given consideration, and if of comparable quality and durability may be allowed at the discretion of the county. 
d)  Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated by lights that flash, move, change in intensity, or turn on intermittently more than once a day, unless it is a permitted automatic changeable copy sign as allowed in Section 14.8. To prevent glare visible from a public street or adjoining property, the beam of any light shall be directed as not to be visible beyond the sign at which it is directed and the light source shall not be visible from any point on an adjacent property or land of the public right-of-way. 
e)  Sign message. In any zoning district, any sign, display, or devise allowed under this article may contain any lawful noncommercial or commercial message except as expressly provided herein. No provision of this article shall be construed to allow regulation of signs based on the content of sign message. 
f)  Measurement of Pole Sign and/or Interstate Sign Height: The height of a pole sign and/or interstate sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the elevation of the centerline of the roadway at the nearest adjacent dedicated public street, to the highest point of the sign structure. 
g)  Measurement of a Ground/Monument Sign Height: The height of a ground/monument sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the sign, to the highest point of the sign structure. Any earthen berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, sign posts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. The ground shall not be altered for the sole purpose of providing additional sign height. 
h)  Measurement of Sign Area: The area of a sign is calculated by determining the area of the smallest square or rectangle which encloses the sign face and the structure surrounding the sign face. For example, the pole or base would not be included, but any frame holding the sign face in place would be counted. Only one (1) face of a multi-face of a multi-face sign structure shall be used in computing the sign area. Where a single freestanding structure contains multiple individual signs, the sign area shall be the total gross area in square feet of all signs on the structure. 
i)  Building signs. 
(1)  A building sign may not project higher than the wall or surface to which it is attached. 
(2)  A building sign may not project more than 18 inches from the wall surface unless approved as a hanging or projecting sign. 
(3)  Changeable copy signs and changing signs are prohibited as building signs. 
j)  Permanent Freestanding signs (monument or pole). 
(1)  Freestanding signs shall be allowed as accessory uses only. 
(2)  Freestanding signs shall be setback at least 15 feet from the curb or edge of pavement of the roadway or two feet behind the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(3)  No freestanding sign shall be located within 30 feet of the nearest intersecting point of two street right-of-way lines. 
(4)  Freestanding signs shall be located at least 50 feet from other freestanding signs on the same side of the road. 
(5)  Monument signs located within 100 feet of a public right-of-way shall display the street address of the property, except where the sign is located on property that has more than one street frontage and the property address is assigned from a street other than the street frontage whereupon such sign is erected. Street numbers shall be of contrasting colors against the background, visible from both directions of travel along the street, and no less than six inches nor more than ten inches in height. 
k)  Projecting signs. 
(1)  A projecting sign shall not project more than 36 inches beyond the wall to which it is attached. 
(2)  A projecting sign shall be finished on both sides. 
(3)  A projecting sign shall be mounted perpendicularly to the wall. 
l)  Gas Canopy Signs: One company logo shall be allowed per street frontage. 
m)  Project Entrance Signs. Where permitted, project entrance signs shall meet the following standards: 
1)  Each project entrance may have no more than one such sign per entrance if double-faced or two signs if attached to symmetrical entrance structures. 
2)  The sign must be constructed of brick, stone, masonry or equivalent architectural material and be monument-style or integral to walls/fencing separating the project from the street. 
3)  The maximum face area shall not exceed 40 square feet. 
4)  The height of the structure shall not exceed eight feet including embellishments which shall not extend more than two feet above the main body of the structure. 
5)  Signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
6)  Signs shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of a street or two feet behind the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
n)  Miscellaneous Freestanding Signs: Accessory uses on multi-family lots to include MHP and CRVP zoned lots, non-residential lots and lots with public and institutional uses, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Within the area between a street right-of-way line and the minimum building setback required from that street right-of-way line on the property, the following applies: 
i.  Permanently installed miscellaneous freestanding signs may be located only within three feet of driveways or curb cuts that provide access into or from the property. 
1.  There shall be no more than two such signs per driveway or curb cut and each such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area nor more than three feet in height. 
ii.  Miscellaneous freestanding signs located farther from the street than the minimum building setback from that street right-of-way line on the property, shall be allowed provided that such signs are no more than six square feet in area nor more than six feet in height. 
iii.  Directory signs for multi-family lots to include MHP and CRVP zoned lots are permitted provided they do not exceed four square feet each nor six feet in height. 
iv.  Display boards located next to drive-thru lanes. Such signs are permitted provided they do not exceed 8 feet in height or 32 square feet in area. 
v.  Miscellaneous Freestanding Signs will be permitted as part of the overall site design review process for new and expanded development. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.7 - Interstate Signs. 
1.  Interstate Signs will be allowed on I-85 only, according to the latest version of the adopted quadrant map. The following standards must be met: 
a.  The property shall be at least a one acre lot and must be zoned GC or GI. 
b.  The maximum sign height shall be 75 feet. 
c.  The surface area of the sign shall not exceed 400 square feet per sign face, and not more than 800 square feet of total sign area when all sign faces are combined. 
d.  The location of each interstate sign shall be set back not more than 100 feet from I-85, but at least 10 feet from I-85 and 40 feet from all other property lines. 
e.  No freestanding interstate sign shall be located within 50 feet of another freestanding sign. 
f.  The face of each sign shall be perpendicular to the centerline of the interstate nearest to its location. No sign shall have more than 2 faces. 
g.  Interstate signs shall not be changing signs. 
h.  All interstate signs must be permitted by Troup County Building, Zoning and Planning Department in accordance with this section as well as the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.8 - Changing Signs (Digital Multiple Message). 
Changing signs or signs employing changing sign technology shall be allowed exclusively within the G-C, G-I or L-I, zoning district as a portion of a conforming, freestanding sign and are allowed on property used for public or institutional use regardless of zoning district. In no case are changing signs allowed on roads designated as Scenic Corridors in this ordinance, as amended. Changing Signs are further subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Each message displayed on any changing sign display shall remain static for at least thirty (30) seconds following the completion of its transition from the previous message. As used in this subsection "static" shall mean a display that is fixed in one (1) position with no portion of the display being in motion or changing in color or light intensity. 
(2)  When a message is changed mechanically, the transition between a complete static display of the previous message and a complete static display of the next message shall be accomplished in three (3) seconds or less. The transition period shall be measured as that period between any movement of any part of the display of the previous message and the time that the display of the next message is fully static. 
(3)  When a message is changed electronically, the transition between a complete static display of the previous message and a complete static display of the next message shall be accomplished in two (2) seconds or less. The transition period shall be measured as that period between the time that the previous message is static and fully illuminated and the next message is static and fully illuminated. 
(4)  No changing sign may include animated, flashing, full-motion video or other intermittent elements. The transition period between two fully illuminated static messages displayed in an electronically changed sign shall not be considered an intermittent element so long as the purpose of the changing light intensity is to fade or dissolve into the next message. 
(5)  No changing sign may have any type of changing effect on the border of the sign that is not fully integrated with a static message display and which does not transition to the next static message display in the same manner as the rest of the display. 
(6)  No display or other effect from any electronically changed sign shall cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. 
(7)  Message transitions achieved by means of the scrolling of the letters, numbers or symbols shall be completed within two (2) seconds and shall remain static for at least sixty (60) seconds following the completion of the transition from the previous message. 
(8)  All signs shall appropriately adjust display brightness as ambient light levels change so that the brightness of the display does not cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. The maximum illumination, intensity, or brightness of electronic signs shall not exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours, or 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn. The sign must have an automatic phased proportional dimmer control, photocell or other light sensing device, or a scheduled dimming timer, or another approved device, which produces a distinct illumination change that reduce nighttime brightness levels (compared to daytime brightness levels). The applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set or can be programmed not to exceed the levels specified in this subsection; end-user manipulation of pre-set levels or to exceed those specifications herein shall not be permitted. Unless another industry standard is accepted, the measurement for purposes of this paragraph shall be at any point ten (10) feet from the surface of the changing sign. 
(9)  No malfunction of a changing sign shall cause a glare or other condition that impairs the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. 
(10)  Any changing sign currently in existence shall comply with the regulations of this part. If a changing sign currently in existence cannot meet these requirements due to the limitation of the technology being employed, the owner of the sign shall be allowed to continue the existing use upon a showing, satisfactory to the director, that the requirements of this part cannot be met. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.9 - Temporary Signs requiring a Permit. 
Temporary signs to include banners (includes definition of feather banners) and portable signs are allowed as indicated on Table 14.11 and in conformance with the following regulations: 
1.  Location: 
a.  All temporary signs must be set back at least 15 feet from the edge of the street pavement or 2 feet behind the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
b.  A temporary sign must be located at least ten (10) feet from any other sign. 
c.  A temporary sign shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located. 
2.  Permit Required: 
a.  A temporary sign permit and fee shall be required for the signs allowed in this section. 
3.  Size: 
a.  Banners: Banners may not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. 
b.  Portable Signs: Portable signs may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
4.  Number of signs (not exempt from permitting requirements). 
a.  Only two signs (2) related to each temporary event may be located on a lot at any one time. 
5.  Duration: 
a.  Each lot that can have a temporary event sign under this section may have a permitted sign for thirty days in duration and may be approved four times per calendar year. The 30 days may not be in succession. 
b.  A new business may place one (1) temporary sign prior to opening which provides information such as name, opening date, now hiring, etc. Sign shall be removed prior to occupying the building for business purposes. The sign shall be no larger than six (6) feet in height and twenty-four (24) square feet in sign area. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.10 - Signs allowed per zoning district (Table 14.10). 

 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.11 - PUD zoning district. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, any property in the PUD zoning district will be classified as a residential district. However, based on the site plan approved by the Board of Commissioners, the Senior Building Official/Zoning Administrator shall designate specific areas, within the PUD zoning district, as commercial and industrial, when such areas have the characteristics of a commercial or industrial district. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.12 -   
The following signs shall be prohibited in the county: 
(a)  Any sign not specifically identified in this chapter as a permitted sign. 
(b)  Abandoned signs. 
(c)  Animated and flashing signs. Signs (excluding changing signs) that flash, blink, rotate, revolve, or have moving parts or visible bulbs, and signs containing reflective elements that sparkle in the sunlight or otherwise simulate illumination during daylight hours. 
(d)  Dilapidated signs. Signs that are dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard, nuisance or to be unsafe or fail to comply with any provision of the building code. 
(e)  Fringe, streamers, pennants, air or gas filled figures, search lights, beacons and other similar temporary event signs. 
(f)  Light strands. Series, lines or rows of lights supported by cables or other physical means. 
(g)  Obscene signs. Obscene signs, as defined by the state at O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, as amended. 
(h)  Obstructions. No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or prevent free passage from part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall extend above a parapet wall, be affixed to a fire escape, or interfere with any opening required for ventilation. No sign shall interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the orderly movement of traffic or pedestrians. No sign shall pose a hazard to traffic or pedestrians due to structural deficiencies of such sign. 
(i)  Portable signs except as specifically authorized in Section 14.9. 
(j)  Banner signs (to include feather banner signs) except as specifically authorized in Section 14.9. 
(k)  Private signs placed on public property. Any sign posted or erected on public rights-of-way or any other public property except as authorized by the governmental body, agency or public authority having jurisdiction over such property. 
(l)  Roof signs. This prohibition does not apply to the face of a parapet wall, provided that the sign must not extend above the top of the parapet wall. 
(m)  Snipe signs. 
(n)  Sound or smoke emitting signs. A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing, or a sign that emits smoke, vapor or odors. 
(o)  Signs advertising illegal activity. Signs that advertise an activity illegal under state or federal law. 
(p)  Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on public or private property, except for signs meeting the following conditions: 
a.  The primary purpose of such vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs. 
b.  The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part of the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and do not break the silhouette of the vehicle. 
c.  The vehicle and/or trailer is in operating conditions, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and actively used or available for use in the daily function of the business to which such signs relate. 
d.  The vehicle is parked in a legal parking area, on a lot with an active business license. 
(q)  Vehicles and trailers used primarily as static displays, advertising a product or service, utilized as storage, shelter or distribution points for commercial products or services for the general public. 
(r)  Signs imitating public warning or traffic devices. 
(1)  Any sign that displays intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, and any sign that uses the words "stop", "go", "slow", "caution", "danger", "warning" or other message or content in a manner that might mislead or confuse a driver. 
(2)  Any sign that uses the words, slogans, dimensional shape or size, or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
(3)  No red, green, and yellow illuminated sign shall be permitted within 300 feet of any traffic light. 
(s)  Window signs. Window signs on residential properties and individual or aggregate window signs exceeding 50 percent of the window area per building elevation for all other districts. 
(t)  Signs located in the right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.13 - Nonconforming Signs. 
Signs that, on the effective date of this ordinance, were approved and legally erected under previous sign restrictions, and have become nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this ordinance, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
(a)  Signs shall not be repaired, rebuilt, replaced or altered except in conformity with this chapter after damage exceeding 50 percent of the signs' replacement cost at the time of damage. 
(b)  Signs shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that would increase the nonconformity of the sign. 
(c)  Existing signs which were legally erected but which have become non-conforming and which do not meet the setback requirements of this ordinance due to road widening should be moved to meet the setback requirement of this ordinance but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. 
(d)  The right to continue use of a nonconforming sign is extinguished upon change in ownership of the parcel upon which said nonconforming sign is located. 
(e)  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or de-mountable material on non-conforming signs shall be permitted. A change in the mode of message conveyance (i.e. from screen-print panel to LED) shall not be permitted on a non-conforming sign. 
(f)  Minor repairs and maintenance of non-conforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the signs hall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(g)  Portable signs, banners, and other signs allowed under this chapter which are not fixtures or freestanding signs are considered personal property, unattached to the real property on which they are placed, and thus have no nonconforming or grandfather rights under this section. 
(h)  A nonconforming sign shall not be rebuilt or otherwise re-established after its use has been discontinued for more than 90 days. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to any sign which according to the application of state or federal law or rule is allowed to remain or to be rebuilt or reconstructed, unless just compensation is paid. 
(j)  In all zoning districts, signs shall be removed which: 
1.  Were illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances. 
2.  Are made of paper, cloth or non-durable materials, except as otherwise permitted by this ordinance. 
3.  Are located in the public right-of-way, except as otherwise permitted by this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.14 - Administration and Enforcement. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as exempted from obtaining a permit, all persons desiring to post, install, erect, display, expand, relocate or substantially change a sign regulated by this chapter within the county, shall first obtain a sign permit and all other permits required for the desired structure in accordance with county ordinances. A change in the copy of a sign shall not constitute a substantial change. However, a change in the mode of message conveyance (i.e. from screen-print panel to LED) shall be considered a substantial change requiring a sign permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. Applications for sign permits, along with the non-refundable application fee, shall be submitted by the sign owner or the owner's agent to the building official on the form furnished by the county. Only complete applications will be accepted. Applications shall include the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located. In the absence of a street address, the parcel identification number as assigned by the Troup County Tax Assessor shall be given. 
(2)  The name(s) and address(es) of all owners of the real property upon which the sign is to be located. 
(3)  The name, address, contact information and occupational tax certificate number and issuing jurisdiction of the sign contractor/installer. 
(4)  Written consent of the owner or owner's agent specifically granting permission for the placement of the sign as proposed. 
(5)  The types of sign, height, face area and total cost of sign construction or installation. 
(6)  For free-standing signs, a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the proposed sign in relation to property and right-of-way lines (or edge of pavement, as appropriate), acreage of the parcel, location of driveways and parking spaces, public or private easements, and building locations. 
(7)  For building signs, a to-scale drawing or photo-simulation of the building face upon which the proposed sign is to be installed showing the placement of the sign upon the building, dimensions of the wall and sign and its height from ground level. 
(8)  Construction and/or fabrication details of the proposed sign, including certification as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the building code by a qualified structural engineer, or prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting, or exceeding all requirements of the building code, if applicable. 
(9)  Whether or not the sign is to be illuminated and the method of illumination. 
(c)  Time for consideration and issuance of permit. The county shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the county's actual receipt of a complete application and application fee for a sign permit. Revisions or amendments to an application shall extend the review period to 20 business days from the date of submission of the revision or amendment. Revisions or amendments received after the issuance of a permit shall constitute a new application. 
(1)  The building official shall reject any application as incomplete that does not include all items required for a sign permit application as set forth under subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  The building official shall reject any application containing false material statements or omissions. Any rejected application later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission instead of the original date of submission. 
(3)  Within 30 business days of receipt of a complete application, the building official shall: 
a.  Issue the permit; or 
b.  Inform the applicant in writing of the reasons why the permit cannot be issued. 
Failure of the building official to act on a sign permit within thirty (30) days shall result in a denial of the application. 
(4)  Upon determination that the application fully complies with the provisions of this chapter, the building code, and all other applicable laws, regulations and chapters of the county code, the sign permit shall be issued by the building official. 
(5)  If it is determined that the application does not fully comply with the provisions of this chapter, the building code and all other applicable laws, regulations and chapters of the county code, the building official shall reject the application and notify the applicant of the decision and reason(s) for the denial of the permit. The building official shall give such notice in writing by hand delivery, mail, e-mail or fax using the contact information provided on the application. The notice shall be post-marked or otherwise date-stamped on or before the 30th business day following the date of the completed application's receipt by the county. A denial pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to the appeal procedures of this chapter. 
(d)  Permit fees. A sign permit shall not be issued unless the appropriate permit fees, as established by the county commission, have been paid. No refunds of permit fees will be made for sign permits that expired due to failure to erect the subject sign. If a person desires to erect a sign in the same location as for any expired permit, a new application must first be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(e)  Expiration of permit. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and fully installed within six months of the date of issuance, provided, however, that a 90-day extension shall be granted if a written request for extension is received by the building official prior to the expiration date of the initial permit. 
(f)  Appeals. Appeals from an administrative decision by the building official may be made by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, or board or bureau of the county affected by any decision of the building official or other county official based on this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken and exercised in accordance with the appeal provisions for the zoning ordinance for the county as contained in this Code as the same may now exist or hereafter be amended. Any such appeal shall be to the board of zoning appeals and planning commission, which shall hear and decide whether there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official or other county official based on this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
14.15 - Variances. 
(a)  Application. A request for a variance to the provisions of this chapter may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the Senior Building Official. 
(b)  Application requirements. The application shall be on a form provided by the Department of Building, Zoning and Planning and accompanied by an elevation drawing and/or plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed sign. The Senior Building Official may require other information about the variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. Variance applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the governing body by resolution from time to time. 
(c)  Procedure. Upon the filing of any complete application for a variance, a public hearing shall be scheduled and held by the Board of Zoning Appeals (the Board). Public notice of the variance application shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the local jurisdiction at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing of the Board. Such notice shall state the purpose, location, time and date of the public hearing, and the nature of said application. 
(d)  Authority. The Board shall have the authority to grant variances to this chapter, upon application by a property owner and after receiving comments by the staff and after holding a public hearing. 
(e)  Criteria for action upon variance application. In acting upon variances, the staff shall submit written findings and the Board shall consider the following criteria and the extent to which they support or fail to support the sign variance application: 
a.  Where there are unusual, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions pertaining to the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the owner's or occupant's own actions. Such conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or peculiar shape of the lot. 
b.  As a result of such unusual circumstances or conditions, there is an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty that renders it difficult to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  The authorization of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity or district in which property is located, and the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of this ordinance. 
d.  The variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the sign. 
e.  The variance is not a request to permit a type of sign which otherwise is not permitted in the zoning district involved. 
(f)  Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the Board shall seek judicial review by filing for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of Troup County within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04 , § I(Exh. A), 8-15-2017) 
ARTICLE XV. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 

15.1 - Nonconforming Lots. 
A lot or portion of a lot where the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. No such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded, either on the same or adjoining property. 
15.2 - Nonconforming Uses of Land. 
A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirement of the zoning district. The following applies to all nonconforming uses. 
15.3 -   
A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. When a nonconforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not be used for any other nonconforming use. 
15.4 -   
A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining property. 
15.5 -   
When any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
15.6 - Nonconforming Structures. 
A structure or building, the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. Nonconforming structures shall not be altered, expanded, enlarged or extended in any manner without the approval of the board of commissioners as provided in section 15.7 of this article. 
15.7 - Reserved. 
  
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-09 , § II, adopted Oct. 3, 2017, repealed § 15.7 which pertained to nonconforming signs, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, adopted June 2, 2009. 
15.8 - Reserved. 
  
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-09 , § II, adopted Oct. 3, 2017, repealed § 15.8 which pertained to nonconforming signs, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, adopted June 2, 2009. 
15.9 - Reconstruction of Nonconforming Structures. 
When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or other act of God, such structure may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than 50 percent of the structure. If the nonconforming structure is damaged more than 50 percent the structure may be rebuilt only if it conforms to the zoning ordinance as presently adopted. Nonconforming manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park may be replaced according to type II appearance standards. 
( Ord. No. 2018-09 , § III, 10-3-2017) 
15.10 - Restoration to a Safe Condition. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the restoration of any structure or use to a safe or sanitary condition, nor shall the ordinance prevent regular maintenance of any nonconforming use or structure. 
15.11 - Change, Enlargement or Reestablishment of a Nonconforming Use. 
The County Commission of Troup County may grant the change, reestablishment or enlargement of a nonconforming use or the enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming structure upon the following findings: 
1.  The change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use. 
2.  The structure cannot otherwise be economically modified so as to be suitable for uses in the district. 
3.  The structure would have to be removed to permit development of the property for conforming uses. 
4.  The structure has such value that removal to permit development of the conforming uses would cause substantial economic hardship to the owner. 
5.  The proposed change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, replacement or repair would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this zoning ordinance. 
15.12 - Applications. 
Applications submitted to the Troup County Commission requesting the change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming use or structure shall include the following information: 
15.12-1 The applicant shall submit a plat or an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot, size and location of all structures and their distance from all property lines, the names of all streets which the property abuts and all parking spaces. 
15.12-2 If the request is for a commercial use or structure, a written description shall be submitted to describe the business. This description shall include hours of operation, number of employees, equipment used, products made or sold, type of signs, and other information as needed for the Troup County Commission to reach an informed decision. 
15.13 - Evidence. 
The applicant shall bear the burden of providing clear and convincing evidence to the Troup County Commission that the use or structure: 
1.  Could not be economically converted to any conforming use; 
2.  That the present use is legally nonconforming; 
3.  That change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing nonconforming use; 
4.  That the structure has such value, that removal, to permit conforming structures, would cause substantial economic hardship to the owner. 
15.14 - Troup County Commission Action. 
If the requested change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement is approved, the Troup County Commission may place conditions on the approval to ensure the mitigation of adverse impacts to the surrounding area. The applicant is responsible for conformance with these conditions. Any conditions imposed go with the land and are not changed in any way by a change in ownership of the property. Any approvals with conditions shall be noted on the zoning map and made part of the zoning ordinance by reference. 
15.15 - Changes in Zoning. 
Any nonconforming use created by approval of changes to this ordinance shall be governed by the provisions of this article. 
ARTICLE XVI. - ADMINISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 7, 2017, repealed Art. XVI in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. XVI, §§ 16.1—16.23 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-08, § I, adopted June 2, 2009. 

16.1 -   
This ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator of Troup County, in cooperation with the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.2 - Zoning Administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator of Troup County, Georgia. 
16.2-1 Duties and Authority: The zoning administrator or person as designated shall administer the provisions of the zoning ordinance, and shall: 
a.  Serve as administrative secretary to the planning commission. 
b.  Maintain public records concerning the administration of the zoning ordinance, including all maps, amendments, special uses, conditional uses, variances, and records of public hearings. 
c.  Collect data and keep informed as to the best zoning practices in order to be qualified to make recommendations to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
d.  The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall receive all applications, petitions, or other requests to the BOZA/PC from a citizen or an interested party in writing and signed by the applicant or agent of the applicant with supporting documentation. All information submitted by the applicant, applicant's authorized representative, or any other person in support or opposition of the proposed application, shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee and shall not be tendered directly to members of the BOZA/PC. All information submitted will be disseminated to the BOZA/PC and one copy shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator as part of the permanent record. 
e.  The zoning administrator or his/her designee shall conduct all correspondence of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission; keep a minutes' book recording attendance, the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; keep records of examination and hearing and other official action; and shall carry out such other official duties as may be assigned by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
f.  Undertake other relevant duties as may be delegated by the Troup County Manager. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.3. - Building Official. 
The Building Official or authorized agent of Troup County, Georgia. 
16.3-1 Duties and Authority: The building official or authorized agent shall enforce the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
a.  Issue certificates of zoning compliance for all permitted uses, special uses, and variances which are granted by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission or Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
b.  Maintain public records of certificates of zoning compliance. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.4 - Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission. 
There is hereby created a Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission of Troup County, Georgia to: (1) provide the planning, zoning and land division services that promote the harmonious development of the County and enhance and preserve the quality of life for its current and future residents by facilitating the creation of economic vitality and promoting the highest standards for development and revitalization throughout the County; (2) prepare and maintain a comprehensive land use plan for the County; (3) provide unbiased advice to the Board of Commissioners on development and zoning matters; and (4) hear and decide appeals and requests for variances in an objective and timely manner. 
16.4-1 Membership. 
a.  Appointment. The board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall consist of nine members. Members shall be appointed by the Troup County Board of Commissioners for terms of four years and may be reappointed to successive terms. Any vacancies in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Troup County Board of Commissioners. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while representing the board. The nine members appointed shall be residents and citizens of Troup County. 
b.  Removal from Position. Members are expected to attend all scheduled and called meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission, within reason, and shall accrue no more than three consecutive absences to scheduled meetings. Members serve at the pleasure of the Troup County Board of Commissioners and may be removed at any time with or without cause. 
c.  Unexpired Position Replacement. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the Chairperson of the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission and the Troup County Board of Commissioners by and through the Troup County Manager of any vacancy as promptly as possible. 
16.4-2 Organization. 
a.  Officers and Election of Officers. The officers of the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission shall be a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary, who shall be the Zoning Administrator. Officers of the Board, other than the Secretary, shall be elected for two year terms at the Regular meeting of the BOZA/PC held during the month of January. All elected officers shall serve a term of two (2) years. The Chairperson may not be eligible for a successive term. The Vice-Chairman may be elected successively. At any time during the calendar year, should an officer resign his/her office, an election to replace the position shall be placed on the following month's agenda. 
b.  Duties of the Chairperson. The Chairperson shall call to order all hearings and meetings of the BOZA/PC, preside at all hearings and meetings, assure proper order of the BOZA/PC and the public during all proceedings, sign any official documents on behalf of the BOZA/PC, and act as spokesperson for the BOZA/PC. The Chairperson, or a designee from the Board, also sits on the committee to review Development Rating points for Major Subdivisions. 
c.  Vice-Chairman. The Vice-Chairperson shall exercise all duties of the chairperson in the absence, disability or disqualification of the chairperson. Should the Chairperson's position become vacant for any reason, the Vice-Chairman shall serve as the interim Chairman until a successor has been elected by the BOZA/PC. 
d.  Secretary. The Zoning Administrator shall act as the Secretary of the Board and be responsible for the preparation of meeting agendas, minutes of meetings, and maintenance of the BOZA/PC files and records. This position is also responsible for complying with the Open Meetings Law and Open Records Law. 
e.  Chairperson Pro Tempore. In the case that both the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson are absent or recused from a hearing or meeting, the remainder of the sitting BOZA/PC members shall elect a chairperson pro tempore from among their own number by a majority vote. This position shall then exercise the duties of the chairperson in the absence, disability, or disqualification of both the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson. 
16.4-3 Meetings. 
a.  Regular Meetings. Regular Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission shall be held the third Thursday of every month in the Troup County Commission meeting room at 10:00 a.m. These meetings are scheduled on a yearly calendar with a minimum of one schedule meeting per month. The annual schedule is posted at the regular meeting place and on the Troup County website. If any Regular Meeting is rescheduled or cancelled, public notice of such rescheduled meeting shall be provided as required by law. Meetings may be cancelled or rescheduled due to lack of business or knowledge of inability to have a quorum. Regular Meetings are open to the public and are meetings during which the BOZA/PC deliberates and may take substantive votes on specific items. Public Hearings shall only be held during regular meetings. 
b.  Special Meetings. Special Meetings of the BOZA/PC may be held at the call of the Chairperson provided at least twenty-four hours' notice of such meeting is given. The meeting shall be open to the public; however, there shall be no opportunity for public comment unless a specific question is asked by a member of the BOZA/PC. The Department of Building, Zoning and Planning shall advertise said meeting on the Troup County website and place the notice on the 1st floor of the Troup County Government Center. The Department will notify the media in accord with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act. Special meetings shall be presided over by the Chairperson. Special Meetings are those that are held that were not listed on the official schedule. Said meetings shall be for special purposes only. 
c.  Agenda. The Department of Building, Zoning and Planning shall prepare and post an agenda as required by the Open Meetings Act. All matters to be considered by the BOZA/PC shall appear on the posted agenda, except that upon a majority vote of the BOZA/PC non-agenda items may be added for consideration when such matters are time sensitive. A majority vote of the BOZA/PC may also change the order of the posted agenda. 
d.  Quorum. No business shall be conducted by the BOZA/PC unless a quorum is attained. A quorum is five members of the BOZA/PC. The Chairperson shall be responsible for enforcing this rule and any member may raise a point of order at any time if he or she believes that a quorum is not present. If a BOZA/PC member leaves during the course of a meeting so that a quorum no longer exists, the meeting may not continue. If a quorum is not attained or re-attained within thirty (30) minutes, the meeting may be rescheduled by the Chairperson with the approval of the members present. 
e.  Records. Minutes of the proceedings shall be kept, showing the vote of each member on every question. If any member is absent or fails to vote, the minutes shall so indicate. Minutes of the proceedings and records of the official action of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be a part of the public records of Troup County. 
16.4-4 Duties and Authority. The Duties and Authority of the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission shall include the power to: 
a.  Hear and decide questions from any person, who alleges there is an error in, or who is aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator in the administration, enforcement, and/or interpretation of this code. A person may file an appeal with the building inspection, zoning and planning office within 30 days of the decision stating the grounds for such appeal. The board of zoning appeals/planning commission is hereby authorized to hear and decide said appeals, after proper application, public hearing and presentation of relevant findings of fact. A written decision to the applicant will be recorded and mailed to the applicant within 30 days of the board's decision. 
b.  Authorize upon appeal in specific cases, variances from the terms of this ordinance where a hardship or special exception variance as defined in this ordinance exists. 
c.  Make recommendations to the Troup County Board of Commissioners on special uses, placement of manufactured home units (MHU) and home occupations, except those that the zoning ordinance provides for administrative approval. 
d.  Make recommendations to the Troup County Board of Commissioners regarding map and text amendments to the Troup County Zoning Ordinance. 
e.  Make recommendations to the Troup County Board of Commissioners for review and approval of developments in the single-family medium density, lakeside residential and PUD zoning districts. 
f.  Periodically review and make recommendations for amendments to the Troup County Comprehensive Plan or zoning ordinance and/or map in order to keep the plan and zoning ordinance consistent with changing conditions in Troup County. 
g.  Review and approve preliminary plats for major subdivisions. 
h.  Review and approve QDC site plans and variances. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017; Ord. No. 2019-01 , § I, 7-3-2018) 
16.5 - Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission Code of Conduct. 
a.  Conflicts of Interest. A BOZA/PC member shall have a conflict of interest if said member or his/her immediate family (spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter), has a property interest in any real property affected by action on an application before the BOZA/PC or has a financial interest in any business entity that has a property interest in any real property affected by action on an application before the BOZA/PC. Any member having a conflict of interest shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest prior to discussion of the matter and these disclosures shall be made a public record. No BOZA/PC member shall vote or participate on a matter in which he or she has a conflict of interest and the member shall leave the room while the matter is being discussed so as not to influence the voting of any other member. 
b.  Conflict of Interest Affidavit. Each member of the BOZA/PC shall sign the Conflict of Interest Affidavit form for each zoning application that is acted upon by the BOZA/PC, if a conflict does exist. 
c.  Outside Material. No BOZA/PC member shall discuss any matter pending before the BOZA/PC with anyone outside a public hearing, with the exception of other board members and staff. No discussions shall be held when a quorum is present unless the discussion takes place in a meeting has been duly advertised in accordance with this ordinance and the Open Meetings Act. All letters or other material personally received by any member shall be provided to each BOZA/PC member at the public hearing on the item in question. 
d.  Responsibility to Remain Impartial. Members of the BOZA/PC shall not decide or announce how they will vote prior to the conclusion of public hearing of any matter and shall otherwise avoid the appearance of premature decision making on any matter before the BOZA/PC. 
e.  BOZA/PC Member as Applicant. Nothing herein shall prevent a member of the BOZA/PC from presenting a matter to the BOZA/PC where such member is the applicant so long as such status is disclosed by the member prior to the presentation. Such member shall abstain from discussions and voting on such matter and the member shall leave the room while the matter is being discussed so as not to influence the voting of any other member. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.6 - Variances. 
A deviation or modification of the strict terms of the zoning ordinance granted by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. There are two types of variances that may be applied for by owners or agents of owners on a particular lot or parcel. The process for approval is the same for both, but each has a specific application form and fee that must be completed prior to being placed on the BOZA/PC agenda. 
16.6-1 Application and Process. A property owner or his authorized agent may initiate a request for variance by filing an application with the zoning administrator. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development. The zoning administrator may require other drawings or materials essential to an understanding of the proposed use and variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. The variance application shall be considered complete when the zoning administrator deems the application complete and the fee has been paid. The application shall be submitted and accepted within the timeframe established by the building and inspection office and according to the fee as posted in the building inspection, zoning and planning offices. 
16.6-2 Conditions and Standards for Granting a Hardship Variance. The board of zoning appeals/planning commission, in cases where specifically authorized, may grant a hardship variance only after the determination that all of the following conditions exist and criteria met: 
a.  There are unusual, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the owner's or occupant's own actions. Such conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or peculiar shape of the lot. 
b.  As a result of such unusual circumstance or conditions, there is an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty that renders it difficult or impossible to carry out the provisions of this code. 
c.  The authorization of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to surrounding property or district in which property is located, and the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of this code. 
d.  Compliance with one section of the ordinance would violate another section of the ordinance. 
e.  The variance approved will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
f.  An approved variance request does not permit a use of land, building or structure that is not permitted by right in the zoning district where the proposed development is located. 
16.6-3 Standards for Special Exception Variance Approval. A special exception variance may be granted by the board of zoning appeals/planning board upon a finding that the relief, if granted: 
a.  Would not cause substantial detriment to the public good; and 
b.  Would not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity; and 
c.  Would not diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; and 
d.  Would not impair the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance. 
16.6-4 Limitations on Relief of Special Exception Variances. Special exception variances shall be limited to relief from the following requirements of this zoning ordinance: 
a.  Minimum building setbacks. 
b.  Maximum building height. 
c.  Minimum lot width. 
d.  Minimum appearance standards for single-family dwellings. 
e.  Public or private street frontage. 
f.  Automobile parking requirements. 
g.  Zoning buffers and screening. 
h.  Signage. 
16.6-5 Administrative Approval. 
a.  Special exception variances shall be considered by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission unless the variance is approved administratively. Only those variances listed in this subsection, below, and within the parameters stated, may be considered for administrative approval. Administrative approval requires agreement by all staff members listed below, otherwise application defers to board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
b.  The zoning administrator, upon a finding that a special exception variance meets the standards for approval contained in this section, and upon the recommended approval of the Troup County Planner, Troup County Engineer and Troup County Building Official may administratively approve such special exception variance within and not exceeding the following parameters: 
(1)  Minimum building setbacks. Not to exceed a reduction in the minimum setback required by ten percent, except the front setback may be reduced or waived if the parking (for commercial properties) is located in the side or rear yards. 
(2)  Maximum building height. Not to exceed an additional four feet above the maximum allowed. 
(3)  Minimum appearance standard for single-family dwellings. Roof pitch—No less than three-twelfths, minimum width—No less than 20 feet, minimum floor area—No less than ten percent of minimum 1,000 square feet. 
(4)  Automobile parking requirements. Not to exceed a change by more than ten percent in the number of spaces required or allowed, shared parking, or the proximity of spaces to the use served. 
(5)  Signage. Up to ten percent of the dimensional restrictions of the sign regulations article. 
16.6-6 Restriction on Re-Filing a Special Exception Variance if Denied. If denied, an appeal for a special exception variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of six months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the board of zoning appeals/planning commission may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
16.6-7 Limitations on Special Exception Variance Approval. In no case shall a special exception variance be granted from the conditions of approval imposed on a property through a zoning change granted by the board of commissioners. 
16.6-8 Staff Report. The zoning administrator shall make an investigation of all variance applications and shall prepare a report, considering applicable criteria. The investigation shall be submitted to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. The investigation shall also be made available to the applicant prior to any public hearing scheduled on the matter. The applicant shall be notified of the availability of report by the zoning administrator. 
16.6-9 Action. The board of zoning appeals shall make findings and render a decision as soon as possible after the hearing. The approval or disapproval of a variance request may be published the day of the hearing or the board may take up to 30 days to make a final decision. If no findings are published within 30 days the variance shall be considered approved. 
16.6-10 Appeals. Appeals from administrative decisions of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall be taken to Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia by writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.7 - Initiation of Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance: 
Applications to amend this ordinance may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend the official zoning map(s). An application to amend the text of the zoning ordinance may be initiated by the zoning administrator or be submitted to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission by the Troup County Commission or any individual property owner. An application to amend the official zoning map(s) may be initiated by an individual property owner or his agent, the zoning administrator, or be submitted to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission by the Troup County Commission. Unless initiated by the Troup County Commission or the zoning administrator, all applications to amend the official zoning map(s) must be submitted by the owner of the property or authorized agent (authorized agent shall present a statement in writing from the property owner giving the agent authority to act on his/her behalf or a valid sales contract may be added to the application and serve as authorization for the buyer to act as authorized agent of the property owner) and shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee as posted in the building and inspection office, set by the Troup County Commission. An application for an amendment to the zoning map(s) affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, said intervals to begin with the date of final decision by the Troup County Commission. 
16.7-1 Application for Text Amendments: Each application to amend the text of this ordinance or the official zoning map(s) shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The initiation of all amendments must be submitted by written request from the board of commissioners, zoning administrator and/or the individual property owner. 
16.7-2 Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of applicant. 
b.  The existing text to be affected by amendment. 
c.  Proposed wording of text change. 
d.  Reason for amendment request. 
16.7-3 Standards for Text Amendments: 
a.  Whether the proposed text amendment furthers an implementation strategy, addresses an element of and the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Whether the proposed text amendment is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance. 
c.  Whether the adoption of the amendment furthers the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare. 
16.7-4 Application for Map Amendments: 
a.  A legal description of the tract(s) to be rezoned, including the street address and subdivision, if any, or area in which the tract is located. 
b.  A plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district; the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s); floodplain and flood hazard areas; unusual topographical features; current zoning of subject tract and all adjacent properties; and existing structures. This plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer or landscape architect or a planner with an AICP certification or land surveyor whose seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
c.  The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any; together with a written notarized authorization from the owner(s) agents, if any, to seek rezoning. 
d.  A description of how the property is to be used. 
e.  A description of how the property is being used at the present time. 
16.7-5 Submitted Application. Applications shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted annually by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission that shall provide each application be submitted by the deadline date as shown on the calendar of dates located in the office of building and inspections prior to the date on which it is to be considered by the Troup County Commissioners and in any event in sufficient time so as to permit advance advertising and notice of any public hearing(s) pursuant to the terms of this section and the zoning procedures law. Each application for an amendment to the official zoning ordinance text or map shall be assessed a fee as posted in building inspection zoning and planning office of Troup County to defray administrative costs. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the Troup County Commission, Planning Board or Zoning Administrator. 
16.7-6 Withdrawal of Application. If applicant withdraws application after the legal advertising has been published the applicant will not receive any refund of zoning application fee. If application is withdrawn prior to legal advertising being published and sign posted on the property the applicant may receive a refund of application fee. All withdrawals of applications shall be in writing to the zoning administrator at least 24 hours prior to the first reading of the application before the Troup County Commissioners. 
16.7-7 Requirements Regarding Developments of Regional Impact (DRI). The Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments, which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments, known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRI's), shall be submitted based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the Three Rivers Regional Commission (TRRC) for review, and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit, utility tap, or rezoning, whichever occurs first. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.8 - Planning Study. 
The zoning administrator (or his/her designee) upon receiving an application to amend the official zoning map(s), shall do the following: 
a.  With respect to an application to amend the official zoning map(s), consider and evaluate each of the standards set forth in section 16.10. 
b.  Consult with other departments, as necessary, of the county to fully evaluate the impact of any land use or zoning district change upon public facilities and services including, but not limited to schools, drainage, traffic, and related facilities. 
c.  Conduct a site visit to review the property and surrounding area. 
d.  Submit a written record of her/his investigation and recommendations to the Planning Board, said report shall be a matter of public record. 
e.  The zoning administrator may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this ordinance will be served, and reduce or mitigate any adverse impacts to surrounding neighborhood. 
16.9 - Public Notification. 
16.9-1 Newspaper of General Circulation. Due notice of the public hearing before the Troup County Commission shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation for Troup County where the legal advertisements of the county are published. The advertisement of the application for amending the zoning map of Troup County shall state the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearings at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the first hearing (reading) conducted by the county commission. If the application is for amendment to the official zoning map(s) and the application is initiated by the property owner then this notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
16.9-2 Signs Posted: As to an application to amend the Official Zoning Map(s) which is initiated by a party other than Troup County, at least 15 days and no more than 45 days in advance of the scheduled public hearing date of the Troup County Commissioners, a sign or signs shall be posted which shall meet or exceed the following composition standards: 
a.  For Rezoning Signs: Signs shall be white, of durable weather-resistant material such as wood or coroplast a minimum of 48 vertical inches by 72 horizontal inches in size (four feet by six feet), and with vinyl, painted or screen printed lettering of a minimum of three inches in height in black letters on a white background, except that the existing and the proposed zoning districts and proposed use shall be in red letters. The top line shall be reserved for the "NOTICE TO REZONE". The sign shall list the name of the applicant, date, time, subject property address (or Assessor Parcel Number (APN) if no address has been assigned) of property, present zoning, and proposed zoning, proposed use of the property, the meeting address and telephone number of the planning and zoning department. The sign shall also include the statement "Meeting dates subject to change, call to verify dates" for which the lettering shall be no less than one-half the height of the next smallest lettering and no less than one-half inch. 
b.  For variance, special and conditional use, manufactured home unit (MHU) placement, home occupation signs: Signs shall be white, of durable weather-resistant material such as wood, metal or coroplast a minimum of 18 vertical inches by 24 horizontal inches in size (one and one-half feet by two feet) and with vinyl, painted or screen-printed lettering of a minimum of three inches. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017; Ord. No. 2019-05 , § I, 11-20-2018) 
16.10 - Standards for the Exercise of Zoning Power. 
In addition to the standards enumerated in other sections of this ordinance, the board of zoning appeals/planning commission and Troup County Commission shall consider the following standards in reference to any rezoning application: 
a.  The existing land use patterns. 
b.  The population density pattern and possible increase or overburdening of public facilities including, but not limited to; schools, utilities, police and fire protection and streets. 
c.  Whether the proposed change will create or excessively increase traffic congestion or otherwise affect public safety. 
d.  Whether the proposed change will create adverse environmental impacts to water, erosion and sedimentation control regulations or sewerage system. 
e.  Whether the proposed change is consistent with the future land use map as adopted by the Troup County Commission. 
f.  Any other factors relevant to balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality or general welfare against the individual right to the unrestricted use of property. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.11 - Procedures for Public Hearing. 
All applications requiring a public hearing shall be posted in the newspaper of general circulation for Troup County where the legal advertisements of the county are published before being held before the BOZA/PC. The intent of the public hearing is to provide equitable opportunity for the public to speak on items that require public input and a minimum time period of ten minutes and a maximum time period of 15 minutes shall be available both to the proponents and opponents for the presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. The presiding officer may increase the maximum time period if the need arises and such time shall be determined by the presiding officer. 
Any person wishing to speak at a public hearing the person shall raise their hand and, after being recognized by the presiding officer, shall stand and give his/her name, address, reveal any campaign contributions made to any sitting county commissioner, or commissioner-elect, and make any comment appropriate to the proposed zoning request. 
All public hearing items shall generally follow the following prescribed order: 
1.  Calling of the item to order by the Chairperson. The public hearing shall be a part of the proceedings of the meeting. A motion to move into the public hearing section of the agenda shall be made, seconded and voted upon. Upon approval of the motion the public hearing shall be called to order by the presiding officer who shall explain the procedures to be followed in the conduct of the public hearing. 
2.  Presentation by staff. 
3.  Presentation by the applicant or designee. 
If the subject of the hearing is a zoning decision initiated by a petitioner other than the board of commissioners; the petitioner requesting such zoning decision, or the petitioner's agent, shall be recognized first and shall be permitted to present and explain the request for the zoning decision. If the request for a zoning decision is initiated by the board of commissioners, all members of the board of commissioners shall be thus allowed to speak as they are recognized by the presiding officer regardless of whether such board member speaks in favor of or in opposition to the proposed zoning request. Thereafter, all individual members of the board who so desire shall be permitted to speak in favor of the zoning request. After the county commissioner(s) have concluded their discussion any member of the public who wishes to speak shall have the opportunity to do so. 
4.  Comments by proponents. Once the applicant has presented the request, the presiding officer chairperson will ask to hear comments from any proponents of the application. 
5.  Comments by opponents. After all individuals have had an opportunity to speak in favor of the request, in accordance with section 16.10. those individuals present at the public hearing who wish to speak in opposition to the zoning request shall have an opportunity to speak. 
6.  Concluding comments by the applicant. Once all comments have been given by proponents and opponents of the application, the applicant is given an opportunity to make summary remarks concerning the application. 
7.  Chairperson closes the public hearing. Thereafter, the presiding officer shall announce that the public hearing for the requested zoning decision is closed. The board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall then convene its business session to consider the proposed amendment. 
8.  BOZA/PC directs questions to staff or members of the public, if desired. 
9.  Motion and vote. 
The BOZA/PC may then act upon its recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.12 - Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission Action. 
As to each application, the board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, denial, continuance, or withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. The board of zoning appeals/planning commission's action may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this ordinance will be served and reduce any adverse impacts to the surrounding neighborhood. A written report of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission's recommendation shall be submitted to the Troup County Commission and shall be public record. The failure of the planning commission to take any action within 45 days of the submittal of the application shall be considered to be a recommendation for approval. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.13 - Motions, Votes and Abstentions. 
Rules of Order. The form and character of motions shall generally be guided by Robert's Rules of Order, Revised except as otherwise provided herein. 
Motions. Upon review of the full public record and due deliberation among the members of the BOZA/PC, any of its members, except the chairperson, may make a substantive motion. In the case of items requiring recommendations to a further body, the motions shall be in the form of "Recommend Approval", "Recommend Approval subject to conditions" or "Recommend Denial". In the case of items requiring final action, the motions shall be in the form of "Approve", "Approve subject to corrections/conditions (as applicable)" or "Denial". 
Seconds. All motions shall require a second from another member, except the chairperson, in order to proceed to a full vote. A motion shall die for lack of a second. Upon receiving a second, the Chair shall call for any discussion on the matter. Upon closing of any discussion, the Chair shall call for the voting of all members against the motion. A majority of the quorum present shall constitute the minimum number of votes necessary to win the vote. 
Votes. The chairperson may vote on any motion, however, the chairperson shall not be required to vote except to break a tie. 
Defeated Motions. When a motion receives more "No" votes than "Yes" votes, it shall be deemed to have failed. This shall require a subsequent motion and vote on the item. 
Abstentions. When a BOZA/PC member is aware that he/she has a direct financial or familial conflict of interest as described in this Article or Ga. Code Ann., § 36-67A-1 et seq., the BOZA/PC member shall remove themselves from the item in its entirety and shall abstain from the vote. Normal circumstances should require that the member leave the room. All abstention notifications shall be made to the Chairperson before the item is heard. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.14 - Troup County Board of Commissioners Public Hearing. 
At the first meeting of the board of commissioners following the zoning appeals/planning meeting where the board of zoning appeals/planning commission made its recommendation, there shall be a first reading of the proposed amendment to include the recommendation of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission and a public hearing in accordance with the procedures as outlined in this ordinance. The Troup County Board of Commissioners shall consider whether or not further study and consideration of the proposed amendment and recommendation is needed and, if so, shall suspend and continue the public hearing on the matter for such further consideration. If the matter and hearing is continued, there shall be a second and final reading of the proposed amendment and the recommendation of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission and a recommencement of the public hearing before the board of commissioners at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners following the first reading of the proposed amendment and the recommendation of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. At the close of the public hearing before the board of commissioners after the second and final reading, the board shall immediately convene its business session and consider the recommendation for the zoning change and take action on the proposed amendment. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.15 - Appeals. 
Any appeals from the decision of the Board of Commissioners should be made directly to the Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia, and such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of action by the Board of Commissioners. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.16 - Reversion Clause. 
If after one year from the approved rezoning, the approved use has not been developed as stated in the minutes of the Troup County Commission meeting or an application for a preliminary plat review or building permit has not been made, then the rezoning shall be brought for review by the board of zoning appeals/planning board. Notification to the applicant and property owner of this review is required prior to any decision of the Troup County Commissioners. The applicant or property owner shall submit in writing to the board of zoning appeals/planning board within five business days of receiving the notification of review an explanation of the delay in developing the property as zoned. After review of the explanation from the applicant the planning commission may extend the rezoning, require filing of a new application for rezoning, or recommend reversal of the zoning to the Troup County Board of Commissioners. If the recommendation is to rezone the property to its previous zoning district then the reversal process shall follow the same procedures as an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning) with public hearing and notification in compliance with sections 16.5.4 through 16.12 of this article. Rezonings initiated by the board of commissioners or zoning administrator are exempt from this clause. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.17 - Building Permit. 
No improvement, building or other structure shall be located, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the offices of building and inspections. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and/or as approved by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.18 - Application for Building Permit. 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, setback distances, any parking spaces, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit shall become invalid and all construction shall cease until and unless a new permit is obtained. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.19 - Certificate of Occupancy. 
Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the building official after approval of the final inspection and prior to any person occupying the building. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building official and a copy shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.20 - Conditional Zoning (Conditions attached to zoning decisions). 
In order to mitigate adverse impacts to surrounding areas and to maintain the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Troup County the Troup County Commissioners may impose conditions on rezoning requests. Conditions placed on the property as a part of approval of a rezoning application shall remain in force until such time as an appeal has been approved relieving the property of such conditions. 
16.20-1 Property Conditions. Conditions, including but not limited to hours of operation, types of outside lighting, fencing, etc., placed on property at the time of rezoning shall become a written part of the minutes of the Troup County Commission meeting and shall be attached to the amendment to the official zoning map. The conditions imposed shall be part of the rezoning application and kept in the office of the zoning administrator or his/her designee. Conditions on the property travel with the property and stay in effect when property changes owners. 
16.20-2 Appeal Process for Conditional Zoning. Appeals for relief of conditions placed on rezoned property may be heard by the Troup County Commission only when the reason for the placement of conditions has been altered to allow the use of the property without the conditions. Appeals shall follow the same procedure as that of a rezoning application. Public hearings are required. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.21 - Special Uses. 
The board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall review and make recommendations to the Troup County Commission to approve, approve with conditions or deny special uses that are specifically authorized by this ordinance. Public hearings are required by the Troup County Commission (See hearing requirements). 
16.21-1 Conditions and Limitations: The board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation that may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this ordinance in its review and recommendation and the Troup County Commission may impose conditions, requirements or limitations it deems necessary. If at any time after a special use permit has been issued, the zoning administrator finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, the permit shall be terminated and the use discontinued until in compliance with the conditions. 
1 6.21-2 Special Use Application Procedure: Application for a special use shall be filed with the office of the zoning administrator, and the board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall have 45 days within which to consider each request and make recommendations to the Troup County Commission. Upon receiving recommendations from the board of zoning appeals/planning commission or after the 45-day period has expired, the Troup County Commission shall schedule the proposed special use to be voted on at the next regularly scheduled commission meeting. Each special use application is subject to public hearing procedures as specified in section 16.10. Each application shall contain a simple sketch of the site to scale, showing the following: 
a.  The general location of all existing structures and property lines; 
b.  Present zoning of adjacent property; 
c.  The existing use of adjacent property; 
d.  Location of proposed buildings and land use; 
e.  A legal description of the property; 
f.  Setbacks; and 
g.  Parking spaces, if applicable. 
16.21-3 Standards. In order to grant approval of a special use, the Troup County Commission shall determine whether the following standards have been met: 
a.  The available existing street system is adequate to efficiently and safely accommodate the traffic that will be generated by the proposed use or development. 
b.  The existing public utilities, facilities and services are adequate to accommodate the proposed use or development. 
c.  The use or development will not generate or cause conditions such as noise, light, glare, or odor or similar objectionable features which would reduce the value, use or enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
d.  The use would not have a detrimental environmental impact on the surrounding area. 
e.  The use would not adversely affect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
16.21-4 Application Fee. Each application for a special use shall be submitted along with a fee according to fee schedule posted in offices of building and inspections and set by the Troup County Commission to partially defray administrative and notification costs. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.22 - Conditional Uses. 
Uses that have been granted Conditional Use approval prior to February 7, 2017 may continue as long as they meet the guidelines and conditions as a part of the approval. After February 17, 2017, uses that were formerly deemed "conditional uses" will be special uses subject to the guidelines as stated in 16.21 - Special Uses. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.23 - Compliance with Zoning Procedures Law. 
This article of the Troup County Zoning Ordinance, as from time to time amended, is intended to set forth and constitute the policies, procedures and standards required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and copies of same shall be available to the public upon request. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
16.24 - Appeals. 
Decisions of the board of commissioners may be appealed to the Troup County Superior Court and such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of action by the board of commissioners 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § I(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

18.1 - Purpose. 
It is the objective of this zone to establish procedures and standards for the implementation of comprehensively planned, multi-use and mixed use projects. It is also intended that this zone provide a more flexible approach to the comprehensive design and development of multi-use and mixed use projects than the procedures and regulations applicable under the various conventional zoning categories. In so doing, it is intended that this zoning category be utilized to foster an overall improved development pattern for Troup County. The specific purposes of the zone are: 
18.1-1 To encourage orderly, staged development of comprehensively planned, multi/mixed-use centers by providing procedures for various zoning and plan approvals, including development phasing; 
18.1-2 To encourage design flexibility and coordination of use, architectural style of buildings and signage; 
18.1-3 To ensure the integration and internal compatibility of applicable residential and non-residential uses by providing a suitable residential environment that is enhanced and complimented by commercial, recreational, open space, employment and institutional uses and amenities within all land use components of the multi/mixed-use project; 
18.1-4 To ensure compatibility of the proposed land uses with internal and surrounding uses by incorporating higher standards of land planning and site design than could be accomplished under conventional zoning categories and to provide a superior quality of development exceeding what could be achieved under conventional zoning regulations and procedures; 
18.1-5 To encourage the efficient use of land by: locating employment, educational and retail uses convenient to residential areas; reducing reliance on automobile use and encouraging pedestrian and other non-vehicular circulations systems; retaining and providing usable open space and passive and active recreation areas close to employment and residential population; and providing for the development of comprehensive non-vehicular circulation networks, separated from vehicular roadways, which constitute a system of linkages among residential areas, open spaces, recreational areas, educational, commercial and employment areas, and public facilities; 
18.1-6 To provide superior natural environment by the preservation of trees, natural topographic geologic features, wetlands, watercourses, and open space, and; 
18.1-7 To allow development only in a staged or phased fashion to ensure the adequate provision of public facilities and the concurrent implementation of community amenities. 
18.2 - Size, Location and Development Requirements. 
The PUD zoning classification and accompanying development plans may be approved upon findings that the application is proper for the comprehensive and systemic development of the county, is capable of accomplishing the purposes of this zone, is an internally and externally compatible form of development and is consistent with any applicable planning and land use policies of the county. In order to enable the county to evaluate the conformance with the standards contained herein, specific sets of plans shall be submitted in accord with subsection 18.9 herein, and the county is authorized to approve said plan or plans if such plans are found sufficient to accomplish the above purposes in compliance with the standards and requirements of this zone. 
18.2-1 Minimum Area. No land shall be classified in the PUD zone unless it contains a minimum of 100 acres. Parcels or tracts less than the minimum acreage may be permitted if they are within a municipal urban area boundary (UAB) or contiguous to an existing PUD zoned area and may be harmoniously integrated into the PUD area, consistent with the objectives and purposes of this zone. 
18.2-2 Location. Such land shall be located adjacent to and readily accessible from existing or planned roadways, sufficient to carry the increased capacity of the development, and are in an approved construction program. It is intended that adequate access be available to such sites so that traffic does not have an adverse impact on the surrounding area or cause internal circulation or safety problems. To this end, it is required that any PUD constructed in Troup County have at a minimum two entrances and exits, preferably along collector or arterial street systems. 
18.3 - Public Water and Sewer. 
No development shall be permitted unless served by a water and sewer system owned and operated by a local government or authority of a local government. 
18.4 - Signage. 
Signs shall be allowed in accordance with the specifications and standards established in the final site plan and approved by the Troup County Engineer and Troup County Planner. The number of signs shall be decided upon at the final platting stage and the following signage may be permitted: 
a.  Primary monuments for the overall development at each primary entrance to the development that shall not exceed 64 square feet in surface area and 20 feet in height. These signs shall not be located in the right-of-way of any road nor shall it obstruct the view of oncoming traffic from any direction. 
b.  Secondary monuments for specific phases of the development and for internal separation of uses within the development and shall not exceed 24 square feet in area four feet in height. 
18.5 - Connectivity. 
Parcels shall not be zoned PUD unless configured to connect to adjacent streets (grid pattern) and promote the overall connectivity of pedestrians and vehicles within the development. 
18.6 - Traditional Neighborhood Development Principles. 
Land developed in the PUD zone should be developed consistent with the principles of traditional neighborhood developments, which emulate the historic pattern of development in the county and will be generally more compatible with existing developed areas of the county. These principles are listed below: 
18.6-1 Walkability: Most daily needs can be satisfied within a five-to-ten minute walk of home and work (quarter- to half-mile radius). Pedestrian-friendly street design includes buildings close to the street, front porches, continuous tree cover, on-street parking where appropriate, hidden parking lots, garages relegated to a rear lane or alley, and narrow, slow-speed vehicular trajectories. 
18.6-2 Connectivity: An interconnected street grid network disperses traffic and increases walkability by allowing most streets to be narrow. A high quality pedestrian network and public realm makes walking comfortable, pleasant, and interesting. 
18.6-3 Mixed/Multi-Use: A mix of shops, offices, apartments, houses, live-work units, recreation, on site. There should be mixed/multi-uses within the neighborhood, the block, and buildings. 
18.6-4 Diverse Housing: A range of architectural types, sizes, and prices preferably interspersed but minimally located in close proximity. 
18.6-5 High-Quality Architecture and Urban Design: Emphasis on aesthetics, human comfort, and creating a sense of place and special placement of civic buildings and sites within the community. Architectural styles and exteriors shall vary and provide an aesthetically pleasing facade to the public street. 
18.6-6 Increased Density: More buildings, residences, shops, and services closer together, to encourage walking and to enable a more efficient use of resources and time. 
18.6-7 Smart Transportation: A transportation network connecting neighborhoods, business districts, cities and towns together. Pedestrian-friendly design encourages a greater use of walking, bicycles, carts and scooters as daily transportation. 
18.6-8 Sustainable: Minimal environmental impact of development and its operations. It has less use of finite land and fuel resources, more local production. 
18.6-9 Quality of Life: Taken together, all of the above contribute to an improved quality of life for community residents and for the human community as a whole. 
18.7 - Uses Permitted. 
18.7-1 Residential. All types of residential uses allowed by right in the MFR, SFMD and LR, zoning districts shall be permitted, as well as all accessory uses thereto. 
a.  The location and type of all residential uses proposed on the site must be shown on the concept and preliminary plan submitted in accordance with the requirements of subsection 18.9 of this section, with the level of specificity increasing at each level of plan review. 
b.  Residential uses may be mixed with proposed commercial/employment uses, rather than located in a separate residential area on the site, upon a finding by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission and the county commission that combining residential and non-residential uses at one location, within a site, will not adversely affect the overall development proposed. 
18.7-2 Commercial. All uses allowed by right in the LC, NHC zone are permitted uses. Some uses in the GC and LI districts may be allowed by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission upon request. 
a.  The approximate location and general type of commercial and employment uses proposed on the site must be shown on concept plan and preliminary development plan submitted in accord with subsection 18.9 herein, with the level of specificity increasing at each level of plan review. 
b.  In order to establish and appropriately mix character within the entire PUD-zoned area, a mixture of commercial uses including retail commercial, office, institutional, civic and other low intensity uses shall not exceed 30 percent, including parking and landscaping of the total project shown on a concept plan. 
18.8 - Density and Intensity of Development. 
18.8-1 Residential. The total number of dwelling units and the corresponding density, as well as the approximate location of such units, shall be established at the time of concept plan approval pursuant to subsection 18 provided that the approximate location of specific units may be modified after approval of the plan if such modification does not affect the total density of the development and does not affect the total number of units of a particular type by more than 15 percent. Any modifications that meet the density and type requirements may be approved by the zoning administrator upon the receipt of a revised plat. Any modifications that exceed the density and type requirements shall be re-submitted to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission for approval. The zoning administrator shall have ten days to review any modified plans. Residential units may consist of single-family attached or detached dwellings. Also allowed as residential units are duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, townhomes, live-work units or any combination of these that adequately address the developer's concept of the project. 
18.8-2 Lot size. Supporting commercial facilities and use facilities may be authorized up to 100 percent lot coverage provided a parking plan identifying parking alternatives in the immediate vicinity of the building, acceptable to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission is developed for the proposed building. No variances from landscaping requirements shall be granted unless developer has true hardship as defined in Article III of these regulations. However, modifications may be made to the landscape plan if the modifications do not alter the intent of this ordinance and enhance the project as determined by the zoning administrator and approved by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
18.8-3 Height. Building heights may not exceed 45 feet (excluding solar panels and roof-mounted rainwater cisterns) unless waived by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
18.9 - Minimum Green Area, Landscaping and Amenity Requirements. 
18.9-1 The amount of green area, including designated parks, public and private open space, active and passive recreational areas, required for the residential portion of a mixed/multi use development shall not be less than 25 percent of the net acreage shown for residential use. The minimum green area requirement, which shall include designated parks, private open space, active and passive recreational areas, for the commercial portion of a mixed/multi use development shall be ten percent or less of the total net acreage devoted to commercial uses, except that comparable amenities and/or facilities may be provided in lieu of green area if the board of zoning appeals/planning commission determines that such amenities or facilities are sufficient to accomplish the purposes of the zone, and would be more beneficial to the proposed development than strict adherence to the specific green area requirement. 
18.9-2 All recreation areas, facilities and amenities, and all open space and landscaped areas, shall be reflected on the application for PUD zone at concept plan approval stage approved by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. With respect to such areas, facilities and amenities, the concept plan or accompanying documents shall reflect: 
a.  That such areas, facilities or amenities shall not be constructed, converted or used for any purposes other than reflected and designated on the approved preliminary plan unless said plan is amended by prior written consent of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
b.  A staging or construction timetable specifying the construction of all recreational areas, facilities and amenities. The staging or construction timetable may be related to the number of residential units under construction or complete, or population levels, or other appropriate standard. Amendments of the timetable may be made after approval of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. The adherence to the performance of such timetable may, at the discretion of the Troup County Commissioners be secured by the withholding and suspension of all permits for any project lying within the designated PUD zone. 
c.  Copies of proposed supporting covenants to be filed among the land records prior to the issuance of building permits, which shall enumerate the property owner's and all successors' obligations for perpetual maintenance of all common areas, green space, recreation areas, facilities and amenities, and all common landscaped areas. 
18.10 - Public Facilities and Utilities. 
Roads must conform to standards set and adopted by the county as defined in the Troup County Subdivision Regulations and as approved on the preliminary plan. In the event that proposed roads are to be narrower than county specifications or require other changes in order to meet the objectives of the PUD ordinance the change in conformance to the adopted Troup County Subdivision Regulations may be approved by the county engineer during the preliminary plat approval stage. Each development must have on site water and sewer capabilities. All developers are required to have sewer systems operated and maintained by a governmental body qualified to do so. All utilities shall be underground for PUD developments. Utility and road departments are urged to work with the developer to place utilities, sidewalks and trees in a place that is functional for all and that allows for street trees. 
18.11 - Parking Requirements. 
In addition to any other requirements of this Code section, off-street parking shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Parking spaces shall be determined by off-street parking regulations of this ordinance. The board of zoning appeals/planning commission may reduce or increase the number of spaces required for any use allowed in the PUD zone when such reduction or increase will meet the purposes of the PUD zone. 
b.  Street Trees. Developers are encouraged to provide for street trees that at some point in the future may provide a canopy of trees lining the streets and neighborhood of the mixed/multi-use districts. All mixed-multi use developments are required to submit a landscape plan to be approved by the county arborist. In order to insure that development options are as flexible as possible the landscape plan may be amended as needed to properly serve the development. However, the approved preliminary plat and landscape plan shall be what is required to be built. The preliminary may be modified until construction drawings are submitted to the county engineer for approval. 
18.12 - Application and Processing Procedures. 
All planned unit developments are subject to Troup County Subdivision Regulations. Planned unit developments usually are subject to development of regional impact review by the regional planning agency. At the time of application for rezoning and concept plan approval the zoning administrator will apply to the regional planning agency for determination of development of regional impact. Traffic impact study for proposed site is required at the time of zoning of the property and concept plan approval. All developments are subject to the development point rating system as identified in Article XXVI of this ordinance. PUD's shall also be subject to this review. Procedures for governing the application for the PUD zone and approvals necessary to seek building permits shall be subject to the following multiple step process: 
a.  Concept plan approval does not ensure future approval of preliminary plan or an indication that the project will be approved in future phases of review. 
b.  An applicant shall file, together with the prescribed application fee, a concept plan and rezoning application. The concept plan shall include at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The boundaries of the entire tract or parcel. 
2.  The location size, capacity of roads located on all adjacent lands. 
3.  Generalized location of existing and proposed external roads and adjacent land use and development. 
4.  Generalized location and description of various internal proposed land use components, including information as to proposed densities and intensities, proposed size and heights of development. 
5.  Generalized location, description and timing of proposed roads, proposed dedicated public lands and perimeter setback or buffer areas. 
6.  Proposed phasing or staging plan of development, public facilities and information pertaining to the provision of public facilities as required by the county. 
7.  Generalized areas of woodlands, streams and watercourses and other areas intended for natural preservation. 
8.  An illustrative plan providing for the physical layout of the entire development including all streets, lots, parcels, park and open spaces. 
18.13 - Proposals. 
During the concept plan approval phase, the board of zoning appeals/planning commission and developer will engage in meetings and planning sessions to submit proposals for consideration. 
18.14 - Concept Plan Findings. 
The county commission may approve PUD zoning and the accompanying concept plan upon finding that: 
a.  The application meets or accomplishes the purposes, objectives, and minimum standards and requirements of the zone; and 
b.  The application and concept plan will be internally and externally compatible and harmonious with existing and planned uses in the PUD zoned areas and adjacent areas. 
18.15 - Preliminary Development Plan Approval. 
An application for preliminary development plan approval is subject to review by the development point rating system as outlined in Article XXVI of this ordinance. 
18.16 -   
A preliminary development plan shall be filed for approval, rejection or modification by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission of all or portions of the area zoned pud and reflected within the approved concept plan, together with the required filing fee. The preliminary development plan shall be scaled at one inch equals 50 feet and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Boundary survey and identification plat or survey plat. 
b.  The use(s) of all buildings and structures within the preliminary development plan area, as well as existing uses of adjacent property external to the PUD zoned area. 
c.  The location, height and approximate dimensions and conceptual architectural elevations of all buildings and structures, and the setbacks and densities and/or square footage thereof. 
d.  The location of points of access to the site and all public and private roads, pedestrian and bike paths, in accordance with the applicable thoroughfare design standards. 
e.  The location and setbacks of all parking areas. 
f.  Existing topography including: 
1.  Contour intervals of not more than two feet; 
2.  One hundred-year flood plains and flood ways including base flood elevations. 
3.  Other natural features, such as rock outcropping and scenic views; 
g.  Historic buildings, structures or areas. 
h.  Drainage easements. 
i.  All landscaped areas, proposed conceptual screen planting, open spaces, recreation and amenity areas. 
j.  Proposed phasing or staging plan of development and information relating to such plan's consistency with the provision of public facilities. 
k.  A proposed (draft) covenant or other form of agreement indicating how the area will be included in any homeowners association or other legal organization, and how any open space, community space or amenities located with the area subject to review will be perpetually maintained. 
l.  Five copies of preliminary plan/plat are required for submittal to the review process 24 inches by 36 inches or of a size acceptable to the Troup County zoning administrator. All plats and supporting information shall also be submitted in digital format as may be required by the Troup County zoning administrator. 
m.  Two drawings that inventory all wetlands, all watercourses and impoundments, and floodplain limits; 
n.  Two copies of the stormwater management plan; 
o.  A typical section view for typical utility plan; 
p.  A transportation plan showing the interconnection to the residential and commercial areas and its relationship to all adjoining properties; 
q.  Required fees; 
r.  Project narrative to include description of the type of project and who it will serve, developer information, contractor information, engineer information, contact information, anticipated start dates, completion dates, phasing description (if applicable), impact statement describing projects effects on surrounding transportation including traffic counts and flows from proposed project and existing counts, a narrative description of how traffic will be managed and controlled (and calmed) as appropriate for the development (the traffic impact study may be substituted for this part of the narrative) description of greenspace and public/community space proposed for the project; and 
s.  Application must be signed by owner, developer and engineer or land surveyor (licensed in Georgia with stamp affixed). 
18.17 - Preliminary Plan Findings. 
The PUD preliminary plan submittal may be approved upon finding that: 
a.  The plan is substantially in accord with the approved concept plan; and 
b.  The plan meets or accomplishes the purposes, objectives and minimum standards and requirements of the zone; and 
c.  The plan will be internally and externally compatible and harmonious with existing and planned uses in the PUD zoned areas and adjacent areas; and 
d.  The existing or planned public facilities are adequate to service the proposed development contained in the plan; and 
e.  The development staging or phasing program is adequate in relation to the provision of public facilities and private amenities to service the proposed development; and 
18.18 - Final Site Plan Review. 
Following rezoning and approval of a preliminary development plan, approval of construction drawings to include two copies of the erosion and sedimentation control plan and full utility plan; construction of roads and any other required documentation an applicant shall submit to the board of commissioners a final site plan for approval for dedication of the roads, which shall be in accord with the approved preliminary development plan and shall include the following: 
a.  All information required pursuant to the requirements of the preliminary plan; 
b.  Proposed covenants, suitable for filing in the deed records of Troup County, which shall indicate in specific language that the property is restricted in its use and/or development standards to the preliminary development plan and any accompanying or qualifying text material submitted with such plan, such plan shall be approved by the Troup County attorney at the time of final site plan review. Additional requirements for the covenants are as follows: 
1.  Building/structure setbacks and lot coverage; 
2.  The location and type of accessory buildings and structures; 
3.  Type and nature of accessory uses; and 
4.  The appearance of buildings and structures, configuration of building elements and type of building materials. Provided however, no such rules, regulations and standards shall exceed any maximum development standard or be less than any minimum development standard or permit any use otherwise prohibited in the PUD zone. All owners of property subject to the final site plan and their assigns shall be notified (by the developer) of such rules, regulations and standards at the time of taking title to property located within the final site plan area. 
18.19 -   
The county commissioners shall approve a final site plan upon considerations, determinations and powers set forth in this article. The county commissioners shall, as a condition of approval, require the posting of all necessary bonds or other security instruments, and recording of covenants. 
18.20 -   
No person, firm or corporation may violate any requirement of this article, to include but not limited to deviation from the requirements of the final site plan, and any such violation shall be enforceable by the county and subject to such enforcement and penalties provided by zoning ordinance. 
18.21 -   
An architect shall be commissioned by the homeowner's association or developer as a method of ensuring compliance with the architectural code. Said architect shall be retained by the developer and/or homeowner's association until such time as the last lot in the PUD zone at issue is developed. 
18.22 -   
Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the county commission may seek judicial review by the Superior Court of Troup County within 30 days of the decision. 
ARTICLE XIX. - TREE PRESERVATION 

19.1 - Purpose. 
This tree preservation ordinance has been developed to benefit the environmental and aesthetic quality of Troup County. The intent is to create an opportunity and promote preservation of the county's natural resources and grow in a way that will provide a healthy environment for the future of Troup County. The purpose of this tree preservation ordinance is to provide standards for the preservation of trees as part of the land development process; to prevent massive grading of land, both developed and undeveloped, without provision for replacement of trees; and to protect trees during construction whenever possible in order to enhance the quality of life within Troup County. The regulations of this tree preservation ordinance shall be the definitive, unless otherwise directed by the zoning ordinance or county code. The benefits derived from this tree preservation ordinance include: 
1.  Provide visual buffering and enhance beautification of the county; 
2.  Moderation of storm water runoff, and improved water quality; 
3.  Protect and attempt to enhance property values, thus safeguarding private and public investment; 
4.  Protect the unique identity of Troup County by promoting native plants; 
5.  Control soil erosion; 
6.  Reduction of some air pollutants and interception of airborne particulate matter; 
7.  Preserve stands of trees and "specimen" trees; and 
8.  Protect natural vegetation except where its removal is necessary for responsible property development or control of disease and infestation. 
This article shall serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing of land and its disturbance, so as to preserve, insofar as possible, the natural and existing growth of vegetation and to replace whenever possible the removed foliage with new vegetation. 
19.2 - Definitions. 
In construing the provisions hereof and the meaning of each and every word, term, phrase, or part thereof, where the context will permit, the definitions of words as contained in the adopted Zoning Ordinance of Troup County, supplemented by the following, shall apply: 
Agriculture. The science or art of cultivating the soil, harvesting crops, and raising livestock. 
Boundary Tree. A tree located on adjacent property in proximity to a boundary line of subject project. Requirements set forth herein covering critical root zone shall be adhered to. 
Buffer. See Article III of this ordinance. 
Caliper. A standard of trunk measurement for replacement trees. Caliper inches are measured at the height of six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four-inch caliper and 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than four inches caliper. 
Certified County Arborist ("Arborist"). An ISA certified tree professional responsible for reviewing tree preservation and replacement plans, etc., to include developing arboricultural standards relative to tree care, protection, construction impacts and administrative guidelines for ordinance as well as the determination of tree removal in public places. 
Critical Root Zone. The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone of a tree is established on the basis of the trunk diameter at DBH. Trees are to be represented on plans by a concentric circle centered on the trunk location with a diameter equal in feet to twice the number of inches of the tree's trunk diameter at DBH. The critical root zone shall be used by plan reviewers to determine compliance with design standards and construction specifications. A circle is graphically efficient to produce and represents the most likely configuration of a trees root pattern, even when the crown is skewed or one-sided. The ratio of circle diameter to trunk diameter is based on typical dripline distances noted on open grown trees with full crowns. 
Density Factor. A unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. 
Diameter Breast-Height (DBH). The standard measure of size for overstory and understory trees existing on a site. The tree trunk is measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, measure the trunk at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Drip Line: The line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown from which rainfall would drip from the outermost branch tips of the tree or group of trees collectively. 
Heritage Tree. Any tree which is determined by Troup County to be of unique and intrinsic value to the general public because of its size, age, historic association, unique species to the region, ecological value or any tree designated a Georgia State Champion, United States Champion or World Champion by the American Forestry Association (Refer to appendix B). This ordinance calls for the arborist to maintain a list of trees that are of special interest to the county. Upon recommendation by the arborist, the board of commissioners may designate a tree as a heritage tree, provided the tree's health, aerial space, and open ground area for the root system have been certified by the Arborist as sufficient. The arborist shall maintain a registry of heritage trees which shall be maintained in the building permits and inspections office. 
Land Disturbance Permit. The authorization granted by Troup County necessary to begin a land disturbing activity. 
Land Disturbing Activity. Any alteration of the natural environment that shall require a land disturbance permit for removal of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development and includes, but it is not limited to, soil erosion permit, clearing and grubbing permit, land disturbance permit or building permit. 
Overstory (Canopy) Tree. Those tree species that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. Replacement trees must be chosen from the list in appendix D. 
Pasture Land. Land cleared of trees for agricultural use. 
Replacement Planting. The planting of trees on a site that before development had more trees, and after development shall have fewer trees per acre. 
Site. Any plot or parcel of land, or a combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land, where grading, building, construction or alteration is performed or permitted. 
Site Density Factor. The minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property at completion of development. Reference appendix C. 
Soil Compaction. A change in the physical properties of soil which include an increase in soil weight per unit volume, and decreases in soil pore space. Soil compaction is caused by repeated vibrations, frequent traffic and weight. As related to tree roots, compacted soil can cause physical root damage, a decrease in soil oxygen levels with an increase in toxic gases, and can create an impervious condition to new root development. 
Specimen Tree. Any tree that qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type, and condition (Refer to appendix A). Individual trees may be considered important county resources because of unique or noteworthy characteristics or values. 
Stop Work Order. An official order from the county for work to cease on a development site until such time as specific issues are resolved. 
Timber Harvest. Under Georgia law all timber harvests or sales must be reported on Department of Revenue form PT-283T. The official code of Georgia Annotated defines timber harvest. 
Tree. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any point and a height of over ten feet. 
Tree Diameter. The widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (DBH) or at a point below DBH for new trees or multi-trunk species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
Tree Preservation and Replacement Plan. A plan that identifies tree protection areas where existing trees are to be preserved and where proposed replacement trees are to be planted on a property to meet the requirements of this ordinance, as well as methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree Planting List. The recommended species of trees listed in appendix D. 
Tree Protection Area. Any portion of a site wherein existing trees that are proposed to be preserved in order to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. The tree protection area shall include, at a minimum, no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the critical root zone. 
Tree Save Area. An area designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving existing trees, and/or preserving natural buffers. 
Understory Tree. A tree species that, under normal forest conditions, grows to maturity beneath overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of at least ten feet but less than 40 feet. Replacement trees must be chosen from the list in appendix D. 
Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of Troup County, Georgia, as amended from time-to-time by the Board of Commissioners of Troup County. 
19.3 - Applicability. 
This ordinance shall apply to all properties or portions thereof located within the unincorporated areas of Troup County, Georgia, to the extent of the provisions contained herein. The terms and provisions of this ordinance shall apply to any activity on real property which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit except as exempted in section 19.4. 
19.3-1 PUD. For planned developments including the operations of clearing or grading, the owner shall be required to follow at a minimum the standards set forth herein and the standards of stabilization as set forth in the Erosion Control Ordinance. Plantings shall not be required until a certificate of occupancy is requested for the developed parcels and at that time only the plantings for each developed parcel should be required. Plantings shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or performance of a final building inspection. This shall ensure that the proper plantings are established for each use as well as provide for the appropriate timing of plant installation. 
19.3-2 Zoning Change. Any change in zoning shall require the application of this article to the property. 
19.3-3 The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all public entities and owners of public property within Troup County and it shall be unlawful for said owners to fail to comply with all provisions of this ordinance. 
19.4 - Exemptions. 
The following activities are specifically exempted from this ordinance: 
19.4-1 The construction of single-family detached and/or two-family residential dwelling that is not part of a major subdivision (a subdivision of land which results in the creation of five or more lots). 
19.4-2 Rural residential zoning district shall be exempt when the zoning district is requested to provide road frontage to existing homes that have previously had easements only. 
19.4-3 Any addition, alteration, improvement or remodeling of an existing residence or the construction of structures accessory to an existing residence shall be exempt from this ordinance. 
19.4-4 Tree removal by existing individual single-family detached and duplex homeowners; unless noted as a heritage tree. 
19.4-5 All plant or tree nurseries and botanical gardens and arboretums shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this ordinance in relation to those trees which are being grown for relocation and continued growth in the ordinary course of business, or for some public purpose. 
19.4-6 All orchards of trees in active commercial operation shall be exempt as bona fide agricultural purposes only. 
19.4-7 Any land clearing and grubbing activities that are strictly for agricultural purposes. 
19.4-8 Timber harvesting (selective cutting or clear cutting) timber harvesting operations not incidental to development that qualify as forestry land management practices or agricultural operations, not incidental to development on tracts which are zoned for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purposes. An approval letter from the arborist is required prior to commencement of qualified timber harvesting. 
19.4-9 The installation of on-site sewage management systems (OSSMS), initial or repair, providing the disruption of the trees is kept to a minimum and heritage tree guidelines are followed. If the OSSMS initial or repair is in a tree protection area, a plan of the OSSMS shall be submitted to the arborist prior to installation. 
19.5 - Arborist Approval is Not Required to Remove Dead and Diseased Trees by Individual Homeowners. 
There are situations where large areas of tree removal is appropriate and would not fall under the exemptions listed in section 9.4 including southern pine beetle infestation. Upon the written advice of the county extension service or the Georgia Forestry Commission or an ISA certified arborist in accordance with commonly accepted forestry practices and a finding of disease or insect infestation, the Arborist may authorize the removal of trees to prevent the danger of these trees falling, prevent potential injury to life or property and prevent fuel build up for forest fires. The owner/developer, prior to the removal of these trees, shall notify the arborist, identifying the location of the infested property, and shall submit to the arborist the written finding of the an independent certified arborist, county extension service or the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
19.6 - Removal of Structurally Declining Trees. 
Trees that are identified as posing a risk of failure (whole tree falling or large tree parts breaking off) and documented in writing by a professional landscape forester or I.S.A. Certified Arborist, in accordance with commonly accepted "hazard evaluation" techniques and practices, and not caused by development activities, may be authorized by the arborist for removal without penalty. Site density units must still be met; removal requests shall be accompanied with an amendment to the replanting plan. These trees, because of poor structural attributes, shall not be counted as heritage or specimen trees. 
19.7 - Permitting Applications. 
Land disturbance activities shall not commence until such activities have been authorized by issuance of an appropriate land disturbance permit (LDP) under the provisions of the development regulations, latest edition. No land disturbance permit shall be issued for development without it being determined by the arborist that the proposed development is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
19.8 - Permit Procedures. 
Prior to submission of any plans associated with the LDP application, applicants are required to conduct a pre-planning meeting with the arborist. This meeting is intended to provide an opportunity for the applicant to present their conceptual plans as well as to ensure that applicant is aware of all provisions of this ordinance that might potentially impact said plans. Resulting information from this conference, that are specific to items where the arborist has latitude, should be recorded by the applicant and submitted to the arborist for inclusion in the plans submitted for the LDP application. 
19.8-1 All tree preservation and replacement plans and related documents shall be reviewed by the arborist for conformance to the provisions of this ordinance. The permit will require approval and sign-off by the arborist. 
19.8-2 Arborist sign-off shall constitute an approval of the required tree preservation and replacement plan and conformance to the provisions of these regulations. 
19.8-3 The arborist, at any time, may at his/her discretion, require an "as built" tree plan, which graphically communicates the size, location, and name of all trees and landscape material existing on site. The plan must be to scale and prepared by a certified arborist or registered landscape architect. 
19.9 - Density Requirements. 
The quantity of total existing and replacement trees on a site must be sufficient to produce a total site density factor as follows: Trees should be distributed throughout the development and not located in only one area. Procedures for determining the site density requirements and subsequent tree replacements are provided in appendix C. 
19.9-1 The required site density for each site shall be calculated by multiplying the total acreage of the site by the required site density factor for the appropriate zoning district (see Article VII). 

 
1.  Tree densities for properties zoned PUD shall be determined at the time of concept plan submittal. Site Density is not a factor in determining successful stewardship, unified and connective design, or appropriate design for the neighborhood in which it is located. 
2.  *These exemptions shall be determined prior to final plat submittal. Example: SDF for a Wooded Site zoned AG is calculated by multiplying the total acres by 20 units per acre. A ten-acre site by 20 units per acre equals 200 units. 
19.10 - Mitigation Measures. 
It shall be the policy of the county to maximize the preservation and maintenance of existing trees and where necessary the planting of replacement trees. An approved tree protection and replacement plan must be included as a condition for issuance of a land disturbance permit. The arborist shall have the authority to reject and/or approve appropriate measures (including a combination of measures) based on the requirements of this ordinance and the particular circumstances of each project. It shall also be the policy of the county to provide guidelines for new tree plantings in those instances where no trees currently exist, e.g., former pasture land. 
19.10-1 Mitigation Objectives. 
1.  Protect existing trees or woodland/forest resources. 
2.  Provide additional protection for specimen and heritage trees. 
3.  Planning for and identifying tree save areas at the earliest stages of development process. 
19.10-2 Preservation and Protection of Existing Trees. The required site density factor shall first be met with existing trees when possible (see section 9.8.1). Special emphasis shall be afforded to the preservation of heritage and specimen trees (see appendix A and B). When a choice is available as to which existing trees to save, heritage trees and specimen trees, even isolated individual trees, shall be given preference over other trees. As provided for in appendix B, heritage trees shall be afforded special protection and may be removed in accordance with appendix B. 
19.10-3 Protection. Protection of existing individual trees and/or stands shall be incorporated as a required portion of initial design and project layout through project build out to include the following: 
1.  Planning for and identifying tree save areas at the earliest stages of development process 
2.  Initial design of project lay-out 
3.  Relocate proposed structures or infrastructure as necessary. 
4.  Utilize appropriate construction and planning methods to minimize damage to tree roots during construction. 
5.  Set aside portions of project area as tree save areas. 
19.10-4 Planting of New Trees. If the required site density factor cannot be accomplished with existing trees, replacement trees shall be planted as required by this ordinance. Using the guidelines provided in section 9.3.3 below, the precise locations may be at the discretion of the arborist. Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to assure a reasonable expectation of survivability. 
19.10-5 Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication, " Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual " or similar publication. Use as a reference the American Association of Nurserymen publication " American Standard for Nursery Stock ", (ANSI Z60, 1973) for plant material quality specifications. Also, reference the latest edition of the " Manual for Woody Landscape Plants: " by Michael Dirr, ISA Guidelines and ANSI Standards or other similar publications for information on site requirements for various tree species. 
Guidelines: 
1.  To replace those removed plant new trees in landscaped portions of parcel. 
2.  Plant new trees on lands that currently lack trees (usually pasture or farmland). 
3.  Plant new trees on portions of the project area set aside as tree save areas. 
A plant material list shall be provided when new plant material are to be installed including: 
1.  Common and botanical names of all proposed plants. 
2.  Plant quantities. 
3.  Size and condition of plants. (Example: two inch caliper, six feet height, balled and burlapped). 
4.  Spacing. 
19.10-6 Artificial Materials Prohibited. All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the requirements of this ordinance. 
19.10-7 Minimum Density. In the event that the minimum tree density cannot be met on a parcel then there shall be determination made by the county arborist that density requirements are met when the developer or owner of the property demonstrates that everything possible has been done to accomplish site density requirements. 
19.11 - Tree Preservation and Replacement Plan. 
Three copies, either as separate or combined drawings, along with other permit drawings, are to be submitted as part of the plan approval and/or land disturbance permit process to the Troup County Office of Building and Inspections. These plans will be reviewed by the county arborist/landscape architect for compliance with the zoning and development ordinance of Troup County and this tree preservation ordinance in particular and either approved, denied, or returned for revisions. Any comments shall be made available to the designer for response or revision to the drawings. The plans shall then be re-submitted (along with previous red line comments), with the necessary changes, following the same procedure as if it were an original application. Issuance of a land disturbance permit is contingent upon approval of the tree preservation and replacement plan. 
19.11-1 Prepared by a Professional. Tree preservation and replacement plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect, urban forester or ISA Certified Arborist, other state licensed professionals of similar design discipline may be authorized by the arborist to prepare tree preservation and replacement plans, provided they demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the arborist, competency and knowledge in the principles and practices of arboriculture as well as the demonstrated ability to prepare such plans in accordance with this ordinance. Continuous and excessive reviews and re-submittals may disqualify the designer from further acceptance by the arborist. 
19.11-2 Tree preservation and replacement plans must include the following: 
1.  Tree Inventories and Surveys. Compliance with the required site density factor shall be demonstrated on the tree protection and replacement plan. The density of 20 units per acre is based on the acreage of the overall site. All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried or sampled based on the size of the property. 
2.  Compliance. Tree inventories and surveys compliance with the required site density factor shall be demonstrated on the tree protection and replacement plan. All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried or sampled based on the size of the property. 
3.  Survey methods. The method used to inventory the trees must be indicated on the plans. Only trees with a DBH of five inches and larger are given tree density unit credits and should be sampled or inventoried. The method used to inventory the trees must be indicated on the plans. Only trees with a DBH of five inches and larger should be sampled or inventoried. 
a.  Large Tract Survey. On tree save areas greater than three acres, all tree save areas must be surveyed using an approved scientific sampling method (e.g., basal area). 
b.  Sampling Area. Timber cruising methods (50-foot by 50-foot sample areas or the prism method) of sampling is needed for large tracts. The larger the site the more sample areas should be taken. 
4.  Sampling. Sampling should be done in areas to remain as undisturbed tree save areas, not areas intended for development. The contents of each sample area shall be inventoried. All sampling areas shall be accurately depicted on the tree protection and replacement plan and appropriately flagged to corresponding locations on the actual site. When using sample areas, the basal area units should be averaged and an existing density factor per acre determined. Using this tree density, the appropriate amount of tree save area should be preserved to meet the site density factor requirements. These calculations must be included on the tree plan. 
5.  Sampling, Small Tracts. On tree save areas of three acres or less, all trees to be considered for density requirements must be individually inventoried. This tree inventory list and tree locations must be shown on the plan. The existing tree line and vegetation characteristics of the site shall be shown on the plans. Existing trees or stands of trees used in the density calculations must be indicated on the plan. The tree save areas should be clearly shown on the plans with their size in acres. Areas designated as tree save areas must be wooded. 
6.  Exact Location of all Specimen and Heritage Trees. Special consideration shall be given to specimen and heritage trees on development sites. Specimen trees and heritage trees must be shown on the tree preservation and replacement plan with an indication whether they are to be retained or removed and reason for removal. Said trees must be flagged and numbered in the field with correlating numbers and exact location shown on the plan. Extra tree density credit will be given for saved specimen and heritage trees. If no design features accommodate their preservation, removed specimen trees require recompense plantings of comparable species. Refer to appendix A for specimen tree criteria and tree density unit values. Use the values in the replacement tree density chart (appendix C, table B) to determine the quantity and sizes of the needed recompense trees. Heritage trees that are shown for removal must show that the tree is diseased or dead before the county arborist will approve their removal. Heritage trees are unique to Troup County due to size, age or historic value and shall not be removed unless diseased, dead or dying. 
7.  All Tree Save Areas Must be Delineated on the Tree Protection and Replacement Plan. Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all Tree Save Areas and Specimen/heritage trees, including tree save fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tree wells, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, signage, etc. 
8.  Buffers. All buffers must be identified on the tree protection and replacement plan any portion of a zoning buffer lacking sufficient vegetation to provide effective visual screening must be supplemented with evergreen plantings. A detailed planting plan for these areas is required. Planted trees must be a minimum six feet tall. 
9.  Indicate Limits of Disturbed Area. During construction, tree save areas, zoning buffers, stream buffers, open space and specimen/heritage trees must be properly protected from disturbance using high visibility orange tree save active fencing. These tree save areas and the active tree save fencing locations must appear on the clearing, grading, erosion control and tree protection plans. 
10.  Utilities. Existing and proposed location of underground utilities or easements must be shown. Indicate staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, debris burn and burial holes where these areas might negatively impact protected trees. 
11.  Location and Schedule. The locations of all trees to be planted to meet site density factor requirements. All required landscaping such as street trees, parking lot trees and landscape strips should be shown graphically on the plans. In addition, a detailed planting schedule showing the type (common and botanical names), sizes and quantity of trees to be planted, and any special planting notes. Trees planted for specimen tree recompense and parking lot trees, are not included in overall tree density calculations. These are additional requirements. 
12.  Tree Types. Tree preservation and replacement plans that consist of more than ten new trees shall incorporate at least three separate tree genera whereby no single tree genus accounts for more than 33 percent of all newly planted trees. A narrative explaining the actual planting dates is needed for larger sites. Remote and/or large replanting areas such as zoning buffers are best planted between November and April. Indicate clearly on the tree protection and replacement plan when planting will take place. 
13.  Additional Information. Any additional information as required by the arborist on a case by case basis. After the submission of the plan, the arborist will perform a site inspection. The tree protection and replacement plan shall provide sufficient information and detail to clearly demonstrate that all applicable requirements and standards of this ordinance are or will be fully satisfied. 
19.12 - Tree Preservation Standards During Construction. 
In addition to proper utilization of tree protection devices (see section 19.12-1), the following measures are detrimental to the long term health and survivability of trees. 
Prevention of the following: 
1.  The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
2.  The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
3.  Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the tree's root system with more than four inches of soil; 
4.  Causing the infection or infestation of the tree by pests, fungus or harmful bacteria; 
5.  Pruning judged to be excessive by the arborist or not in accordance with the standard set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA); 
6.  Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; and 
7.  Application of an herbicide, including pre-emergent herbicides, defoliant, to any tree without first obtaining a permit; 
8.  Soil compaction in the critical root zone from heavy equipment, vehicular; or excessive pedestrian traffic, or storage of equipment or materials; 
9.  Root disturbance due to cuts, fills or trenching; 
10.  Wounds to exposed roots, trunks or limbs; 
11.  Other activities such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning, fire, etc. 
19.12-1 Location and Types of Tree Protection Devices. Tree protection devices are to be installed completely surrounding the critical root zone of all trees or group of trees to be preserved. Active protection (see section 19.12-2a) is required where tree save areas are located along the limits of disturbance. Passive protection (see section 19.12-2b) may be used in more remote tree save areas as determined by the arborist. Once tree save areas are established and approved, any changes are subject to review and written approval by the arborist. 
19.12-2 Materials. 
a.  Active Tree Protection shall consist of chain link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post, rail fencing or other equivalent restraining material. 
b.  Passive Tree Protection shall consist of heavy (as determined by arborist) mill plastic flagging of a bright color or equivalent signage on a continuous, durable restraint sufficient to delineate the bounds of any tree protection or save areas. See appendix E. 
19.12-3 Sequence of Installation and Removal. All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any land disturbing activity. The arborist will inspect the installation of tree protection devices. It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner and/or developer to ensure that all tree protection devices remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development and shall not be removed until final landscaping is installed. In the event passive tree protection is not kept in functioning condition, active tree protection may be required throughout the project. 
19.12-4 Encroachment. If encroachment into a tree save area occurs, that causes irreparable damage to the trees, the tree preservation and replacement plan shall be revised to compensate for the loss. Under no circumstances shall the developer be relieved of responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, nor shall plan revision activities stop the county from instituting action for violation of this ordinance. 
19.12-5 Other Specifications. Where clearing has been approved, trees shall be removed in a manner that does not physically impact the trees to be preserved. Felling trees into tree save areas or disturbing roots inside the tree save areas shall be treated as a violation and shall be punishable in accordance with this ordinance. All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed so that sediment will not accumulate within the tree save area. All tree protection areas shall be designated as such with "tree protection area" signs posted visibly on all sides of the fenced-in area. These signs are intended to inform subcontractors of the tree protection process. Signs requesting subcontractor cooperation and compliance with the tree protection standards are recommended for site entrances. 
19.13 - Tree Replacement Standards. 
Species selected for replacement must be quality species, and must be ecologically compatible with the intended site. See appendix D for list of recommended species. Deviations from the recommended tree planting list are acceptable for use in meeting density requirements only with prior approval from the arborist. 
19.13-1 Minimum Planting Area. In order to provide sufficient growing area for planted trees, the following minimum criteria must be observed unless otherwise approved by the arborist: 
Overstory (Canopy) Trees: 450 square feet. 
Understory Trees: 200 square feet. 
Planting Strips: (refer to Article VIII of the Troup County Zoning Ordinance). 
19.14 - Warranty or Maintenance Surety. 
Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other landscape material planted to meet the requirements of this ordinance, and before acceptance by the county arborist, the owner shall either post a maintenance bond or letter of credit in an amount equal to 75 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation, warranting the new trees, shrubs or landscape material for a period of no less than 15 months from approval of final plat or certificate of occupancy. 
1.  Inspection. The arborist shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by this ordinance prior to the end of the 15-month warranty period. The owner shall be provided written notice of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with this ordinance or conditions of zoning, special use, or variance approval as pertains to trees and landscaping. Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release of the warranty by the county. In no case shall replacement be delayed greater than 30 days from notification unless an additional performance bond is posted with the county. 
2.  Performance Surety. In the event that new trees required to be planted as set forth herein, cannot be installed upon application for a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval as appropriate to the project, then at the discretion of the arborist, a performance bond or letter of credit in an amount equal to 130 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation may be accepted in accordance with the performance bonding requirements and provisions of the county. 
19.15 - Compliance upon Permit Completion or Expiration. 
Properties where a permit is issued to conduct land disturbing activities that does not require the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the approval of a final plat, shall comply with the tree density standard of this ordinance as follows: 
19.15-1 Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or Grading Only Permits. A performance bond or letter of credit shall be posted with the county for the replacement units prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. The amount shall be equal to 130 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation. 
19.15-2 Continuing Maintenance. The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of buffers and landscape plantings required by this ordinance. The county arborist is hereby authorized to order diseased, infested, dying, dead or damaged landscaping required herein to be replaced. Replacement trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
19.16 - Variances. 
All petitions shall require a public hearing before the board of zoning appeals/planning commission and shall be subject to the provisions for variances as defined in Article XVIII of the Troup County Zoning Ordinance and the application requirements of the Troup County Office of Building and Inspections. 
19.17 - Non-liability of County. 
The contents of this ordinance shall not in any way be deemed to impose any liability upon Troup County, the board of commissioners or county employees nor shall it relieve the owner and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep trees upon private property or under his/her control in a safe condition as not to affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
APPENDIX A 
SPECIMEN TREES 
Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for preservation. These trees are referred to as Specimen Trees. 
The following criteria are used to identify Specimen Trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify. 
Size Criteria 
Overstory Trees: 24 inches diameter DBH or larger. 
Understory Trees: Ten inches diameter DBH or larger. 
Condition Criteria 
Life expectancy of greater than 15 years 
Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay 
No more than one major and several minor dead limbs 
No major insect or pathological problem 
As determined by county arborist 
Type 
Loblolly and slash pines do not qualify as specimen trees. In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved would be four times the assigned unit value shown in appendix C—Table A. To qualify, these trees must be within or directly adjacent to the developable areas of the site. Specimen trees which lie inside areas already protected, such as buffers, wetlands or open space areas shall not receive extra density credit. 
Considering every development site and situation will be different, specimen tree preservation cannot be expressed as a formula, but is a required design criteria. If the tree preservation plan submitted for a development site does not incorporate design features to preserve specimen trees, an alternate site design may be required. To ensure that preservation of specimen trees is afforded a high priority, the alternate design features may include revised building designs and locations, parking lot designs and locations and also infrastructure modifications. 
While it is understood that all specimen trees cannot be preserved in a development, this program will be closely examined on every project prior to approval of any and all site plans. In this connection, the remaining specimen trees on site, which are allowed to be removed, will require recompense planting equaling two times their density unit value in appendix C—Table A. Specimen trees must be replaced by species with potentials for comparable size and quality. Specimen recompense trees must be a minimum four-inch caliper at the time of planting. 
If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for the removal must be submitted to the arborist. 
In addition to the penalties addressed in section 4.1.1.2 of this ordinance, any specimen tree which is removed without the appropriate review and approval of the arborist must be replaced by trees with a total density of eight times the unit value of the tree removed. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition. 
APPENDIX B 
HERITAGE TREES 
Troup County residents have long enjoyed an abundance and diversity of trees and forests. These have served as resources for shelter and products, shaded homes and streets, and immeasurably added to the aesthetic character of rural areas, towns and neighborhoods. 
The Troup County Heritage Tree Register will recognize a noteworthy tree or trees or groves of trees and acknowledge the significance selected individual trees or stands have had to our communities. It is the intent of this ordinance that this process of identifying and publicly noting significant (heritage) trees and maintaining the register listings with accurate historical and current data should result in appropriate maintenance and adequate consideration being given to the status of trees as assets of particular vulnerability in changing areas. 
Heritage trees are individual trees or groves of trees of any size or species that are specially designated as heritage because of their historical, commemorative, or horticultural significance. The list of designated heritage trees remains open for new designations and provides useful information to the planning and zoning staff regarding the importance of their actions while planning activities near heritage trees. 
Troup County shall compile a list of heritage trees which may also include the oldest, tallest, largest, endangered and rarest native and exotic tree species growing in the county. 
Anyone may nominate a heritage tree by contacting the planning and zoning office or county arborist. Upon nomination by any person and with the written consent of the property owner(s), the county may designate a tree or trees as a heritage tree. After county approval of a heritage tree designation, the county arborist shall notify the property owner(s) in writing. 
No tree on private property can be designated without the consent of the current property owner. 
Once designated by current owner as a heritage tree, this ordinance further states that it is unlawful for any person, without a prior written permit from the county arborist, to remove, destroy, cut, prune, break or injure any heritage tree. No heritage tree can be removed without the consent of the county arborist. If heritage tree becomes a hazard follow steps as defined in section 19.6. Requests for the removal of a heritage tree will be denied unless one of the following findings is made: 
1.  There is a public benefit, or a public health, safety, or welfare benefit, to the injury or removal that outweighs the protection of the specific tree (public benefit means a public purpose, service, or use which affects residents as a community and not merely as particular individuals); or 
2.  The present condition of the tree is such that it is not reasonably likely to survive; or 
3.  There is an objective feature of the tree that makes the tree not suitable for protection; or 
4.  There would be a substantial hardship to a private property owner in the enjoyment and use of real property if the injury or removal is not permitted; or 
5.  To not permit the injury or removal would constitute a taking of the underlying real property tree removal requests with a discretionary action will be reviewed by the county. 
Decisions on tree removal are subject to standard appeal. 
APPENDIX C 
SITE DENSITY REQUIREMENTS 
The basic requirement of the tree preservation ordinance is that all applicable sites retain a minimum tree density as defined in section 8. The term "unit" is an expression of basal area (a standard forestry inventory measurement), and is not synonymous with "tree". A single tree equal to one tree unit is between 13 and 14 inches in diameter. This density requirement must be met regardless of if the site had sufficient tree density prior to development. For these sites, the density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees, or some combination of the two as represented by the formula below. 
SDF=EDF+RDF 
SDF (Site Density Factor)—The minimum tree density to be met on a development site, expressed in units per acre. 
EDF (Existing Density Factor)—The total number of trees density units measured or calculated based on tress that will remain as conserved on site. 
RDF (Replacement Density Factor)—The density or total unit value of new trees to be planted on a site. 
The site density factor (SDF) is calculated by multiplying the number of site acres by units per acre required. 
Tree density calculations for a two and two-tenths acre example residential site would be as follows: 
Two and two-tenths acres by 20 units per acre equal a SDF of 44 units. 

 
The existing density factor (EDF) is calculated by converting the diameter of individual trees to density factor units using table A. 
Therefore, with a site density factor requirement of 44 units, a tree save area totaling 44.6 density units satisfies the site density requirement. These trees will be protected in a tree save area. 
TABLE A 
Conversion of Existing Tree Diameters (DBH) to Density Factor Units 

 
The unit value of an individual tree may be determined by using the formula: (Diameter) 2× .7854 ÷ 1449 
Replacement density factor (RDF)—If enough trees do not exist onsite to meet the tree density requirements, replacement trees will be needed. Calculate the RDF by subtracting the EDF from the SDF. 
For instance, if it was determined that the two and two-tenths acre sample site mentioned earlier had only enough existing trees to yield a 30-unit per acre EDF, then replacement trees totaling 14 density factor units would be required. 
SDF (44) − EDF (30) = RDF (14) 
The density factor unit value for each caliper size of replacement (new) trees is shown in table B. Replacement tree caliper is measured at a point on the trunk six inches from the base. 
TABLE B: Conversion of Replacement Tree Caliper to Density Factor Units 

 
The values in table B shall also be used to determine the quantity of replacement trees needed for any specimen tree recompense planting. This planting is additional to planting required for site density requirements. 
Pasture Land Reduction 
It is recognized that some properties, or portions of them, may be devoid of trees due to agriculture use. In these cases a reduction of minimum tree density is warranted for new developments. In areas that meet the description of pasture land, the required minimum tree density shall be one-half the amount shown on the site density requirements. Since most of the pasture land will be located in the agricultural or agricultural-residential zoning district then use the following numbers for example: 
Wooded site SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of total site acres by 20. 
EXAMPLE: a ten-acre site has a SDF of 10×20 = 200 units. 
Pasture land SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of total site acres by ten. 
EXAMPLE: a ten-acre site has a SDF of 10×10 = 100 units. 
Mixture of wooded and pasture land SDF is calculated using each component's unit per acre requirement. 
EXAMPLE: a ten-acre site has eight acres wooded and two acres pasture land a SDF of (8×20 = 160 units) + (2×10 = 20 units) for a total SDF of 180 units. 
Easement Exclusion 
Properties possessing natural gas, petroleum or electric power transmission easements, or major sanitary sewer main (greater than eight inches in diameter) or water main (greater than 16 inches in diameter) distribution easements, may exclude the land area contained in the easement from the total acreage of the property in fulfilling the site density factor provided that no improvements (e.g., parking lots, tennis courts, driveways, storm water detention facilities, etc.) are proposed within the easement. If any improvements are proposed within the easement, then the land area so utilized within the easement for improvements shall be included in the site density factor requirements. 
Lake and Pond Exclusion 
Properties with an existing lake or pond greater than one acre in size may exclude the land area contained in the lake or pond from the total acreage of the property in fulfilling the site density factor. 
Partial Exclusion of Buffers from Tree Density Requirements 
When designing a site, tree preservation shall not be limited to unusable, remote areas of the site. Tree preservation areas should be more evenly distributed around these sites. The intent is to preserve some natural characteristics of the site, such as quality existing vegetation, specimen and heritage trees for aesthetics and conservational purposes. 
In an effort to preserve trees and other natural vegetation within a development, a certain amount of the required 50 percent of the required post-development tree density shall be met outside stream bank and zoning buffer areas. The tree requirement cannot be fully satisfied by trees in buffer areas. The area of a development outside buffer areas must separately meet at least 50 percent of the required per acre tree density, even if trees in buffer areas would compensate or more than compensate. 
The 20-unit per acre overall tree density must be met with a minimum of ten-tree density units per acre outside buffers. To calculate this, simply subtract the buffer acreage from the overall site acreage and multiply by ten. 
For this example: A 30-acre site which contains five acres of buffer areas. A 30-acre site minus five acres of buffers equals 25 acres outside of buffers. Twenty-five times ten units per acre results in a minimum of 250-tree density units to be met outside buffers. It is expected that a combination of tree save areas, preserved specimen and heritage trees and quality replanted trees will be used to meet this requirement within this developed area. 
It is understood that many times open or sparsely vegetated zoning buffers will require supplemental or complete planting to meet visual screening requirements; therefore, trees planted for this purpose may count towards this ten unit per acre requirement. 
If the development site does not include stream bank buffers or zoning buffers proper design and planning should be implemented to achieve the intent of this ordinance also. 
Example: 
30 acres × 20 units per acre = 600 units 
600 units × 50 percent = 300 units minimum to be provided outside the buffer areas. A combination of trees save areas, preserved specimen and heritage trees and quality replanted trees will be used to meet this requirement within this developed area. 
It is understood that many times open or sparsely vegetated zoning buffers will require supplemental or complete planting to meet visual screening requirements; therefore, trees planted for this purpose may count towards the SDF. 
APPENDIX D 
TABLE A-1 

 
TABLE A-2 

 
TABLE B-1 

 
TABLE B-2 

 







ARTICLE XX. - WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT 

20.1 - Findings and Purpose. 
In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and to continue to have a healthy economic climate, it is essential that adequate supplies of drinking water be ensured. Conflicts can arise in meeting this goal when development occurs within areas that are close to water supply reservoirs or the drainage areas supplying water to those reservoirs or to other sources of water. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of streams, rivers, or reservoirs. Stormwater runoff from developed areas can introduce toxicants, nutrients, and sediments into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. 
The purpose of the watershed protection district is to establish measures to protect the quality of the present and future water supply for Troup County; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to a water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This ordinance shall apply to the portions of the watersheds which occur within the jurisdiction of Troup County and are herein identified as water supply watersheds of West Point and Hogansville. 
20.2 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable only to the watershed protection district: 
(1)  Buffer: A natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
(2)  Confined Animal Feeding Operation: A building or fenced enclosure designed and used for the holding or fattening of animals in preparation for market. It does not include pasturing animals at densities recommended by the best management practices of the Georgia Department of Agriculture as follows: Horses, one per 43,560 square feet (acre); cow, one per 43,560 square feet; sheep or goat, one per 20,000 square feet; fowl, 20 per 43,560 square feet. 
(3)  Corridor: All land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
(4)  Improvement, Development or Single Development: Any project or group of related projects constructed or planned for construction on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under single ownership. 
(5)  Hazardous Material: Any substance defined as "hazardous waste" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 
(6)  Hazardous Waste: Includes those solid and liquid wastes or combinations thereof that may cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness, or which pose a substantial threat to human health when improperly handled. 
(7)  Impervious Surface: A manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
(8)  Land Disturbing Activity: Any operation that involves excavation or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and construction, rebuilding, or alteration of an existing structure. Land disturbing activity does not include ordinary maintenance and landscaping activities; yard and grounds maintenance; individual home gardens; repairs or minor modifications to a single-family residence; or the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
(9)  Large Quantity Generator of Hazardous Waste: Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or other legal entity that is defined as a "large quantity generator" by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. and that is regulated by the State of Georgia under that section. 
(10)  Natural Vegetated Area: An undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include: 
a.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish, and other wildlife. 
b.  Outdoor recreational activities including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting, education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
c.  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures, and utilities used in the service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the previous nature of the land shall be minimized. 
d.  Limited excavating, filling, and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the uses permissible in the area as above. 
(11)  Nonconforming Use: A land use activity, building, or structure legally established prior to adoption of this article, or subsequent amendment to it, that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this article. 
(12)  Overlay District: A district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land use category. 
(13)  Perennial Stream: A stream which flows throughout the year, as indicated by a solid blue line on United States Geological Survey (USGS) seven-minute topographic series maps (scale of one to 24,000). 
(14)  Reservoir Boundary: The edge of a reservoir, defined by its normal pool level. 
(15)  Setback Measurements: Measured from the banks of any river, creek, stream, spring or body of water. 
(16)  Surface Water: Any river, creek, stream, spring or body of water located within the district. 
(17)  Toxin: Any chemical substance that has been defined as toxic by the Environmental Protection Department of the State of Georgia (E.P.D.), the Department of Agriculture of the State of Georgia (G.D.A.), or the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States (EPA). 
(18)  Underground Water: Any water located underground in the district. 
(19)  Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, and railroads. 
(20)  Water Supply Reservoir: An impoundment of water for the purpose of providing drinking water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. 
(21)  Water Supply Watershed: The drainage area (watershed) of lands upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake or water supply reservoir. 
20.3 - Establishment of the Watershed Protection Districts. 
This article will create two zoning districts to be known as the West Point Watershed Protection District and Hogansville Watershed Protection District (hereinafter referred to as the "districts"). The West Point Watershed District and Hogansville Watershed District are hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the water supply intake from the stream banks to the ridgeline of the West Point and Hogansville watersheds. The boundary of the watershed districts is defined by the ridgeline of the watershed within a radius of seven miles upstream of the water supply intake or by the political boundaries of Troup County within the watershed. All lands in the districts are within an area defined as a water quality critical area, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. The boundary shall be set at places readily identifiable on the watershed district map. The watershed district overlies the Troup County zoning map which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference. The districts establish measures to protect the quality of the present and future water supply for Troup County. Because these protective measures allow some latitude with land uses and because the district is not intended to prescribe a specific land use but rather to define a range of acceptable land uses, the West Point and Hogansville Watershed Protection Districts are designed as overlay districts. Within the range of land uses which can be located within the districts, there are established in section 5 performance standards which apply to development within the districts. 
20.4 - Regulations of the Underlying Zoning District. 
Unless otherwise noted in the watershed district regulations, the regulations of the underlying zoning district shall be maintained and not affected. 
20.5 - Conditions and Performance Standards. 
All uses in the watershed districts are subject to the following conditions and performance standards: 
(1)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks and for a distance of 150 feet from the reservoir boundary of a water supply reservoir. 
(2)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks or within a 150-foot setback area from a reservoir boundary. 
(3)  Septic tanks and the drainfields of septic tanks are prohibited within 150 feet of a stream bank or of a reservoir boundary. 
(4)  Exemptions from buffer and setback requirements: 
a.  Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act from the provisions of water supply watershed protection plans. 
b.  Utilities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of water supply watershed protection plans in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
1.  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission of the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
2.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(5)  Site plans required. Except for the exemptions listed in subsection (7) below, all forms of development within the watershed districts shall be required to have a site plan prepared and approved according to this article before any building permits or other development related permits may be issued or any land disturbing activity may take place. Each site plan submitted under this article shall include the following: 
a.  A site plan drawn to a scale and showing all planned improvements including the width, depth, and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses, and drainageways; water, wastewater, and stormwater facilities; and utility installations. 
b.  Location, dimensions, and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
c.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
d.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
e.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale, and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. 
(6)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan, that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of provisions of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill, or removal of vegetation during construction, or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the Troup County building official. Minor changes such as realignment of streets, or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure, to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(7)  Exemptions from site plan requirement. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement of detailed site plans: 
a.  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
b.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
c.  Construction of minor structures such as sheds, or additions to single-family residences. 
d.  Agriculture and forestry. Normal agricultural activities including planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. Silvicultural activities must conform to best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
e.  Mining activities. All mining activities permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the Georgia Surface Mining Act are exempt. 
20.6 - Use Limitations. 
Within the watershed districts the following limitations on permissible uses shall apply in addition to the regulations of the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(3)  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the Department of Natural Resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources. 
(4)  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be based upon an assessment of the percentage of impervious surface present in the watershed district at the time of the adoption of this article. New impervious surface will be allowed up to the point where 25 percent of the watershed district as a whole is comprised of impervious surface. 
ARTICLE XXI. - WETLANDS PROTECTION DISTRICT 

21.1 - Findings of Fact and Purpose. 
The wetlands within Troup County are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; natural resource education; scientific study; and recreational opportunities. The purpose of this district is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce the primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, ground water recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas. 
21.2 - Definition. 
The following definitions are applicable only to the wetland protection districts: 
(1)  Wetlands: Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designation wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation and hydrological conditions involving a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(2)  Reserved. 
21.3 - District Delineation. 
These regulations shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within Troup County. The wetland district overlay map adopted as part of this ordinance shows the general locations of wetlands, according to the 1987 National Wetlands Inventory and should be consulted by persons considering activities in or near wetlands before engaging in a regulated activity. The standards for this district shall comply with Department of Natural Resources Rule 391-3-16-03, Criteria for Wetlands Protection. 
21.4 - Wetland Development Permit Requirements. 
No activity or use except those identified in section 5[21.5] shall be allowed within the wetland district without a permit issued by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. If the subject property contains jurisdictional wetlands of the United States as delineated by the National Wetland Inventory Map or as determined by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, if jurisdictional wetlands are contained within the subject property, the applicant must document receipt of a nationwide, regional, general or individual permit, from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Clean Water Act before a development permit will be issued by Troup County. 
21.5 - Permitted Uses. 
The following uses are permitted by right within the wetland district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging: 
(1)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. section 404 does not require permits for normal ongoing silvicultural activities. However, section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such exemption. 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided the conservation or preservation does not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(4)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(5)  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approval by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
21.6 - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants are prohibited. 
(b)  Hazardous or sanitary landfills are prohibited. 
ARTICLE XXII. - CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER CORRIDOR PROTECTION DISTRICT 

22.1 - Findings and Purpose. 
The Chattahoochee River has been designated as a protected river by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. From West Point Dam, the Chattahoochee River flows through the southwestern corner of Troup County to the West Point city limits. A Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection Plan has been adopted by Troup County. The purpose of the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas adjacent to the Chattahoochee River. 
22.2 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable only to the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District: 
(1)  Buffer: A natural or enhanced vegetated area located adjacent to a protected river and containing flora native to that area. 
(2)  Hazardous Material: Any substance defined as hazardous material by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 
(3)  Hazardous Waste: Includes those solid and liquid wastes or combinations thereof that may cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness, or which pose a substantial threat to human health when improperly handled. 
(4)  Land Disturbing Activity: Any operation that involves excavation or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and construction, rebuilding, or alteration of an existing structure. Land disturbing activity does not include ordinary maintenance and landscaping activities; yard and grounds maintenance; individual home gardens; repairs or minor modifications to a single-family residence; or the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
(5)  Natural Vegetated Area: An undeveloped area largely free from human disturbance where naturally occurring vegetation is allowed to remain undisturbed or is enhanced and maintained by human intervention. Activities specifically allowed in such an area include: 
a.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish, and other wildlife. 
b.  Outdoor recreational activities including hunting, fishing, trapping, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, canoeing, skeet and trap shooting, education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
c.  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads, structures, and utilities used in service of the public, provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that negative effects on the previous nature of the land shall be minimized. 
d.  Limited excavating, filling, and land disturbance necessary for the repair and maintenance of structures necessary to the uses permissible in the area as above. 
22.3 - Comprehensive Plan Compliance. 
The natural and historic resources section of the Troup County comprehensive plan addresses the need for protection of the land adjacent to the Chattahoochee River. This protection is required by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs; the Georgia Department of Natural Resources provided minimum criteria. In December, the Troup County board of commissioners adopted the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection Plan, which is a regional plan prepared by the Regional Commission. This plan commits the county to the adoption of protection measures per DNR Rule 391-3-16-04. The area of Troup County covered by this article is relatively small. The criteria are applied to the land within 100 feet of both banks of the Chattahoochee River. On the current tax maps, this involves 11 parcels, only one that will be nonconforming. 
22.4 - Overlay District. 
The district will be an overlay zone, like the Quality Development Corridor Overlay District (QDC). The following restrictions will apply, in addition to the underlying zoning requirements: 
(1)  Several uses are not allowed, including hazardous waste and solid waste landfills. 
(2)  A single-family dwelling requires two acres, and septic tank drainfields may not be located within 100 feet of the river bank. 
(3)  An undisturbed vegetative buffer must be maintained within 100 feet of the river bank. 
(4)  Property may not be rezoned to commercial or industrial zones because such uses are prohibited. All land is currently zoned lakeside residential (L-100). 
(5)  Nonconforming Use: A land-use activity, building, or structure legally established prior to adoption of this article, or subsequent amendment to it, that would not otherwise be permissible under the provisions of this article. 
(6)  A district that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land-use category. 
(7)  Protected River: Any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. 
(8)  River Bank: The rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
(9)  River Corridor: All land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. Because stream channels move due to natural processes, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purpose of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the time of adoption of the river corridor protection plan. Any shift in the location after that time will require a revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of comprehensive plan review by the department of community affairs. 
(10)  River Corridor Protection Plan: That part of the local comprehensive plan which deals with the river corridor protection requirements specified herein. 
(11)  Sensitive Natural Areas: Any area, as identified now or hereafter by the Department of Natural Resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
a.  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
b.  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
c.  Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
d.  Other areas so designated by the Department of Natural Resources; and which is sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
(12)  Setback Measurements: The measurement for buffer area which shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river bank, usually marked by a break in the slope. 
(13)  Single-Family Dwelling: A dwelling structure that is designed for the use of one family. 
(14)  Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, and railroads. 
22.5 - Establishment of Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District. 
The Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the Chattahoochee River, which has been designated as a protected river by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. The boundary shall be set at places readily identifiable on the zoning map of Troup County. The district establishes measures to guide future growth and development in areas adjacent to the Chattahoochee River. Because these protective measures allow some latitude with land uses and because the district is not intended to prescribe a specific land use but rather to define a range of acceptable land uses, the district is designed as an overlay district. Within the range of land uses which can be located within the district, there are established in section 5 protection criteria which apply to development within the district. 
22.6 - Regulation of Underlying Zoning District. 
Unless otherwise noted in this article, the regulations of the underlying zoning district shall be maintained and not affected. 
22.7 - Protection Criteria. 
(1)  All development within the Chattahoochee River Corridor shall maintain a natural vegetative buffer except as otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land disturbing activity within the river corridor. 
(3)  Except as noted below, all construction within the buffer area is prohibited. 
(4)  Exemptions from protection requirements: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings, including the usual appurtenances, may be constructed within the buffer area subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The dwelling shall be in compliance with all local zoning regulations. 
(2)  The dwelling shall be located on a parcel of land containing at least two acres. For the purpose of these standards, the size of the parcel shall not include any area within the protected river (that is, for parcels that include the area between the river banks, that portion cannot be counted towards the two-acre minimum size). 
(3)  There shall be only one such dwelling on each two-acre or larger parcel of land. 
(4)  A septic tank or tanks serving such a dwelling may be located within the buffer area. However, the septic tank drainfields shall not be located within the buffer area. 
(b)  Construction of road crossings and utility crossings of river corridors are exempt provided that construction of such road and utility crossings shall meet all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, and of the applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(c)  Land uses existing prior to the promulgation of the Chattahoochee River Protection Plan subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Industrial and commercial uses of river corridors shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water; and 
(2)  Industrial and commercial activity within the river corridor shall meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(d)  Mining activities, if permitted by the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
(e)  Utilities, (except as discussed above in section 5.4.b.[20.5(4)b.]) if such utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area (feasibility shall be decided conservatively by the local government), provided that: 
(1)  The utilities shall be located as far from the river bank as reasonably possible; 
(2)  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer area as well as is reasonably possible; and 
(3)  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(f)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities except as discussed in section 5.4.g.[20.5(7)d.]. 
(g)  The following acceptable uses of river corridors are allowed, provided that such uses do not impair the long term functions of the protected river or the river corridor. 
(1)  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission; and 
b.  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(2)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(3)  Wastewater treatment. 
(4)  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would be consistent with this criterion but a hard-surfaced tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criterion. Paths and walkways within the river corridor are consistent with this criterion. 
(5)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(6)  Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; 
b.  Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended; and 
c.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(7)  Other uses permitted by the Department of Natural Resources or under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
22.8 - Use Limitations. 
Within the Chattahoochee River Corridor Protection District, the following limitations on permissible uses shall apply in addition to the regulations of the underlying zoning district: 
(1)  Except as expressly provided for under section 5.4.a.[22.7(4)(a)] of these criteria (dealing with single-family dwellings within the river corridor), septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within river corridors. 
(2)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited within river corridors. 
(3)  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills are prohibited within river corridors. 
(4)  Other uses unapproved by local governments shall not be acceptable within river corridors. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE PROTECTION DISTRICT 

23.1 - Findings and Purpose. 
The Georgia Department of Natural Resources has mapped "significant recharge areas" for the State of Georgia. Several recharge areas have been identified in Troup County. Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides, herbicides sprayed on crops, animal waste and septic tank affluence contribute to deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. The purpose of the groundwater recharge area protection district is to establish measures to protect Troup County's identified recharge areas from potential sources of contamination by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundment's, application of chemicals, injections and other development pressures. 
23.2 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the groundwater recharge district: 
(a)  Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundment, and applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
(b)  Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
(c)  Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
(d)  Significant recharge areas mean those areas mapped by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. 
23.3 - Establishment of the Recharge Protection District. 
This article will create zoning districts to be known as the "groundwater recharge districts," hereinafter referred to as the "districts." The boundary shall be set at places readily identifiable on the groundwater recharge map. The groundwater recharge map overlies the Troup County zoning map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by referral. 
The groundwater recharge area protection map is delineated according to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 Edition)" and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources "Pollution Susceptibility Map Hydrological Atlas 20 (1992 Edition)," standards for this district shall comply with the DNR Rule 391-2-02, Criteria for the Protection of Groundwater Recharge Areas. 
23.4 - Regulations of the Underlying Zoning District. 
Unless otherwise noted in the groundwater recharge district regulations, the regulations of the underlying zoning district shall be maintained and not affected. 
23.5 - Criteria. 
The following criteria shall apply in significant recharge areas: 
(a)  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tank or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(b)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
(1)  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre feet. 
(2)  As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. (The average size of existing agricultural waste impoundment's in Georgia is about 15 acre-feet; sheeps-foot rollers or pans with heavy rubber tires, which are normal equipment for most Georgia earth moving contractors, should be able to compact clay to the recommended vertical hydraulic conductivity.) 
(c)  New homes served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified on table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR table MT-1"): 
(1)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)  New mobile home [manufactured home] parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitation as identified on table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR table MT-2"): 
(1)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(e)  All multifamily development located within a high pollution susceptibility groundwater recharge area shall be required to have the following minimum lot sizes: where individual on-site sewer systems are installed in conjunction with public water systems the minimum lot size for multifamily structure shall be 10,890 square feet per unit; where individual on-site sewer systems are installed in conjunction with an individual water system the minimum lot size shall be 21,780 square feet per unit. The Troup County health department shall approve all multifamily developments. If there are conflicts between provisions of these regulations, the stricter shall apply. 
(f)  If a local government requires a larger lot size than that required by subsection (c) above for homes or by subsection (d) above for mobile homes [manufactured homes], the larger lot size shall be used. 
(g)  Troup County at its option may exempt from the requirements of subsection (c) or (d) any lot of record on the date of their adoption of these lot size standards. 
(h)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home [manufactured home] to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the DHR manual and subsections (c), (d), (f), and (g) above. 
(i)  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks, in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire code requirements. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - SCENIC CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 

24.1 - Purpose and Intent. 
Motorists sometimes drive for the inherent pleasure of driving. Driving a scenic road should be a pleasurable recreation experience. When a road passes through an attractive landscape, a considerable portion of a motorist's perceptual activity is directed to the roadside environment. The visual character of a road depends on a number of factors, some of which cannot be significantly modified (e.g., physiography), while others such as land use are more readily subject to change. It is the intent of this article to protect the views from the road to natural conditions, archaeological sites and other features with historic and scenic quality. This article is also intended to regulate land uses so that they will complement rather than detract from a scenic experience. It is also intended to provide tree canopies and to preserve rural character. 
24.2 - Definitions. 
Archaeological Site: Ruins, artifacts, structural remains and other resources of types that cannot be commonly found throughout a region or in other places across the country, and/or physical evidence of historic or prehistoric human life or activity. 
Historic Quality: Legacies of the past that are distinctly associated with physical elements of the landscape, whether natural or manmade, that are of such historic significance that they educate the viewer and stir appreciation of the past. 
Natural Quality: Those features of the visual environment, such as geological formations, fossils, landforms, water bodies, vegetation and wildlife, that are in a relatively undisturbed state. There may be evidence of human activity but the natural features reveal minimal disturbances. 
Scenic Corridor: A roadway and its accompanying right-of-way that offers motorists the unobstructed opportunity to view scenic views and scenic sites in one or more directions, and which usually has a high percentage of open landscape within and alongside it. A corridor may include adjacent private property, depending on the context. 
Scenic Site: A building, structure, field, resource, natural condition or other feature that has scenic qualities and which has been specifically identified by the county in the natural and historic resources element of its comprehensive plan or other inventory and assessment as worthy of protection because of its scenic qualities. 
Scenic View: A scene that offers significant viewing opportunities beyond a distance of one-quarter mile. 
Setback: Refer to Article III, Definitions in this ordinance. 
Viewshed: The surface area that can be seen from a specific viewpoint along the road. 
24.3 - Scenic Corridor Designation. 
There is hereby established one or more scenic corridors as shown on the Scenic Corridor Overlay District Map, which is hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance. Development within a designated scenic corridor shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
It is the intent that the Scenic Corridor Overlay District shall apply to all properties within 1,000 feet (500 feet on each side of the roadway) of the following roads and highways: 
Salem Road—From U.S. 27 to the Harris County line 
Flat Shoals Church Road—From the intersection of Salem Road to the intersection with Dennis Smith Road 
Dennis Smith Road—From the Troup County line to the intersection with Hamilton Road 
I-185—From the I-85 to the Harris County line 
24.4 - Applications and Exceptions. 
All new development within the Scenic Corridor Overlay District shall comply with the provisions of this article, except that the following shall be exempt from compliance with this article: 
(a)  Active farm or agricultural-related structures outside the roadway buffer. 
(b)  Single-family dwellings and manufactured homes on an existing lot of record. 
(c)  Developments existing on the effective date of this ordinance, provided that expansions or additions to existing development on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to compliance with these regulations. 
24.5 - Existing Conditions Analysis and Site Plan Required. 
Any new development that is required to comply with this article shall not be approved until the applicant has submitted an existing conditions map and a site plan of the proposed development. When a preliminary plat is required to be filed for a subdivision (residential or non-residential) in accordance with this Ordinance it shall be administered and enforced at the time a preliminary plat is filed as part of the subdivision review process by the zoning administrator and the planning commission. In other cases such as a development (residential or non-residential) permit or building permit, this article shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator and building official in connection with said permitting process. 
24.6 - Setbacks, Buffers, Trees and Landscaping. 
Development setback. Where feasible, major subdivision developments along scenic corridors shall be designed to contain all interior lots. All developments shall maintain a 100-foot setback for all buildings, structures and property improvements such as parking lots, except for approved road, driveway and utility crossings from the right-of-way. 
24.6-1 Roadway Buffer. A roadway buffer of at least 40 feet shall be provided within the required development setback, abutting the right-of-way of the scenic corridor. Where existing trees and significant vegetation exist within the roadway buffer, they shall be retained as determined appropriate and directed by the zoning administrator. Where such existing trees and significant vegetation are sparse, they may require re-vegetation as directed by the zoning administrator. Vegetation within a roadway buffer that is required to remain within a roadway buffer may be pruned and/or removed only if necessary to ensure proper sight visibility, remove safety hazards or dying or diseased vegetation, or for other good cause as approved by the zoning administrator. 
24.6-2 Tree Requirement. All development subject to the roadway buffer shall provide a minimum of one tree for each 35 linear feet of road frontage along the scenic corridor. All trees required by this section shall be located within the required development setback and randomly placed on the parcel. All required trees planted within the development setback shall be of a shade-type variety with a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches at planting and an expected height at maturity of at least 30 feet. 
24.6-3 Uses within Roadway Buffer. Signage and other minor accessory features of the development may be included within the roadway buffer only if compatible with the purpose of the roadway buffer, subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. 
24.6-4 Exceptions to Roadway Buffer for Scenic Viewshed Protection. When the application of the roadway buffer requirement of this article would have the practical effect of screening from view important scenic sites, natural qualities or historic qualities, the zoning administrator may permit a modification of these provisions so that views of such sites or qualities are retained. The intent of this provision is to preserve lines of sight to view scenery from scenic corridors. 
24.6-5 Exceptions for Product Viewing. For developments containing commercial uses and which require the display of goods in view from the road, the zoning administrator may, upon application, permit a modification of the development setback, roadway buffer and screening requirements of this article to allow for reasonable but limited view of commercial products from the road, provided that no such product view area shall extend more than 20 percent of the total length of the property frontage along the scenic corridor. 
24.6-6 Landscaping Plan. A landscaping plan showing all existing and proposed features, including trees, roadway buffer and other relevant features of the landscape within the development setback, shall be required to be approved by the zoning administrator. Landscaping shall be installed by the development applicant in accordance with the approved landscape plan. Native plant materials are particularly encouraged, although the use of ornamental plant materials (such as azaleas) may be approved by the zoning administrator if planted in a naturalistic manner and allowed to develop in their natural form. 
24.7 - Provisions Regarding Buildings and Structures. 
24.7-1 Screening. To the extent that the required roadway buffer does not provide screening of buildings, structures, parking lots and service and loading zones included in a development, except for approved product viewing areas, there shall be additional landscaping, walls, fences, hedges, shrubbery and/or earthen berms required to provide the necessary screening. 
24.7-2 Height. No building or structure shall exceed the following height limits, which are designed to have a "step-back" effect to preserve viewsheds. Cross-section drawings showing how proposed structures meet the height requirements of this article may be required by the zoning administrator to ensure compliance with this section. 

 
24.7-3 Utilities. All utility lines serving uses proposed or developed within the scenic corridor, including electric, telephone, data and cable television, shall be installed underground within the roadway buffer and development setback area. Underground utility trenches must be re-vegetated. Utility boxes and cabinets that are now or must, by necessity, be located above ground must be shielded from view from the scenic corridor with existing vegetation and/or re-vegetation. Any above-ground boxes that cannot be buried shall, in addition to being screened by vegetation, shall be painted a neutral or earth tone color or otherwise made to blend in with their surroundings. 
24.7-4 Signage. Signs shall be permitted within the roadway buffer required by this article, in accordance with provisions of this section and subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. Signs located outside (beyond) the roadway buffer are not subject to the requirements of this section, but all signs are subject to the sign regulations otherwise stated in this ordinance. 
(a)  The total sign area of all signage on any one lot shall not exceed 64 square feet. A double-faced sign shall be considered a single sign. No more than two signs shall be permitted within the roadway buffer area per lot, except that this limitation shall not apply to signs erected by Troup County the Georgia Department of Transportation, the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or other signs owned and erected by a government entity to preserve the public safety, health and welfare. 
(b)  The material used to construct the sign, as well as the color of the sign shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator at the time of submittal of plans for the development or rezoning request. 
(c)  No internally illuminated signs shall be permitted, nor shall any flashing, blinking, fluctuating or otherwise changing light source be permitted. 
24.7-5 Walls and Fences. Walls within or along the roadway buffer shall not be allowed, except for low-lying decorative walls for enhancement of the scenic corridor, or walls that are needed for slope stabilization. Privacy fences shall be permitted within the roadway buffer or development setback area. Where permitted, walls shall be located so that scenic views are maintained. Walls must consist of natural materials and shall only be of those colors that blend with the vegetation or abutting landscape features. 
24.8 - Variances. 
Any provision herein that presents a hardship as defined in Article III of this zoning ordinance shall be subject to the variance procedures as described in article administration. 
ARTICLE XXV. - DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

25.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this district is to maintain sustainable, quality development in Troup County. Regulations regarding density, building materials, setbacks, design standards and all other requirements of this section are intended to aid in the preservation of rural character, preserve and protect natural resources and provide development options. These regulations are also intended to provide safe, visually pleasing housing and commercial development and provide a good quality of life for the citizens of Troup County. 
25.2 -   
All developments, when initially submitted, shall be reviewed to determine if the development meets or exceeds thresholds for development of regional impact (DRI). If the zoning administrator determines that the development might require a DRI review it is referred to the appropriate regional commission (RC) for determination as a DRI. If it is determined that the development is a DRI no further action may be taken by Troup County until the DRI process is completed with a final report from RC. No developments shall be phased or scheduled so that the DRI process is circumvented. Such circumvent attempts may require subsequent phases or adjacent developments to undergo the DRI process. 
25.3 -   
Traffic impact study for larger developments under DRI thresholds. 
25.4 - Design Standards Single-family Units. 
This section applies to all single-family residential structures. Structures subject to these standards shall meet all other standards for the zoning district in which the structure is proposed for location. 
All setbacks are from the centerline of the road where property has frontage unless otherwise stated in this section. 
25.4-1 Additional standards to ensure appearance consistent with surrounding neighborhood are required as follows: 
a.  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. 
b.  Buildings shall utilize at least two of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the dwelling unit. 
Dormers (functional or false) 
Gables 
Recessed entries 
Covered front porches 
Pillars or posts 
Arches 
Quoin corners 
Two or more brick masonry bond treatments 
Side loaded garage or carport 
Bay windows (minimum 24-inch projection) 
c.  On single-family dwellings the garage shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the total building frontage. This measurement does not apply to garages facing an alley. 
d.  On single-family dwellings walls which face a street other than an alley shall contain at least 20 percent of the wall space in windows and doors. Windows shall be provided with trim. Windows shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with architectural surround at the jamb. 
e.  The minimum roof overhang shall be 12 inches, exclusive of porches and patios. 
f.  Minimum roof pitch is 5/12 on main structure. 
g.  In order to promote environmental sustainability each dwelling shall utilize the following features to reduce energy and water consumption: 
1.  Energy Star windows 
2.  Insulation: 
A.  Foundation insulation rated at R-values of four to 13; 
B.  Wall insulation rated at R-values of 11 to 22; 
C.  Ceiling insulation: 
Where an attic is present and there is no space limitation, insulation should have R-values of 19—50. Where space is limited or vaulted ceilings insulation should have R-values of 19 to 30. 
3.  Low flow bathroom and kitchen faucets or grey-water or rain-water conservation systems. 
h.  All subdivisions and buildings within subdivisions shall be in compliance with all adopted international codes as amended. 
25.4-2 Townhouse Development. Duplexes may be used as townhouses so long as the dwelling units meet all requirements of this section of the ordinance. 
The applicant for townhouse development shall submit with the preliminary review application a plan and accompanying documentation as required that includes the following: 
a.  General Requirements: A site plan showing front elevation. Plans and specifications shall include: 
1.  Frontal elevations must be submitted and must show size, height, shape, exterior finish and location of all buildings and proposed improvements to the property. Exterior finish and appearance must be compatible and generally consistent with surrounding structures; 
2.  Finished grade plans; 
3.  Driveway/access plans depicting method by which such access will connect to the public right-of-way; 
4.  Landscape plans; 
5.  Lot sizes, establishing compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  The average lot per dwelling unit at any townhouse development shall not be less than 2,200 square feet and no lot shall contain an area of less than 2,000 square feet. 
b.  The minimum distance between contiguous townhouse groups and between a townhouse group or a building outside the townhouse group shall not be less than 20 feet at any point; 
6.  Setbacks, establishing compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  Front yard, minimum 20 feet from front property line; 
b.  Rear yard, minimum of 20 feet to rear property line; 
c.  No side yard is required except at each end of a townhouse group where a minimum side yard of ten feet shall be maintained, and on corner lots a minimum side yard of 15 feet shall be maintained on the side street; 
7.  Off-street parking as required by Article XIII of this ordinance; 
8.  Open space: Not less than 30 percent of the gross lot area shall be maintained as usable open space, including drives, service area, or required off-street parking; 
9.  Deed restrictions: A permit for the construction of a townhouse development shall be issued in accordance with the regulations set forth after evidence has been presented in the form of a proposed deed covenants and restrictions requiring the maintenance of jointly owned areas so as to prevent the occurrence of blight by failure of the owner of any unit to maintain jointly owned property. 
Additional Requirements. 
a.  Each dwelling unit shall, if multistory, be independently served by interior stairways and by utilities and services. 
b.  Typical floor plan for the proposed unit. 
c.  Proposed townhouse development shall be in single ownership at the time of development. 
d.  No single townhouse group or development shall contain less than two nor more than 8 single-family dwellings. 
e.  Each townhouse unit shall be separated from the other units by an approved fire wall, such wall to be without openings or other means of passage or visibility between each unit and shall in all cases comply with the current building code. 
f.  Minimum unit size shall be 1,000 square feet. 
g.  Each lot shall be owned in fee simple transferred from the developer to the buyer. 
25.5 - Development requirements. 
The following development requirements are supplemental to the requirements in Article VII and Article[section] 25.4. For front yard distance from public or private street or road, refer to the troup county functional classification map. 
25.5-1 AG Agricultural District Dimensional Requirements. 

 
25.5-2 AGR Agricultural/Residential. 

 
25.5-3 RR Rural Residential. 
a.  Lot width fronting on access drive shall be 300 feet. 
b.  Lot area shall be five acres. 
c.  Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum radius of 50 feet and shall have frontage of 100 feet. 
d.  Permitted and special uses. Permitted and special uses are listed in table 7.3 and 7.4. 
e.  Building setback requirements. 
1.  Seventy-five feet from the front property line. 
2.  Twenty feet from each side line. 
3.  Forty feet from the rear property line. 
f.  Infrastructure requirements. 
g.  All lots in RR districts must meet the following infrastructure requirements: 
Water: Well or public water system. 
h.  Wastewater: Individual septic system or public sanitary sewage system. 
i.  Private access drives/easements: Serving no more than six lots and having a minimum width (easement or owned property) of at least 50 feet with 20 feet paved driving surface. The access drive shall be a jointly owned easement and maintained by all lots served by the easement. At the time of submission for approval by the board, the owners and/or developers shall present an agreement binding on the property owners and their successors and/or assigns which shall provide a mechanism for the perpetual maintenance of the road. Said agreement must receive the approval of the board prior to rezoning consideration. 
j.  End of easement: Tee style paved surface area sufficient for turning around at the end of the private driveway/easement. 
k.  Private access drives/easements requirements: Private access drives/easements shall be permitted in rural residential zoning district or lakeside residential subdivisions only when such subdivisions contain peninsulas of land that may not be fully utilized without the private access drives/easements. All private access drives/easements shall meet the requirement of subsection 3(a). 
1.  Private access drives/easements shall adhere to the following standards: 
a.  All private access drives/easements shall be a minimum of 50 feet in total width, shall have no less than a 20-foot wide paved section, and shall be constructed to the specifications shown on Figure 1 that is incorporated herein by reference. 
b.  All private access drives/easements that dead end shall provide for a turnaround of sufficient size to allow for emergency vehicles to enter and leave without having to make more than one backing movement. The turnaround and the entrance to the private road shall not be blocked in any manner so as to prevent the access and egress of emergency vehicles. 
c.  All private access drives/easements shall be a jointly owned easement and maintained by all lots served by the easement. Prior to approval of the final subdivision plat, the owners and/or subdivider or his agents shall present an agreement binding on the property owners and their successors and/or assigns that shall provide a mechanism for the perpetual maintenance of the road. Said agreement must receive the approval of the board of commissioners prior to recording the final plat. 
d.  All lots served and/or accessed by the private access road shall comply with the frontage requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
e.  No private access road shall be allowed to serve as the means of ingress and egress to more than six dwelling units. 
f.  The final subdivision plat shall contain notations in a form acceptable to the county that all private access drives/easements are private and are not maintained by Troup County. The homeowners of those lots shall jointly own all private access drives/easements served by the road. All private access drives/easements shall be perpetually maintained pursuant to an agreement binding the lot owners, their successors and assigns. 
2.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in subsection 3.b., private access drives/easements shall comply with all the requirements set forth in subsection 3.a. of this section. 
a.  Rural residential and lakeside residential and lakeside rural residential access drives shall be paved at the owner of the private roads expense, upon the submission to the county engineer by the developer or homeowner's association of detailed plans, specifications and hydrological reports and studies by a certified professional engineer. Such plans, specifications and hydrological reports and studies must be in a form acceptable to the county and in compliance with standard practice and proper design standards, must be approved by the county engineer, and must contain a certification that the requested improvement(s) will not result in drainage and/or run-off onto any public road or driving surface or alter drainage and/or surface water flows in a manner detrimental to the general public or to surrounding landowners. 
b.  No plans or specifications for the paving of rural residential, lakeside residential or lakeside rural residential access drives shall be approved until the developer and/or homeowner's association have agreed in a form acceptable to the county attorney to indemnify the county for any and all losses and damages incurred by the county as a result of the drainage and/or alteration of surface water flows caused by the road paving by the owners of the road improvements. 
l.  Plat Statements. Statements to be noted on plat shall be: 
1.  Only one residence per tract. 
2.  The private access road shown is not a county-maintained road. 
3.  A ten-foot utility easement shall be located on the front, side, and rear lines of each lot. 
4.  No manufactured homes allowed. 
5.  Addresses shall be assigned and displayed according the the Troup County Comprehensive Address Assignment and Display Ordinance. 
6.  The access drive shall be jointly owned by all lots served by the easement and shall be perpetually maintained pursuant to an agreement binding the lot owners, their successors and assigns. 
25.5-4 LR Lakeside Residential District. 

 
25.5-5 LRR Lakeside Rural Residential District. 

 
25.5-6 Single-Family Medium Density. There will be three development options for development in the single-family medium density zoning district. 
1.  Option A. This option will be for developments with minimum lot size of one acre with individual septic tanks and public water. This option is limited to not more than 50 units. The following are dimensional requirements: 

 
2.  Option B. This option is a 1 ½ acre minimum lot size with no limit on the number of units developed with individual septic systems. The following are dimensional requirements: 

 
3.  Option C. Residential cluster minimum development standards. 
(a)  Option C developments must be a minimum of 25 acres. 
(b)  Overall density shall not exceed three housing units per acre. 
(c)  Lot width shall not be less than 60 feet of road frontage and in no case shall be less than 6,000 square feet in total area. 
(d)  Overall density shall not exceed three housing units per acre as defined in the zoning district where the property is located and no land shall be classified in the zone unless it contains a minimum of 25 acres. 
(e)  All water and sewer systems are required to be operated and maintained by a qualified local governmental body capable of operating and maintaining the system. For purposes of this section, "qualified local governmental body" shall mean Troup County, Georgia, if the county is then engaged in water and sewer system operations. If Troup County, Georgia, is not then engaged in water and sewer system operations, "qualified local governmental body" shall be any local governmental water and sewer provider authorized to operate sewer systems within unincorporated Troup County, Georgia. If no such authority is then in existence and engaged in sewer operations, "qualified local governmental body" shall mean any municipality then engaged in operating and maintaining sewer systems with lines sufficiently close and of sufficient capacity to allow future connection of the cluster development to its sewer operations or Troup County may own and operate the systems. 
(1)  The owner/developer of the cluster development shall at the time of submission for approval by the board of commissioners present proof that a request for the provision of sewer service has been submitted to qualified local governmental body (closest municipality) and that the local governmental body has either declined to provide sewer service or has not responded to the request of the owner/developer within 30 days of the request having been made. 
(2)  The proposed system must be approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division (or such state department or authority so charged) prior to the issuance of any permits. 
(3)  Decentralized sewer systems designed and installed in cluster developments shall be the latest technology available and systems designed to meet the requirements by the environmental protection division for stream discharge and/or reuse are required. 
(f)  No residential cluster development shall be approved unless, in the sole determination of the board of commissioners and the advice of Troup County attorney, adequate provision is made through the declaration of protective covenants, restrictions and conditions for the perpetual and legally enforceable maintenance of the common areas and amenities of the development through a property owners' association of perpetual duration. 
(g)  No residential cluster development shall be approved in the absence of a minimum amenities package approved by the planning commission and the board of commissioners. For the purpose of this subsection, a "minimum amenities package" is defined as the provision, without duplication, of at least two of the following amenities for every 150 housing units in the development: 
(1)  Non-impervious surfaced walking/running/biking trails of at least one-half mile in total length; 
(2)  Swimming pool or zero-depth water feature; 
(3)  Baseball/softball/soccer field; 
(4)  Tennis court; 
(5)  Basketball court; 
(6)  Putting green; 
(7)  Dog park; 
(8)  Children's (non-impervious surface) playground; 
(9)  Community clubhouse; 
(10)  Other similar amenities as recommended by the planning commission and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(h)  The amount of green area, including designated parks, public and private open space, active and passive recreational areas, required for the residential portion shall not be less than 25 percent of the gross total area. The minimum green area requirement, which shall include designated parks, public and private open space, active and passive recreational areas, except that comparable amenities and/or facilities may be provided in lieu of green area if the planning commission determines that such amenities or facilities are sufficient to accomplish the purposes of the zone, and would be more beneficial to the proposed development than strict adherence to the specific green area requirement. 
(i)  A perimeter buffer of not less than 30 feet is required on all residential cluster developments except when adjacent to existing. 
4.  Lot Size, Yard and Landscaping Requirements, Minimum. 
(a)  Minimum lot size is 6,000 square feet with a minimum 60 feet lot width. 
(b)  Maximum density is three units per total net area. 
(c)  Front. Setback from the centerline of a: 

 
(d)  Side. Five feet for each side, plus, an additional three feet per side for each story over one. Where a side yard abuts a street, road or highway, the side yard shall not be less than the front yard requirement as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Rear. Twenty-five feet. 
(f)  Landscaping. Landscaping of all development areas shall be reviewed for compliance by the arborist or landscape architect as designated by Troup County Commission. The review shall consist of the list of plants used, how they are situated in the development plan, the proximity of the landscaped areas to required sidewalks and any landscaping along street shall be reviewed by the county engineer to ensure no obstruction to vision from traffic. 
5.  Streets and Road Design Standards, Minimum. 
(a)  All residential cluster development streets and/or roads shall comply in all respects with Article IV of the Troup County Subdivision Regulations or as approved by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission preliminary plat. 
(b)  Street light design shall be submitted as a part of the site plan review process. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of Article IV of the Troup County Subdivision regulations and the laws of the county, sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all development streets. 
6.  Structural design standards, minimum. Every fifth house in adjoining lots shall be so constructed as to provide a one hour rated fire wall assembly or shall have a side yard setback of no less than ten feet. 
7.  Signs. All signs shall conform and comply with the requirements for residential signs as provided in Article XIV of this ordinance or as approved by the county engineer at the preliminary plat approval stage. 
8.  Approval Procedure. All requests requiring rezoning shall be made at the time the concept plan is submitted. All required rezoning and initial review fees shall be paid at the time the rezoning request is made and the concept plan is submitted. 
(a)  Application and processing procedures. Procedures for governing the application for the residential cluster zone and approvals necessary to seek building permits shall be subject to the following multiple step process: 
(1)  Application for concept plan approval. 
a.  An applicant shall file, together with the prescribed application fee, and application for concept plan approval as provided by the county, and in addition, shall submit for approval as part of the application, a concept plan reflecting at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The boundaries of the entire tract or parcel. 
2.  Generalized location of existing and proposed external roads and adjacent land use and development. 
3.  Generalized location and description of various internal proposed land use components, including information as to proposed densities and intensities, proposed size and heights of development. 
4.  Generalized location and description of proposed roads, proposed dedicated public lands and perimeter setback or buffer areas. 
5.  Proposed phasing or staging plan of development, public facilities and information pertaining to the provision of public facilities as required by the county. 
6.  Generalized areas of woodlands, streams and watercourses and other areas intended for natural preservation. 
7.  An illustrative plan providing for the physical layout of the entire development including all streets, lots, parcels, park and open spaces. 
8.  A draft of urban and architectural standards to govern covenants and to be managed by the homeowners association and to act as the residential cluster development compliance document. 
9.  Generalized information concerning traffic impact of the proposed development shall be submitted. 
a.  During the concept plan approval phase, the planning commission and developer will engage in meetings and planning sessions to submit proposals to be considered by the planning commission. 
9.  Application for Preliminary Development Plan Approval. After the concept plan and rezoning request has been recommended for approval by the planning commission and rezoned by the board of commissioners; or, if the existing zoning is appropriate, a preliminary development plan shall be filed for approval, rejection or modification by the planning commission of all or portions of the development site and reflected within the approved concept plan, together with the required filing fee. The preliminary development plan shall be scaled at one inch equals 50 feet and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  Boundary survey and identification plat or survey plat. 
2.  The use(s) of all buildings and structures within the preliminary development plan area, as well as existing uses of adjacent property external to the residential cluster development and proposed uses within adjoining residential cluster development. 
3.  The locations, height, approximate dimensions and conceptual architectural elevations of all buildings and structures, and the setbacks and densities and/or square footage thereof. 
4.  The location of points of access to the site and all public and private roads, pedestrian and bike paths, in accordance with the applicable thoroughfare design standards. 
5.  The location and setbacks of all parking areas. 
6.  Existing topography including: 
i.  Contour intervals of not more than two feet; 
ii.  One-hundred-year flood plains and floodways including base flood elevations; 
iii.  Other natural features, such as rock outcropping and scenic views; 
iv.  Utility easements, if any; and 
v.  Historic buildings, structures or areas. 
7.  All landscaped areas, proposed conceptual screen planting, open spaces, community identification signage, recreation and amenity areas. 
8.  Proposed phasing or staging plan of development and information relating to such plan's consistency with the provision of public facilities. 
9.  A proposed covenant or other form of agreement indicating how the area will be included in any homeowners association or other organization, and how any open space, community space or amenities located with the area subject to review will be perpetually maintained. 
10.  Five copies of required preliminary plan/plat for review process of a size 24″×36″ or acceptable to the Troup County planner. All plats and supporting information shall also be submitted in digital format as they may be required by the Troup County planner. 
11.  Two copies of previous plat. 
12.  Two drawings that inventory all wetlands, all watercourses and impoundments, and flood plain limits. 
13.  Two copies of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
14.  Two copies of the stormwater management plan. 
15.  Utility cross section. 
16.  Transportation plan showing the interconnection on the subdivision and its relationship to all adjoining properties along with a formal traffic impact study, if required. 
17.  Project narrative to include description of the type of project and who it will serve; developer information, contractor information, engineer information, contact information, anticipated start dates, completion dates, phasing description (if applicable), description of utility development plans including main sizes, lift station information, communications deployment plan and schedule, stormwater planning narrative, impact statement describing projects effects on surrounding transportation including traffic counts and flows from proposed project and existing counts, a narrative description of how traffic will be managed and controlled (and calmed) as appropriate for the development, description of green space and public/community space proposed for the project. 
18.  Application must be signed by owner, developer and engineer or land surveyor (licensed in Georgia with stamp affixed). 
10.  Final Site Development Plan Review. Following approval of a preliminary development plan, an applicant shall submit to the planning commission a final site plan for approval and recommendation to the board of commissioners, which shall be in accord with the approved preliminary development plan and shall include the following: 
a.  All information required for preliminary development plan; and 
b.  Proposed phasing or staging plan of development and information regarding consistency of such plan with the provision of public facilities; 
1.  Demonstration of compliance with the approved preliminary development plan; 
2.  A proposed covenant, suitable for filing in the deed records of Troup County, which shall indicate in specific language that the property which is the subject of the application is restricted in its use and/or development standards to the preliminary development plan and any accompanying or qualifying text material submitted with such plan, as such plan may be approved or modified by the county commissioners at the time of final site plan review. The covenant to be filed in the deed records shall also indicate that such restrictions shall be in effect until such time as the property may be rezoned, at which time such restrictions shall be removed. 
11.  Findings Required. 
(1)  The planning commission shall review the preliminary development plan for compliance with the following standards: 
a.  The application meets or accomplishes the purposes, objectives, and minimum standards and requirements of this article; and 
b.  The application and concept plan will be internally and externally compatible and harmonious with existing and planned uses in single-family medium and high density and lakeside residential zoned areas and adjacent areas. 
(2)  The county commissioners shall approve a preliminary development plan only upon finding that: 
a.  The plan is substantially in accord with the approved concept plan; and 
b.  The plan meets or accomplishes the purposes, objectives and minimum standards and requirements of the zone; and 
c.  The plan will be internally and externally compatible and harmonious with existing and planned uses in adjacent areas; and 
d.  The existing or planned public facilities are adequate to service the proposed development contained in the plan; and 
e.  The development staging or phasing program is adequate in relation to the provision of public facilities and private amenities to service the proposed development. 
(3)  The county commissioners shall approve a final site plan consistent with the findings required in subsection (c)(2) immediately above and upon considerations, determinations and powers set forth in this section. The county commissioners shall, as a condition of approval, require the posting of all necessary bonds or other security instruments, execution of required agreements, and recording of covenants. 
(4)  Procedures for amendment. Amendments to a final site plan may be permitted, and are to be approved by the county commissioners in accordance with the submission requirements of this article. 
(5)  Urban and architectural regulations shall be adopted as part of concept plans. 
a.  The proposed covenants and restrictions shall be presented to the BOC as part of a preliminary development plan in the single-family medium and or Lakeside Residential an urban and architectural code as regulations, rules or standards specific and unique to the application under consideration. 
b.  Such rules, regulations and standards shall apply to: 
i.  Building/structure setbacks, and lot coverage; 
ii.  The location and type of accessory buildings and structures; 
iii.  Type and nature of accessory uses; and 
iv.  Appearance of buildings and structures, configuration of building elements and type of building materials. 
Provided, however, that no such rules, regulations and standards shall exceed any maximum development standard or be less than any minimum development standard or permit any use otherwise prohibited in the single-family medium and high density or lakeside residential zone. All owners of property subject to the final site plan and their assigns shall be notified (by the developer) of such rules, regulations and standards at the time of taking title to property located within the final site plan area. 
c.  No person, firm or corporation may violate any requirement of this article, to include but not limited to deviation from the requirements of the final site plan, and any such violation shall be enforceable by the county and subject to such enforcement and penalties provided by zoning ordinance and/or Troup County Codes. 
d.  An architect shall be commissioned by the developer as a method of ensuring compliance with the urban and architectural code. Said architect shall be retained by the developer and/or homeowner's association until such time as the last lot in the SFMD zone at issue is developed. 
25.5-7 MFR Multi-Family Residential District. Multi-family development within the MFR district, shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
a.  Minimum required lot area for the first dwelling unit, 6,000 square feet; 
b.  Minimum additional lot area per dwelling unit for each unit in excess of one, 3,000 square feet; 
c.  Multi-family shall not exceed six units per acre = one unit per 7,560 square feet. 
d.  Minimum required lot width of 70 feet per dwelling unit plus an additional five feet of lot width for each unit in excess of one. 
e.  Minimum required building setback line is 25 feet from the right-of-way line. 
f.  Minimum required side yard ten feet plus one foot for each foot in height that a structure exceeds 20 feet above the elevation at the adjacent lot line nearest to such structure. Corner lots shall have a side yard setback of 20 feet along the side street line. For any side or rear lot line which abuts a single-family or two family residential districts there shall be a buffer as defined in Article IX. 
g.  Minimum required rear yard, 25 feet for single-family and two family residential units and 30 feet for multi-family units, plus one additional foot for each foot in height that the structure exceeds 20 feet above the elevation at the contiguous lot line nearest to such structure. 
h.  Maximum possible lot coverage: The total ground area covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 50 percent of the total lot area. 
i.  The height of buildings shall not exceed 45 feet, except upon approval of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
j.  All multi-family developments shall meet fire codes including fire walls and shall require the approval of the fire marshal. 
k.  Multi-family developments shall utilize on-site sewer treatment when not served by a municipal wastewater system. 
l.  The only multi-family units that may be developed on parcels with septic tank systems are duplexes and the following standards apply: 
a.  Minimum lot size is one and one-half acre and each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 1,000 square feet of heated floor space. 
b.  Front yard—50 feet from right-of-way line. 
c.  Side yard—25 feet. 
d.  Back yard—45 feet. 
25.5-8 MHP Manufactured Home Park District (R-500). For requirements of this district please refer to Article XI. 
25.5-9 Unrestricted Subdivision (USD). This district is intended to provide suitable locations for residential uses with a mixture of single-family housing types including manufactured homes and site built homes. Each USD must have a minimum of three parcels which meet the minimum lot standards and all other Troup County subdivision requirements in effect at the time the subdivision is approved. 

 
25.5-10 CRVP Commercial Recreational Vehicle Park, Campgrounds and Rental Cabins District. For requirements of this district please refer to Article XII. 
( Ord. No. 2010-11 , § IH., 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 2017-14 , § III.a—h., 2-7-2017) 
25.6 - Basic Commercial and Industrial Design Standards. 
These standards are intended for new construction of non-residential structures. Existing buildings may be exempt from these requirements upon findings from the zoning administrator that a sincere effort to comply with these regulations has been attempted by property owner. Zoning administrator may require compliance with these regulations for existing buildings provided building has been vacant for at least six months and/or owner/renter has changed and is applying for a business license. For additional non-residential design standards refer also to the quality development corridor overlay. Site plans are required for all new construction of non-residential structures. Site plans shall be drawn to scale by a design professional with the following information: 
a.  North arrow. 
b.  Placement of all buildings and accessory buildings, driveway location, landscaped areas location, parking lot location and location of all loading and unloading areas of the business. 
c.  Owner and zoning of adjacent properties. 
d.  Location of any new proposed roads. 
e.  Square footage of buildings. 
f.  The following standards apply to all new construction of non-residential structures. These standards will be inspected during regular inspections by the building official, or his designee: 
a.  Architectural Standards. 
1.  Orientation. Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward the street. Lots with double frontage or through lots shall provide orientation and public entrances on facades along both street frontages. 
2.  Buildings. Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes, and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from rain and sun. 
3.  Any wall adjacent to the street shall have 30 percent in windows, display areas, and entrances. 
4.  Building frontages greater than 100 feet in length shall have offsets and other distinctive changes in building facades. 
5.  Building Materials. Permitted materials for building facades include, without limitation, brick, and natural decay resistant wood siding, rock, stone, decorative concrete block or concrete walls with textured surface materials, and hardi-board or other similar material as approved by the building official. All metal buildings shall have a facade of one or a combination of approved building materials. Facade colors shall be earth tone or neutral. Building trim and accents may feature brighter colors, not to exceed 25 percent of any building facade. 
6.  Roofs. Roofs shall at a minimum have parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment which are visible from adjoining streets or properties. 
7.  Site Design Standards. A landscape strip at least ten feet wide shall be provided between the right-of-way and any buildings, plazas, or parking areas. 
8.  Parking. Parking lots shall be paved with asphalt or concrete or utilize pervious parking systems and parking spaces delineated in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Appropriate parking spaces shall be identified as such. Parking lots may be located in front yard. 
9.  Solid Waste Storage Areas. Solid waste receptacles, shipping pallets, bundled cardboard and similar waste materials stored for collection shall be enclosed on all sides and screened from view from adjoining residential properties or streets with a solid enclosure (at least six feet high) with a gate and shall be constructed of wood, masonry, or other compatible material. The enclosure shall measure a minimum of 13 feet by ten feet with an opening measuring no less than 13 feet. A ten-foot by 20-foot concrete pad at least six inches thick shall be provided for the garbage truck loading/unloading area. 
10.  Outdoor Storage and Loading Areas. Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and property lines. If visible from adjacent property, screening structures shall be made of similar materials as the principal structure. Non-enclosed areas for the storage and sale of inventory shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design of the screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used in the principal structure. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the exposed roofing colors of the building. 
11.  Lighting. Artificial lighting shall be so arranged and constructed as to not produce direct illumination on adjacent properties when residential in use. 
12.  Water and Sewer. Commercial developments may be developed using decentralized sewer upon approval of EPD and Troup County. Commercial developments that utilize well and septic tanks are subject to Troup County Health Department regulations and shall be approved for well and septic prior to rezoning and prior to any issuance of a building permit. 
25.6-1 CA Commercial Adult. 
Commercial Adult C-A 
The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect a reasonable location within the community for the development of sexually oriented businesses. 
a.  Permitted uses. Sexually oriented businesses subject to regulations as specified in chapter 10 Article II Troup County Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Lot size, yard and parking requirements shall be same as the general commercial zoning district. 
25.6-2 GC General Commercial. 

 
25.6-3 HC Heavy Commercial. 

 
25.6-4 LC Limited Commercial. 

 
25.6-5 NHC Neighborhood Commercial District. 

 
25.6-6 GI General Industrial District. 

 
25.6-7 LI Light Industrial District. 

 
25.6-8 FH Flood Hazard Overlay. For requirements of this overlay district please refer to Article XVII. 
25.6-9 HA Historic Area Overlay. For requirements of this overlay please refer to Article VIII. 
25.6-10 PUD Planned Unit Development District. For requirements of this district please refer to Article XVIII. 
25.6-11 SC Scenic Corridor Overlay District. For requirements of this district please refer to Article XXIV. 
( Ord. No. 2017-14 , § III.i—n., 2-7-2017; Ord. No. 2017-21 , § I, 6-6-2017) 
ARTICLE XXVI. - DEVELOPMENT RATING SYSTEM (POINT SYSTEM) SINGLE-FAMILY MEDIUM DENSITY, LAKESIDE RESIDENTIAL AND PUD ZONING DISTRICTS 

26.1 - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development rating system for single-family medium density, lakeside residential and PUD zoning districts." 
26.2 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a land use management system using a rating procedure whereby points are awarded during a development review process for meeting standards and criteria established by this article. 
The land use guidance system established in this article is intended to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by promoting contiguous and compact development patterns that are adequately served by urban or suburban level facilities. 
26.3 - Applicability and Procedures. 
The board of commissioners shall review and approve the development in single-family medium density, lakeside residential and PUD zoning districts. There shall be a public hearing required as per Article [section] 16.11. 
No private development, unless specifically exempted, shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners until application has been submitted and reviewed as a committee by the zoning administrator, Troup County Planner, building inspector director, county engineer, fire marshal, representative for public works department of the closest municipality, Troup County Board of Education, and one member of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission for compliance with the basic requirements (minimum score of ten points) of this article and the adopted Troup County Subdivision Regulations in appendix C of the Troup County Code of Ordinances. If a development meets the basic requirements it shall be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners for review and approval. 
No permits of any type shall be issued for any development until and unless said development has complied with all requirements of this article and obtained approval of the development from the Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
The scorecard review shall be initiated at the submittal of a preliminary plat. Concept plans are subject to the informal review and it is suggested that developers meet with Troup County Planner and Troup County engineer prior to any submittals in order to become familiar with the requirements of the rating system. 
26.4 - Exemptions. 
Minor subdivisions, as defined in the adopted Troup County Subdivision Regulations, appendix C of the Code of Ordinances shall be exempt from the provisions of this article, but are subject to the Troup County Subdivision Regulations. Rural residential zoning district subdivisions are exempt from the scorecard requirements, but are subject to the requirements of Article XXV Development and design standards and the Troup County Subdivision Regulations. Article XXV Development and design standards apply to all subdivisions of property including minor subdivisions. 
26.5 - Point Rating System of Development Criteria. 
The Troup County Board of Commissioners shall use the following standards in its review and approval of development applications not exempted by this article. In addition to the development rating system the following standards shall be applied to all developments in the single-family medium density, lakeside residential and PUD zoning districts: 
1.  Whether or not the development meets the goals and policies of the Troup County Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Whether or not there are adverse impacts to surrounding neighborhood not delineated in the development criteria scorecard. 
3.  Whether or not the development poses any adverse impacts to natural resources, community facilities, transportation or public safety. 
If a given development does not attain the minimum score of ten points, the development application shall be disapproved by the review committee until the applicant can add features or modify the project to obtain more points. The minimum score shall be derived from table 26.1. 
Additional points enumerated in table 26.2 may only be accumulated after the minimum score (ten points) has been reached in table 26.1. The additional points shall not be used to bring a development up to the minimum score of ten. 
Any development that reaches a score of 30 shall receive a density bonus of no more than ten percent. Any number of points awarded from 11—30 shall be a pro-rated density bonus up to ten percent. 
Table 26.1 
Basic Point Rating System of Development Criteria for Single-Family Medium Density, Lakeside Residential, and PUD Zoning Districts 

 
26.6 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Troup County Board of Commissioners relative to a specific development may appeal the decision within 30 days to Troup County Superior Court. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - DEVELOPMENT RATING SYSTEM (POINT SYSTEM) FOR AGRICULTURAL, AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL AND LAKESIDE RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

27.1 - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development rating system (point system) for agricultural, agricultural/residential and lakeside rural residential zoning districts". 
27.2 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a land use management system using a rating procedure whereby points are awarded during a development review process for meeting standards and criteria established by this article. 
The land use guidance system established in this article is intended to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by development patterns that protect and preserve the rural character of Troup County. 
The rating system for the agricultural, agricultural/residential and lakeside rural residential zoning districts is based on environmental sustainable improvements to the development that protect and preserve natural resources such as water quality, air quality, wildlife habitat and/or topographic feature (steep slope, rock outcropping, streams, historic site, etc.). 
27.3 - Applicability and Procedures. 
No private development, unless specifically exempted, shall be approved for overall density or density bonus until application has been submitted and reviewed by the zoning administrator, Troup County Planner, Troup County Engineer, fire marshal, Troup County Health Department and one member of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
In the agricultural, agricultural/residential or lakeside rural residential all development in compliance with the adopted Troup County Subdivision Regulations as appears in appendix C of the Code of Ordinances for Troup County shall be considered as complying with the minimum score requirements. The review process for development approval shall follow the procedures as outlined in the latest adopted subdivision regulations. 
In order to qualify for an overall density and/or density bonus the points in table 27.1 shall be considered and the development shall be rated from 10—20 points. Any number of points awarded from 11—15 will allow an overall density and 16—20 shall be a pro-rated density bonus of no more than ten percent. When overall densities are approved, development standards for setbacks shall conform to the zoning district appropriate for the lot size. 
No land use disturbance permit shall be issued for any development until and unless said development has complied with all requirements of this article. 
27.4 - Exemptions. 
Minor subdivisions, as defined in the adopted Troup County Subdivision Regulations as appears in appendix C of the Code of Ordinances for Troup County shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. Rural residential zoning district subdivisions are exempt from these criteria, but are subject to the requirements of Article XXV Development and design standards. All subdivisions of land including minor subdivisions are subject to Article XXV. 
27.5 - Point Rating System of Development Criteria. 
The board of commissioners shall use the following system in its review of development applications not exempted by this article. 
Table 27.1 
Point Rating System of Development Criteria for Agricultural, Agricultural/Residential and Lakeside Rural Residential Zoning Districts 

 
27.6 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission or the Troup County Board of Commissioners relative to a specific development may appeal the decision to Troup County Superior Court. 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - LEGAL STATUS 

28.1 - Introduction. 
This ordinance is not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this ordinance such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. 
28.2 - Conflicting Regulations. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances, regulations, or laws passed by the County Commission of Troup County, Georgia, in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect. 
28.3 - Validity. 
Should any part, section, or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any remaining portion of this ordinance. 
28.4 - Adoption Date. 
The Zoning Ordinance of Troup County, Georgia is adopted after advertisement in the manner provided by law, by Troup County, Georgia, at a public meeting held this _______ day of _______, 20___. 
28.5 - Effective Date. 
Enforcement of these regulations shall be administered and become effective on the _______day of _______, 20___. 
28.6 -   
All amendments, rewording for clarity and other changes included in this edition were approved, following a public hearing on _______, 20___, advertised in the LaGrange Daily News, by Troup County, at a regular meeting on ___________ and became effective on ________. 
APPENDIX B - AIRPORT ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-06, § I(Exh. 1), adopted Feb. 5, 2019, repealed app. B in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former app B, arts. I—X, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 14, 1992. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Roads and streets, ch. 66; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Aviation, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq.; authority to acquire, construct and maintain airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; general powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authority to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27. 

ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE; JURISDICTION 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the LaGrange-Callaway Airport Zoning Ordinance. The description of airport zones is comprehensive for the LaGrange-Callaway Airport airspace requirements, but enforcement of this ordinance applies only to the unincorporated areas of Troup County. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE II. - AUTHORITY; FINDINGS; POLICY 
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by article 9, section 2, paragraph 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the LaGrange-Callaway Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of LaGrange-Callaway Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the LaGrange-Callaway Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared: 
(1)  That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by LaGrange-Callaway Airport; 
(2)  That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and 
(3)  That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power. 
It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation; the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation; and the marking and lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE III. - CONFLICTING LAWS AND REGULATIONS 
If a conflict shall exist between the provisions of this ordinance and any law of the state or any federal law, or any rules or regulations of either, legally adopted and in force, then the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT 
It shall be the duty of the Troup County Building Official to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this ordinance. Applications for building permits and variances shall be made to the Troup County Building Official upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this ordinance to be submitted to the Troup County Building Official shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall be forthwith transmitted by the Troup County Building Official. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE V. - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply: 
Airport: The LaGrange-Callaway Airport. 
Airport elevation: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from sea level, which is 693.40 feet for the LaGrange-Callaway Airport. 
Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope as set forth in article VII. The perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
Approach, departure, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones: These zones are defined as set forth in article VI. 
Board of zoning appeals/planning commission: A board consisting of members appointed by the Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
Building official: An official appointed by the county manager who shall individually work through his designee, issue construction permits, and inspect the workmanship of all construction within the unincorporated areas of Troup County. 
Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
Departure surface: A clear area at the end of runways that provides for pilots to follow standard departure procedures. 
Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Heliport primary surface: The area of the primary surface coincides in size and shape with the designated takeoff and landing area of a heliport. This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation. 
Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
Larger than utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. 
Nonconforming use: Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance or an amendment thereto. 
Non-precision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
Notification zone: An area within three miles extending in any direction from the threshold end of the nearest runway. 
Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in article VII. 
Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint-stock association, or governmental entity; such term includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
Precision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in article VI. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
Runway protection zone (RPZ): An area at ground level off the runway end to enhance the safety and protection of people and property on the ground. 
Structure: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
Tree: Any object of natural growth. 
Utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
Visual runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE VI. - AIRPORT ZONES 
In order to carry out the provisions of this ordinance, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, departure surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the LaGrange-Callaway Airport. Such zones are shown on the LaGrange-Callaway Airport Zoning map consisting of one sheet dated January, 1979, and updated February 5, 2019, consisting of three sheets, which is, by this reference, made a part of this ordinance. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the runway. 
(2)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths-mile non-precision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility with a visible minimum as low as three-fourths-mile non-precision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(5)  Transitional zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(6)  Horizontal zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(7)  Heliport approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface which corresponds in size and shape with the designated takeoff and landing area. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 500 feet at a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet from the primary surface. 
(8)  Heliport transitional zones: These zones extend outward from the sides of the primary surface and the heliport approach zones a horizontal distance of 250 feet from the primary surface centerline and the heliport approach zone centerline. 
(9)  Conical zone: The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(10)  Departure zone: A trapezoidal zone longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, 1,000 feet wide extending outward, and away from the stop end of runway for a distance of 10,200 feet to a width of 6,466 feet. 
(11)  Notification zone: The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of three miles. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE VII. - AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS 
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height limitations which are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths-mile non-precision instrument approach zone: Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility with a visible minimum as low as three-fourths-mile non-precision instrument approach zone: Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(5)  Transitional zones: Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the side of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 693.40 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending as a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(6)  Horizontal zone: Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 843.40 feet above mean sea level. 
(7)  Conical zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and a 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(8)  Heliport approach zone: Slopes eight feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a distance of 4,000 feet along the heliport approach zone centerline. 
(9)  Departure zone: Slopes 40 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the stop end of runway or clearway, for a distance 10,200 feet, to a height of 255 feet above the runway end elevation. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE VIII. - USE RESTRICTIONS 
(a)  Generally. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this ordinance in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(b)  Prohibited uses. All structures and trees are prohibited in the runway protection zone defined as the first 1,700-foot segment of the approach zone beginning at the end of the primary surface for Runway 13-31 and the first 1,000-foot segment of the approach zone beginning at the end of the primary surface for runway 3-21. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE IX. - NONCONFORMING USES 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this ordinance shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of February 5, 2019, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to February 5, 2019, and is diligently prosecuted. Additionally, nothing contained herein shall prohibit construction of additions or additional floors to existing buildings provided that any such buildings were in use on February 5, 2019, the additions were contemplated and designated at the time of the original construction, and that substantial additional costs were incurred at the time of the original construction to allow for those future additions or additional floors. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this ordinance, the owner of any existing or extended nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the LaGrange-Callaway Airport to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the LaGrange-Callaway Airport. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE X. - PERMITS 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of this subsection, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone created in this ordinance unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted by the Troup County Building Official. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. All structures and trees within the notification zone shall seek airspace approval by the airport manager or the FAA. Structures and trees outside of this zone shall seek airspace approval if required by federal regulations. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, using the following criteria: 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
(2)  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree, in excess of any of the height limits established by this ordinance. 
(b)  Existing uses. Except as provided in section article IX(a), no permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on February 5, 2019, or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Troup County Building Official determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use of any property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this ordinance, may apply to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances may be allowed where it is found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship, and any relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this ordinance. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this ordinance may be considered by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the LaGrange-Callaway Airport for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. 
(e)  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted, may if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this ordinance and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the LaGrange-Callaway Airport, at its own expense to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
ARTICLE XI. - APPEALS 
Decisions of the Troup County Building Official may be appealed to the Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission. Appeals from decisions of the board of zoning appeals/planning commission shall be taken to the Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia, by writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , § I(Exh. 1), 2-5-2019) 
APPENDIX C - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-03, adopted April 18, 2006, amended App. C in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former App. C, Arts. I—VII, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the county's subdivisions ordinance, adopted on November 6, 1984, and as published as Appendix D in the county's 1987 Code of Ordinances as supplemented through Supp. No. 24, July 2001. Amendments to the subdivisions ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance as codified. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance describing or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-14(11); buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE, JURISDICTION 

Sec. A. - Title. 
These regulations shall officially be known, cited and referred to as the Subdivision Regulations of Troup County (hereinafter "these regulations"). 
Sec. B. - Authority. 
As provided by the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, the Troup County Board of Commissioners is empowered to provide for the regulation of division of land. 
Sec. C. - Purposes. 
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
1.  To encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community so as to conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of the county. 
2.  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities and any other facilities and services to residential subdivision developments. 
3.  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian and to help insure that all lots will be accessible to fire fighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles. 
4.  To ensure adequate drainage by providing for the proper layout of streets and lots. 
5.  To promote a safe and healthy environment. 
6.  To encourage the wise development of the community in accordance with the adopted land use plan. 
Sec. D. - Jurisdiction. 
From and after the date of the adoption, these regulations shall govern the subdivision of all land within the unincorporated area of Troup County. 
Any owner of land within said jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the Building Zoning and Planning Department of Troup County, Georgia, a plat of the subdivision that shall conform to all requirements set forth in these regulations. No plat of a subdivision, lying within such territory or part thereof, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Troup County and no subdivider shall proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision until such subdivision plat shall have been approved by the building and zoning department. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of these regulations, which shall be known as the "Troup County Subdivision Regulations," certain words used herein are defined. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 

Sec. A. - Alley. 
A public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Sec. B. - Applicant. 
The owner/owners of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
Sec. C. - Block. 
A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, public properties, roads or streets, other than alleys or easements. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the subdivider may determine the outline of the block. 
Sec. D. - Bond, maintenance. 
Any form of security (including a cash deposit, surety bond or letter of credit) obligating funds for the purpose of insuring the maintenance of required and approved improvements to a subdivision. 
Sec. E. - Bond, performance. 
Any form of security (including a cash deposit, surety bond or letter of credit) obligating funds for the purpose of insuring the completion of required and approved improvements to a subdivision. 
Sec. F. - Building setback line. 
The distance as measured perpendicularly from either the front, side or rear property line to the principal building on the parcel. 
Sec. G. - Comprehensive plan. 
The adopted official statement of the Troup County Board of Commissioners that sets forth (in words, maps, illustrations, and/or tables) goals, policies and guidelines intended to direct the present and future physical, social, and economic development that occurs and includes a unified physical design for the public and private development of land and water. 
Sec. H. - County commissioners. 
The Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia. 
Sec. I. - County engineer. 
A person appointed by Troup County Board of Commissioners as the Troup County Engineer. 
Sec. J. - County inspector. 
A qualified person or persons designated by the county commissioners to review specifications and inspect construction. 
Sec. K. - Cul-de-sac. 
A street intersecting another at only end and designed to be permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround as specified in these regulations. 
Sec. L. - Easement. 
A grant by a property owner of the use of land by the public, a corporation, or persons for purposes such as the construction, maintenance of, or access to utilities, drainage ways or roadways. An easement may be a portion of a lot, generally along lot lines, for the purpose of access to maintain utility structures, drainage and other purposes. No permanent structures shall be built by the owner on said easements. An easement cannot be used for access to other private property in lieu of public road frontage except as specifically allowed in the zoning ordinance. 
Sec. M. - Lot. 
A unit of land in a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership or for development or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road may be included. 
Sec. N. - Lot, flag. 
Flag lots are considered to be large lots, not meeting minimum lot frontage requirements and where access to a public or private street is provided by means of a long, narrow, driveway between abutting lots. 
Sec. O. - Lot, pie. 
A lot that resembles a slice of pie where the largest portion of the "slice of pie" is in the front meeting road frontage requirements and the rear property line is considered to be the point of the "slice of pie". 
Sec. P. - Lot width. 
The width of the lot at the minimum front building setback line measured parallel to the street right-of-way. 
Sec. Q. - Planning department. 
The Planning Department—Troup County Planner. 
Sec. R. - Plat, final. 
A plat of all or part of a subdivision prepared in accordance with the Troup County Subdivision Regulations and submitted for approval in such a form as required by Troup County for the purpose of recording. 
Sec. S. - Plat, preliminary. 
A tentative plat, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision design, prepared by a civil engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect, architect, or land planner in accordance with these regulations. 
Sec. T. - Public hearing. 
A hearing held before the Troup County Board of Commissioners after advertisement of the time, place of the hearing as required by law. Notice will be given to the public by publishing a notice of said meeting in the legal organ of the county at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. Said notices shall include the location of the property, its current zoning and the requested action or change in the zoning ordinance. In addition to the notice published in the newspaper, a sign showing the action requested shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
Sec. U. - Streets, roads. 
A way for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, parkway, thoroughfare, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated. 
Sec. V. - Subdivider. 
Any person, corporation or authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
Sec. W. - Subdivision, major. 
All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into more than four lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development; and includes all division of land into two or more lots involving a new street or a change in existing streets. 
Sec. X. - Subdivision, minor. 
All divisions of a tract of land into more than one and less than five lots, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development. Divisions of land into less than five lots that do not require the construction of new streets, roads, sidewalks or similar facilities are considered to be minor subdivisions. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL APPROVALS REQUIRED 

Sec. A. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission at the time of preliminary plat submission. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in such a manner as to cause confusion for emergency services. 
Sec. B. - Name of streets. 
The Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission shall approve the names of streets at the time of preliminary plat submission. The names shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of streets in any existing subdivision. 
Sec. C. - Conflicting provisions. 
Where any of the provisions of these regulations imposes a restriction different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever is more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
Sec. D. - Saving provision. 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability or any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the county under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the county, except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. 
Sec. E. - Building permits. 
Building permits shall not be issued by the building inspection, zoning and planning department until roads and streets have been inspected and approved by the Troup County Engineer and the required maintenance bond has been accepted; or until acceptance of a performance bond meeting the requirements of Article IV, section E(7) of the Subdivision Regulations of Troup County. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. A. - Major subdivision approval procedure. 
All major subdivisions as defined in these regulations shall be approved according to the following steps: 
1.  Informal review with subdivider or his agent, county planner, county engineer and Troup County Health Department representative. 
2.  Rezone property if necessary. 
3.  Submission of preliminary plat to board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
4.  Submission of construction documents to county engineer and county health department for approval. 
5.  Review of subdivision using the point rating system as defined in Articles 26 and 27 of the Troup County Zoning Ordinance (Appendix "A" to the Troup County Code). If the base score of ten is reached, the preliminary plat will be forwarded to the Troup County Board of Commissioners for information and comment and then presented to the Troup County BOZA/PC for approval. 
6.  Issuance of land disturbing activities (LDA) permit. 
7.  Submission of final plat for approval by the Troup County Board of Commissioners, subject to required bonding. 
8.  Record final plat and submit maintenance bond to the planning office and copy to road department. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § I, 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § I, 5-8-2018) 
Sec. B. - Informal review. 
1.  Prior to the preparation of a subdivision preliminary plat, the subdivider or his agent is required to meet with the county planner, county environmental health officer (Troup County Health Department representative) and county engineer, in order to review the location of the proposed subdivision to determine whether it appears possible that the said subdivision could meet requirements of this regulation. This step does not require any formal application. 
2.  The subdivider or his agent should provide a map of the surrounding area, topographic data taken from USGS Quadrangle maps or other sources, the property boundary, and a sketch of the proposed layout of streets (multiple layouts could be considered). 
3.  The sketch should also include any existing conditions on the property such as a private cemetery or any other conditions that require special attention of the subdivider or his agent. These may include but are not limited to general area of any wetlands or whether the property is located in groundwater recharge area or any other environmentally sensitive area as can be deemed from existing records. 
4.  Approval may be denied on a proposed subdivision where the planning commission deems a public road to a proposed subdivision as being currently inadequate to service the proposed subdivision due to right-of-way width or construction. 
Sec. C. - Preliminary plat procedures for approval of major subdivisions. 
1.  The preliminary plat shall show the proposed layout of streets, number of lots, subdivision title, and other features in relation to existing conditions. The preliminary plat should include topographic data taken from USGS Quadrangle maps or other sources, and any other information necessary for consideration of the proposed subdivision. 
a.  General information that shall be shown on the preliminary plat is the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development. This information shall include data on land characteristics, flood zones, wetlands, an outline of existing and proposed covenants, community facilities, streets, information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of lots, lot width and depth, playgrounds, parks, and other areas. 
b.  Preliminary plats shall also show the building setback lines, lot area, roads with names and addresses on all lots. 
c.  If private roads are to be constructed, covenants for a homeowners association established by the developer shall be submitted with the preliminary plat and approved by the Troup County Attorney. 
2.  The preliminary plat shall be submitted to the building inspection, zoning and planning department along with a completed subdivision review application and payment of required fees as adopted by the Troup County Board of Commissioners. The preliminary subdivision plat shall be submitted in paper and electronic DWG format. The preliminary plat will be reviewed by the Troup County Planner and Troup County Engineer for compliance with requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located and road specifications as defined in these regulations. The submission of a preliminary plat will be presented to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission for approval when the base score of 10 is reached as described in the Development Scorecard in Article 26 of the Troup County Zoning Ordinance. 
3.  The preliminary will be presented to the board of commissioners for information and comment prior to the plat being considered by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission. 
4.  Approval Statement and Expiration. Preliminary plats shall include the following statement: 
"Approval of this preliminary plat shall expire 24 months from the date of approval by the Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission, unless: 1) a final plat from at least one phase has been approved; or 2) street base construction for at least 50 percent of the total linear footage of all roads approved on the preliminary plat has been completed and inspected. Upon expiration of the preliminary plat, a new preliminary plat shall be submitted in accordance with all current regulations and requirements." 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, §§ II, III, 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § II, 5-8-2018) 
Sec. D. - Construction documents review. 
1.  After approval of the preliminary plat by the board of zoning appeals/planning commission, the subdivider or his agent may submit construction documents demonstrating compliance with Article V, to the Troup County Engineer. A checklist of standard requirements, specifications and acceptable practices is available from the county engineer. On site sewerage treatment plans shall be submitted to the Troup County Health Department for approval. 
2.  Plan review: 
a.  Upon receipt of the construction documents, the Troup County Engineer shall determine, within ten working days, if the construction documents appear to be complete. If all plans and related documents are in order, the construction documents shall be deemed to be officially received and the date of such official receipt shall establish the filing date. 
b.  Within 45 working days after the filing date of the construction documents, the Troup County Engineer, the Planning Department and the Water Review Board (if applicable) shall complete the review of such plans for compliance with the requirements and provisions of this ordinance and other applicable codes and ordinances. If such compliance requirements are not met, the construction documents shall not be approved. Specific reasons for disapproval shall be set forth in writing and shall identify deficiencies in the plans which cause disapproval. If multiple reviews are required, the engineer will complete the reviews within 21 working days for each re-submittal. 
c.  If for any reason the required review is not completed in the specified time allotment the construction documents will be deemed approved. 
3.  When the construction documents are approved by the Troup County Engineer and the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), the subdivider or his agent shall submit any maintenance bond required under Article VI, section A and purchase a land disturbance permit to begin construction of required improvements. 
4.  If no construction or permitting has taken place within two years of construction document approval then the subdivider or his agent shall resubmit construction documents to Troup County Planning and Engineering Staff to review for any changes in standards. 
Sec. E. - Procedure for final plat approval of major subdivision. 
1.  Application for final plat approval: After preliminary plat approval and construction has been completed up to and including curb and base, the final plat may be submitted to the board of zoning appeals/planning commission for its consideration and recommendation to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may thereafter approve, deny, approve with conditions, or table the submitted final plat and accept the public roads identified on such plat. 
2.  In order to record the final plat, the subdivider or his agent must submit the complete final plat showing all items specified on the "Final Plat Checklist" available in the building inspection/zoning and planning department including the following: 
a.  Six copies of the final plat, at least one copy of which shall be drawn in permanent ink on plastic velum 17-inch by 22-inch sheets. 
b.  One copy of the final plat in electronic DWG format. 
c.  One copy of any required covenants or homeowners association bylaws. These covenants shall be recorded with the final plat and identified on the final plat. The recording of the bylaws or covenants shall be written on the final plat retained by the building, zoning and planning department 
d.  Administrative fee shall be paid prior to recording the final plat. The fee amount is as adopted by the Troup County Board of Commissioners and posted in the building inspection, zoning and planning department. 
3.  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved. If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat that is to be recorded and developed at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The final plat, prepared according to the 1961 Georgia Plat Act, shall show, at a minimum, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Sufficient data to locate readily and reproduce on the ground the bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and building line. This shall include, but is not limited to, the radius, length of arch, chord and chord bearing for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. 
b.  Tract boundary lines. Street right-of-way lines, easement and other right-of-way lines, building setback lines and property lines of lots and other sites. 
c.  All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one tenth of a foot and angles accurate to the nearest minute. 
d.  Name and width of all streets or other rights-of-way. 
e.  Subdivision name and location, north point and magnetic declination, date and scale. 
f.  Location, dimensions, purposes and holder of any easements, and any areas to be dedicated to public use or for uses other than residential with statement of purpose and limitations. 
g.  Lots listed in numerical order and blocks in alphabetical order. 
h.  Accurate location, description and material of monuments and markers. 
i.  Spaces shall be provided for certifications of approval or acceptance by the: 
(1)  Troup County Health Department; 
(2)  Troup County Planning Commission; 
(3)  Troup County Engineer; 
(4)  Troup County Board of Commissioners; 
(5)  Engineer or surveyor; 
(6)  Owner. 
"State of Georgia  Troup County" 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision. All monuments and pins shown thereon actually exist or are marked "future," and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown. All of the requirements of the land subdivision regulations of Troup County, Georgia, have been fully complied with." 

 
"I/we, the owner of said property to be surveyed, do hereby join in the forgoing statement. I/we also, hereby certify that it was and is my/our intention to divide said land into lots as shown by said plat and by execution of this Certificate. I/we do hereby dedicate and convey for public use such streets, alleys and public ground to Troup County, Georgia as is shown on this plat. I/we further declare that title was vested soley in me/us as of the date of this dedication." 

 
(7)  Troup County Planner. 
(8)  Board of Commissioners, Troup County 
j.  Record: 
"Filed in this Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Troup County, Georgia, Plat Book No. _____, Page No. _____." 
k.  Covenants and restrictions (if any) shall be identified on the final plat by reference to deed book and page where recorded. 
l.  Public notice, drainage. The following note shall be place in a prominent place on the final plat. 
"Note: Troup County assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat." 
4.  Approval of the final plat. The Troup County Planner shall transmit to the BOC before its next regularly scheduled meeting copies of the final plat. The Troup County Board of Commissioners shall review the plat for final approval. 
5.  Recording of the final plat. If approved, the original plats are returned to the subdivider or his representative. The subdivider or his/her designee shall be responsible for recording the approved final plat and the payment of the recording fee. 
6.  Any bonds required by Article VI of this Appendix C shall be submitted with the submittal of the final plat. 
7.  In lieu of completing all required improvements in a subdivision at the time final plat approval is requested, the subdivider may provide a performance guarantee such as a performance bond (signed by a firm licensed and insured as a bonding agency under Georgia Laws, furnishing written documentation for approval by the board of commissioners); or an irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement; in a form acceptable to the county and in the amount of 150 percent of the cost of the remaining required improvements payable to the county. If the required improvements and/or facilities are not completed the proceeds from the performance guarantee shall be used to pay for the required improvements or facilities. County personnel or outside contractor may be used to complete the required improvements or facilities. 
Certificates of occupancy for buildings or structures will not be issued until the construction and installation of required improvements or facilities for which a performance guarantee is posted are completed in accordance with all applicable specifications and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § IV, 7-1-2008) 
Sec. F. - Procedure for approval of minor subdivision. 
1.  The subdivider shall submit three copies of the final plat for administrative review to the Troup County Planner. 
2.  The plat shall show all existing conditions and shall include all items specified on the "Final Plat Checklist" available in the building inspection/zoning and planning department including the following for minor subdivisions of more than one lot and less than five lots: 
a.  Subdivision name and copy of covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover all or part of tract, if such are proposed; and 
b.  Certification by the Troup County Health Department that the lots meet the minimum specifications for onsite sanitation and water. 
3.  The Troup County Planner or his/her designee, shall, approve or deny the plat. 
4.  If the county planner or his/her designee denies the plat, the subdivider may appeal the decision by following the procedure for appeals in [Article V,] section H of this Appendix C. 
5.  If the plat is approved, the subdivider shall be responsible for recording the plat in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Troup County. 
Sec. G. - Private subdivisions. 
1.  A private subdivision shall meet the county subdivision regulations, including all roads, which shall be constructed to the latest county specifications. 
2.  Roads, recreation areas, and other common grounds shall be perpetually owned and maintained by a legally established association of all owners of property within the subdivision. Troup County assumes no maintenance responsibilities within the boundaries of the private subdivision. 
3.  Gates and/or security guards may be permitted. However, roads and other areas shall be open to the normal operation of emergency, police and public service vehicles and personnel. 
4.  It is assumed that the roads within a private subdivision will perpetually remain privately maintained, however, in the event the owners of the subdivision desire to dedicate roads to Troup County, said roads must meet all county standards and specifications at the proposed time of dedication. The roads must pass inspections by the department of roads and engineering prior to dedication of the streets to Troup County. There shall be no implied dedication of roads or streets to Troup County and no dedication shall be effective unless accepted in writing by the Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
5.  All zoning, building permits, health department and other regulations of the county shall be met for individual lots within the subdivision. 
6.  The minimum area of the subdivision shall be 20 acres in Article V. 
ARTICLE V. - STANDARDS FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. A. - Blocks. 
1.  Length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard to: 
a.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
b.  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
c.  Need for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
2.  Pedestrian easements, not less than ten feet wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
3.  On culs-de-sac or dead-end streets, the desirable maximum length is 600 feet. 
Sec. B. - Lot specifications and dimensions. 
1.  The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with county regulations and in providing safe driveway access from an approved street with adequate sight distance to allow building on such lots. 
2.  In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule gives a better street or lot plan. 
3.  Lot size, dimensions and setback lines shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
4.  Lots meeting size requirements are not automatically approved for development. Troup County Health Department must approve all individual sewer systems and/or water supplies. 
5.  Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width, to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. The "front" setback distance shall be used along both street frontages according to the zoning district in which the property is located. The "rear" setback shall be determined by the orientation of the principle structure. 
6.  Each lot shall front upon a public street, except as specified for L-100, RR, and Private Subdivisions. 
7.  Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots, shall be avoided except where topography prevents single road frontage, or to provide separation of residential development from through street traffic. A planting screen reservation of at least ten feet with no drive access shall be provided across the width of the property along the line of lots abutting such a through street. 
8.  No subdivision shall occur wherein a lot will be created of a size ranging between five acres and ten acres, inclusive, unless said lot has a minimum ratio of one foot of road frontage for every four feet of lot depth. 
9.  "Flag" and "pie" lots shall be avoided (please see definitions). All lots shall meet the requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located. In the case of "slice of pie" lots no rear property line shall be less than five feet. 
Sec. C. - Streets and/or roads. 
(a)  Public streets and/or roads. 
1.  Specifications not covered herein shall be performed in accordance with the latest Georgia Department of Transportation and AASHTO standard specifications. 
2.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan. New streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
3.  When such is not shown in the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate connection to existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
b.  When future connectivity is required, the right-of-way for the future street may be recorded without constructing the street provided the right-of-way is no longer than one lot depth. 
c.  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the county commissioners to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
4.  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by high volumes of through traffic will be discouraged. 
5.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed through street with speed limit greater than 35 mph access shall be limited to ensure adequate protection of residential properties and maintain public safety. The following measures may be imposed by the board of commissioners: 
a.  Deceleration stacking lane with taper 
b.  Acceleration lane with taper 
c.  Left turn stacking lanes with tapers 
d.  Reverse frontage lots with screen planting strip along the rear property line or such other treatment as may be necessary to afford adequate separation from through street 
e.  The Georgia Department of Transportation Driveway Manual "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control" shall be used as a design guide. 
6.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to, and on each of side of, such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land (such as parks in residential districts). Such distance shall also be determined with regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
7.  Privately owned reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. 
8.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited 
9.  Street intersections should be as nearly at right angles as practical. 
10.  Street right-of-way width shall be no less than 50 feet with curb and gutter. Larger right-of-way widths are required for some roads. 
11.  Dead-end streets may be platted subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. 
a.  Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall be provided with a turnaround or cul-de-sac at the closed end. Installation shall conform to the latest county road specifications. 
b.  Dead-end streets that are designed to be so temporarily shall have a temporary turnaround or cul-de-sac as a part of the construction. Said condition shall be shown on the final plat presented to the commissioners for approval. Installation shall conform to the latest county road specifications. The temporary cul-de-sac may not lie on any portion of a lot in the subdivision phase to be approved by the commissioners. At the time the final plat is recorded, the subdivider or his agent shall present a bond payable to the county of a type approved by the county. In the event the street is not extended within two years, the cul-de-sac shall be permanently constructed or the bond shall be payable to the county to make the cul-de-sac permanent or the bond may be extended at the discretion of the Troup County Commissioners. 
12.  No street name shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Proposed streets in obvious alignment with existing and named streets shall bear the name of the existing street. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the board of county commissioners. 
13.  Clearing. All trees, stumps, brush, topsoil, old foundations or other building materials shall be cleared from all rights-of-way. No tree stumps, or other debris shall be deposited within the right-of-way. 
14.  Grading. Streets shall be graded to provide for a width of pavement in the center of the right-of-way to conform to a profile and cross-section approved by the county engineer. 
15.  Street grades shall conform to the latest Troup County road specifications and with allowance for reasonable vertical curves, shall not exceed a maximum of twelve percent (12.0%). No streets shall have a grade of less than one percent (1.0 %) except in vertical curve reversals. 
16.  Curb and gutter shall be required on all streets and shall be furnished and installed by the subdivider or his agent in conformance with the latest county road specifications. Distance from back of curb to back of curb must not be less than 25 feet. 
17.  Base and paving: Paving of a minimum width of 25 feet from back of curb to back of curb shall be furnished and paid for by the subdivider or his agent. Installation shall conform to the latest county road department specifications. The typical paving cross section for a proposed county road shall be designed using the Georgia Department of Transportation's "APD" (Asphalt Pavement Design) calculator based on the 1972 AASHTO Interim Guide for Design of Pavement Structures. The minimum acceptable typical paving cross section shall be: 
• 1½″ type "E" asphalt wearing course. 
• 2″ type "B" binder. 
• 6″ G.A.B. (Graded Aggregate Base). 
The asphalt-wearing course must be laid after a period of at least one year after the streets have passed final inspection and the final plat has been recorded. A performance bond is required per Article VII. 
18.  Culs-de-sac shall have a minimum radius of 50 feet to the right-of-way, and a minimum radius of 42 feet to the back of curb. 
19.  Testing thickness and compaction. The county inspector shall make as many tests as necessary to determine the average thickness and compaction of the base course prior to placing of surface course. Tests shall also be made on the finished courses if necessary. When the subdivider or his agent or contractor disagrees with the county inspector's tests and prefers a consulting firm to be employed, said consulting firm shall be employed at the subdivider or his agent's expense. 
20.  Access to subdivisions shall be provided over a public street or road. Where subdivisions abut a public road or street that has a right-of-way width of less than 50 feet (Larger right-of-way widths are required for some roads), the subdivider or his agent shall dedicate additional land to provide a width of 25 feet (or half the total width required) on the subdivider's side of the centerline. Where public roads or streets less than 50 feet (Larger right-of-way widths are required for some roads) traverse subdivisions the subdivider or his agent shall dedicate additional land to provide a width of 25 feet (or half the total width required) on both sides of the centerline. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the county or subdivider or his agent to improve such road or street frontage. 
21.  Approval may be denied on a proposed subdivision where the county commissioners deem a public road to the subdivision as being inadequate due to right-of-way width or construction until such time as the road has been brought up to county standards. 
22.  Driveways within the right-of-way shall be constructed according to specifications of the county road department and Chapter 66 (Road and Streets) of the Troup County Code of Ordinances 
23.  The subdivider or his agent shall furnish and install required striping and street name signs at all proposed street intersections during construction of the streets. The signs shall use six-inch white letters on blue background. The Troup County Department of Roads and Engineering must approve street name signs of special design. Subdivision entrance markers are not permitted within the existing or proposed public right-of-way. 
24.  Inspection. The county inspector shall be notified prior to each phase of construction. All street construction shall be done under the direct inspection of the county inspector. 
(b)  Private access roads. 
1.  Private access roads shall be permitted in subdivisions in areas zoned in Rural residential (RR-5), Lakeside Residential (LR-2) and Lakeside Rural Residential (LRR-3). 
2.  Private access roads shall be permitted in Rural Residential (RR-5), Lakeside Residential (LR-2) and Lakeside Rural Residential (LRR-3) subdivisions and only when such subdivisions contain peninsulas of land that may not be fully utilized without the private access roads. All private access roads shall meet the requirement of subsection 3(a). 
3.  Private access roads shall adhere to the following standards: 
a.  All private access roads shall be a minimum of 50 feet in total width, shall have no less than a 20-foot wide paved section, and shall be constructed to the specifications shown on Figure 1 that is incorporated herein by reference. 
b.  All private access roads that dead end shall provide for a turnaround of sufficient size to allow for emergency vehicles to enter and leave without having to make more than one backing movement. The turnaround and the entrance to the private road shall not be blocked in any manner so as to prevent the access and egress of emergency vehicles. 
c.  All private access roads shall be a jointly owned easement and maintained by all lots served by the easement. Prior to approval of the final subdivision plat, the owners and/or subdivider or his agents shall present an agreement binding on the property owners and their successors and/or assigns that shall provide a mechanism for the perpetual maintenance of the road. Said agreement must receive the approval of the board of commissioners prior to recording the final plat. 
d.  All lots served and/or accessed by the private access road shall comply with the frontage requirements as stated in Article IV, § 9 of Appendix A of this Code. 
e.  No private access road shall be allowed to serve as the means of ingress and egress more than six dwelling units. 
f.  Private access roads shall only provide ingress and egress for dwelling units that are located within the approved platted subdivision. 
g.  The final subdivision plat shall contain notations in a form acceptable to the county that all private access roads are private and are not maintained by Troup County. The homeowners of those lots shall jointly own all private access roads served by the road. All private access roads shall be perpetually maintained pursuant to an agreement binding the lot owners, their successors and assigns. 
4.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in subsection 3.b., private access roads shall comply with all the requirements set forth in subsection 3.a. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, §§ V—VIII, 7-1-2008) 
Sec. D. - Subterranean improvements. 
1.  Utilities shall be installed within the right-of-way of a proposed street in accordance with the Troup County Utilities Standard available from the Troup County Engineer. 
2.  No underground work shall be covered or concealed until inspected and approved by the county inspector 
3.  Water lines. Each lot within the subdivision shall be provided with a connection to a water supply. Individual water systems shall be subject to the approval of the Troup County Health Department. Public and private water systems and all connections shall comply with the regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the county inspector. 
4.  Sanitary sewers (where available). Each lot within the subdivision area shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewerage system. The sewerage system and all connections shall comply with the regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the utility owner, and shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the utility inspector. 
5.  Septic tanks may be permitted wherever sanitary sewerage is not available. Design data shall be submitted to the Troup County Health Department in accordance with regulations of said department. 
Sec. E. - Surface drainage specifications. 
1.  The size, length and location of all surface drainage pipe and structures shall be subject to the approval of the engineer. In no case shall water be allowed to discharge at a point where damage would be caused to any adjacent property. 
2.  All storm drainage pipe shall conform to Georgia Department of Transportation Standards, particularly including but not limited to, designs of cross drain pipes, longitudinal pipes, gutter flows, side ditch flows and appurtenances thereto. 
3.  Any lots within subdivisions that in the opinion of the county building inspector, are unfit for building due to bad drainage conditions shall be excluded, and no building shall be permitted until such conditions have been corrected. 
4.  Installation, backfilling and compaction shall be in accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
Sec. F. - Easements. 
1.  Utility and drainage easements shall be provided as required by the board of commissioners (see the definition of a drainage easement in Article II, section L.). 
2.  Where a watercourse traverses a subdivision, drainageway, or natural channel there shall be provided an easement conforming substantially to the limits of such course, plus additional width as necessary to accommodate future construction and maintenance. 
3.  A ten-foot utility and drainage easement shall be located along the front, side, and rear lines of each lot. The easement is not necessarily maintained by Troup County. 
Sec. G. - Soil erosion and sedimentation. 
1.  Required plan. A plan, approved by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, that meets the criteria of the then current edition of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," shall be required on all subdivisions prior to any clearing or grading. Immediate action shall be taken by the subdivider or his agent, at his expense, to correct any soil erosion that occurs as result of his construction activities, whether in conformance with the plan or not. 
Sec. H. - Appeals. 
1.  The subdivision review board is hereby created. 
a.  The board shall consist of three regular members appointed by the board of commissioners. Initially, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, a second member shall be appointed for a period of two years, and a third member shall be appointed for a period of three years. Thereafter, they shall be appointed for a term of three years. An alternate member shall be appointed for a term of three years to serve in the event of conflict of interest of a regular member. 
b.  The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals of the subdivider or his agent regarding decisions made by the county engineer where there is an alleged error in the interpretation of the standards of this article or of the road design specifications. 
c.  Appeals from the decision of the subdivision review board shall be taken to the appropriate courts. 
2.  The subdivider or his agent may appeal the decision of the county engineer in the application of the standards of this article or the Troup County road specifications to the subdivision review board. 
3.  An appeal from the decision of the county engineer must be made in writing and filed with the building, zoning and planning department within 15 days after the decision is rendered. A meeting of the subdivision review board will be called within 30 days of filing the appeal. 
4.  The subdivision review board shall reach a decision without unnecessary delay and in all cases shall take action on an appeal within 30 days of submission. 
ARTICLE VI. - BONDS 

Sec. A. - Maintenance bond for existing streets. 
1.  Prior to the start of construction Troup County Board of Commissioners may require a maintenance bond to ensure that certain roads that will serve as an entrance for construction traffic through existing sections of a subdivision are restored to the condition existing at the time of construction in the new section or new subdivision was started. If said entrance road has 60 percent of the principal structures completed then no maintenance bond for existing streets shall be required. The Troup County Board of Commissioners shall also consider the age of the existing road in determining the need for a maintenance bond. The maintenance bond amount shall be as posted in Appendix A of these regulations. 
2.  Said maintenance bond shall cover the time period beginning at the date of issuance of the land disturbing activity (LDA) permit and ending concurrently with maintenance bond for new streets. The maintenance bond shall only be released by the county engineer after completion of necessary repairs. 
Sec. B. - Maintenance bond for new streets. 
1.  A maintenance bond in the amount as posted in Appendix A of these regulations is required in order to record the final plat for a major subdivision. 
2.  Said maintenance bond shall cover the time period beginning at the date of acceptance of the streets and ending after 60 percent of the buildings in the subdivision have been completed or two years (whichever is shorter). The maintenance bond shall only be released by the Troup County Engineer. 
3.  The subdivider or his agent, prior to recording the plat and after final plat approval by the Troup County Board of Commissioners, shall present the required maintenance bond. 
4.  The subdivider or his agent shall maintain the required improvements that exist in or in any way affect the dedicated rights-of-way. Said maintenance shall consist of, but not be limited to the following: 
• Repair of any areas of pavement or curb failure. 
• Correcting any erosion. 
• Removal of any sedimentation that occurs within the right-of-way. 
• Cleaning any drainage structures. 
5.  The Troup County Roads and Engineering department inspector shall inspect the required improvements within the last 90 days of the bond period and shall present to the subdivider or his agent a list of needed repairs. If inspection is not performed within the prescribed 90-day period the bond shall be released. The subdivider or his agent shall complete the listed repairs prior to the end of the bond period. If the repairs are not satisfactorily completed at the end of the bond period, an additional one-year maintenance bond will be required. If no repairs are needed, the county shall release the maintenance bond. 
Sec. C. - Performance bonds. 
For asphalt-wearing course: A performance guarantee such as a performance bond (signed by a firm licensed and insured as a bonding agency under Georgia Laws, furnishing written documentation for approval by the board of commissioners); or an irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement; in a form acceptable to the county and payable to the county, shall be required prior to recording the final plat. The purpose of the bond is to cover the cost of installing the asphalt-wearing course. The bond shall not be released by Troup County until the wearing course has been installed. In no case shall the asphalt-wearing course be installed less than one year after recording neither the final plat nor more than the period of the maintenance bond. The amount of the performance bonds shall be based on the "Bond Fee Schedule" as shown in Appendix A. 
Sec. D. - Performance bonds—Prior to completion of improvements other than asphalt-wearing course. 
1.  Improvements performance guarantee: Upon approval of the preliminary plat, construction drawings, Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) and issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit and anytime after clearing, grubbing and preliminary erosion and sedimentation controls are put into place, a subdivider may proceed with final plat approval. The final plat may be recorded, for sale of lots only, prior to completion of required improvements, upon presentation to the Troup County Building, Zoning and Planning Department one of the following guarantees: 
(a)  Surety bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in Georgia in a form acceptable to and made payable upon default to Troup County in an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated actual cost of building the required improvements. The estimation of actual cost shall be based on an estimate by the subdivider's road construction contractor as approved by the Troup County Engineer. 
(b)  A cash escrow account maintained in a financial institution approved by Troup County in an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated actual cost of building the required improvements, and payable upon default to Troup County. The estimation of actual cost shall be based on an estimate by the subdivider's road construction contractor as approved by the Troup County Engineer. 
(c)  The escrow account shall be automatically renewed on an annual basis until all improvements are completed. At the completion of all improvements and approval by the Troup County Engineer or his designee the escrow account shall be released and the two year maintenance bond submitted to the building, zoning and planning department. 
2.  Default: For purposes of this article, default shall mean and be the failure on the part of the subdivider to complete, within the period specified, the required improvements as specified on the approved construction drawings the portion of the subdivision as shown on the final plat. Upon such default, the Troup County Board of Commissioners shall require the surety or the financial institution holding the escrow account to pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow account to the county. Upon receipt of payment, Troup County shall expend such portion of the funds as it deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements. After the necessary completion of required improvements any remaining funds shall be held by Troup County for a period of two years to be applies toward required maintenance bond as required in Section B of these regulations. 
3.  Renewal of improvements performance guarantee: The improvements performance guarantee required by this section (whether pursuant to subsection D 1(a) or (b)) shall be renewed every two years that required improvements are not completed based on current prices as estimated by the road construction contractor as approved by the Troup County Engineer. 
4.  Release of improvements performance guarantee: After completion, final inspection and approval of all required improvements by the Troup County Roads and Engineering Department and receipt of the required maintenance bond, the improvements performance guarantee will be released. The improvements performance guarantee may be reduced in amount and released in part according to the amount expended on completed improvements for a particular phase or section of the development after inspection and approval of the completed portion of the required improvements by the Troup County Roads and Engineering Department and receipt of the required maintenance bond covering the competed portion of the required improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, § I, 2-20-2007) 
ARTICLE VII. - VARIANCES 

Sec. A. - Hardship. 
Where, due to unusual circumstances, the strict compliance with these regulations may result in excessive hardship or practical difficulties, certain variances may be authorized by the Troup County Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission, provided substantial justice is done, the public interest secured and the variance will not nullify the intent or purpose of the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance or these regulations. 
Secs. B, C. - Reserved. 
Sec. D. - Conditions. 
In granting variances and modifications, the county planner may recommend and the board of zoning appeals/planning commission and the board of commissioners may require such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied and modified. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LEGAL STATUS 
The Troup County Subdivision Regulations contain the subdivision requirements for the unincorporated area of Troup County. Provisions of these requirements are considered minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, health, and general welfare. 

Sec. A. - Interpretation. 
These regulations are not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties. However, where these regulations impose a greater restriction upon the use of the property or require greater space than is imposed by other regulations or by private easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
Sec. B. - Conflicting regulations. 
All resolutions and parts of any resolution, regulation, or ordinance passed by the Board of Commissioners of Troup County, Georgia, in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Sec. C. - Validity. 
Should any part, section, or provision of these regulations be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of any remaining portion of these regulations. 
APPENDIX A 
Maintenance Bonds: 
• Existing streets: $28.00 per linear foot of road. 
• New streets: $28.00 per linear foot of road. 
Performance Bonds: 
• Asphalt-wearing course: $12.00 per linear foot of road to be submitted with maintenance bond for new streets. 
APPENDIX D - QUALITY DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section I(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2010-10 , adopted May 18, 2010, repealed the former App. D, §§ 1.1—1.11, 2.1—2.3. 3.1, and 4.1, and enacted a new App. D as set out herein. The former App. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-12, adopted Feb. 20, 2007; and Ord. No. 2008-03, adopted May 20, 2008. 
Cross reference— Any resolution or ordinance describing or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-14(11); buildings, construction and related activities, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 38; manufactured homes, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; roads and streets, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; subdivisions, app. C. 

Sec. 1.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Quality Development Corridor Overlay District (QDC) is to provide for a superior environment along transportation corridors through the application of an overlay district. The overlay zone regulations are intended to supplement the regulation of the underlying zoning districts and to provide for harmony and compatibility of non-residential uses over the length of the corridor. This district is established to protect the public investment in major highways and county roads and ensure that these can continue to serve their primary functions of moving volumes of traffic safely. The intentions of the provisions of the QDC is to expedite the free flow of traffic and reduce the hazard arising from unnecessary points of ingress and egress and cluttered roadside non-residential uses. The intention of this district is to enhance the value of adjacent lands by preserving and extending the useful life of the highway, avoiding land uses that conflict with the roadside and the surrounding area and reducing the risks of creating blighted areas. Insuring the attractiveness of roadside uses will contribute to and enhance trade, tourism, capital investment, general welfare and public safety. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 1.2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in this appendix: 
(1)  Accessory structure: A structure detached from the principal building located on the same lot or parcel and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building. 
(2)  Alteration: Includes, without limitation, any enlargement or diminution of a building or structure; the addition, relocation, demolition, repair, remodeling, or change in number of living units; the development of or change in open space; the development of or change in a sign by painting or otherwise; other change in a facility. This definition shall, however, exclude ordinary maintenance for which no building permit is required, and painting except as provided herein for signs. 
(3)  Buffer: A screen of shrubs, trees, or similar plants dense enough to establish interrupted vision and to reduce the effects of headlight glare, noise, dirt, litter, unsightly buildings or signs and other objectionable activities from one side to the other. Buffers will be left undisturbed or shall be required to be densely replanted depending on the quality of the existing buffer. All plantings used for buffers shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or a combination thereof. All trees planted shall be a minimum five feet apart when planted and shall be a species that will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a minimum of two feet apart when planted, and shall be a species that will achieve a height of at least ten feet at maturity. Plants shall be spaced to provide for effective visual screening within three growing seasons. 
(4)  Corridor: A transportation path that leads into, out of, or through an activity area and includes all properties as delineated on the official zoning map which are adjacent to the path. 
(5)  County: Troup County, Georgia, including administrators, staff, or commission members who have duties related to planning and zoning, such as, but not limited to, legal issues, economic development, landscaping, public safety, and maintenance. 
(6)  Critical root zone: The minimum area beneath a tree that must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone is approximately one foot of radial distance for every inch of the tree's diameter-at-breast-height (DBH), with a minimum of eight feet. 
(7)  Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH): The tree trunk diameter (in inches) at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiples trunks below four and one-half feet, then the trunk is measured at its narrowest point beneath the split. 
(8)  Exterior insulated finish system (EIFS): Block wall with insulated architectural finish. 
(9)  Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of any solid, permanent material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate areas. 
(10)  Junkyard: Property used for indoor or outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment whether or not for sale or resale, of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. An automobile is considered abandoned when a current license tag is absent. 
(11)  Landscape plan: A component of a site or other plan to show the details of landscaping required by this ordinance [appendix]. 
(12)  Landscape strip: Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are allowed. Graded slopes in a landscape strip shall not be steeper than 4 to 1. 
(13)  Official zoning map: The Official Zoning Map of Troup County approved by Troup County Board of Commissioners. 
(14)  Overlay district: A special purpose classification used to supplement but not change the regulations of the current zoning districts (called the "underlying zone") in an effort to promote and protect both public infrastructure and private investment. 
(15)  Parking lot island: A strip of property that separates groups of parking spaces from other groups of parking spaces or internal driveways. Such islands act as traffic barriers and conform to the following specifications: 
(16)  Peripheral parking lot planting strip: A landscape strip of ten feet that is required along the perimeter of all parking lots. The measurement is from back of curb and located between the parking lot and the abutting property lines. The graded slopes in a landscape strip shall not be steeper than 4 to 1. 
(17)  Plant schedule: A list of all the required and proposed plant material for a site that includes quantity, size, spacing and any special planting notes. 
(18)  Portable building: A relatively small structure often purchased pre-built or as a kit in pre-fabricated sections. It is not designed to be served by heat, electricity or plumbing and does not require placement on a permanent foundation. These buildings are accessory structures for storage only and are not allowed as principal buildings. 
(19)  Registered design professional: An engineer, landscape architect, land surveyor, or other person registered in the State of Georgia to practice the type of design applicable to the work being performed. 
(20)  Screening: The method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby use or structure from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. 
(21)  Site plan: A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land as required by these regulations. Requirements for site plans are located in section 3.1(2) of these regulations. 
(22)  Tree save area: An area designed for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving natural trees and/or preserving natural buffers. 
(23)  Underlying zone: This term means the designated zoning districts established on the official zoning map as adopted by Troup County Commissioners. Regulations applicable to the underlying zone may be supplemented when an "overlay zone" is applied to the underlying zone. Where apparent conflicts exist between the regulations of the underlying zone and the regulations of the "overlay zone," the more stringent provision shall prevail and apply. 
(24)  Undue hardship: Hardship relates to the physical characteristics of the property, not the personal circumstances of the owner or user. The physical characteristics include but are not limited to exceptional shape of the lot, exceptional topographic conditions or natural features of the lot, such as a stream, makes complying with the ordinance impossible. 
Hardship shall not include personal or financial hardship or any other problem created by the owner or user of the parcel or lot. 
(25)  Variance: This term means permission to deviate from the literal standards of these regulations because of undue hardship or because complying with one section of these regulations would result in non-compliance with another section. 
(26)  Wall: A constructed solid barrier of concrete, stone, brick, or similar type of material that closes marks or boarders a lot, limits visibility, and restricts the flow of air and light. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 1.3. - Establishment of overlay district. 
The Quality Development Corridor Overlay District (QDC) boundaries shall be established and from time to time amended on the official zoning map, and may include any highway or county road deemed appropriate and its adjacent properties as delineated on the official zoning map. The Troup County Board of Commissioners may apply the corridor overlay district to any highway corridor upon concluding that any or all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The corridor has scenic qualities and natural beauty that should be protected. 
(2)  A major purpose of the highway is to carry through traffic. 
(3)  Non-residential uses along the highway in the absence of the corridor overlay district zoning provisions could have an adverse impact on its level of service; increase danger and/or congestion in the street; impair the public health, safety, convenience and welfare; and/or impede the maintenance or creation of a convenient attractive and harmonious community. 
Designated corridors —The quality development corridor standards shall be applicable to all property within non-residential zones located within 500 feet of either side of the street right-of-way line of all federal highways and state routes in the unincorporated areas of Troup County. The standards shall also apply to any property within non-residential zones within 500 feet of either side of the street right-of-way line of the following list of county roads: 
Bartley Road, Cameron Mill Road, Gabbettville Circle, Gabbettville Road, Hammett Road, Mountville-Hogansville Road, New Hutchinson Mill Road, North Davis Road, Patillo Road, Pegasus Parkway, Rock Mills Road, Shoemaker Road, Stateline Road, Wares Cross Road, Warner Road, Waugh Road, Webb-Bartley Road, Youngs Mill Road. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010; Ord. No. 2017-14 , § IV, 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 1.4. - Applicability. 
All new non-residential uses within a designated corridor shall be subject to sections 2.0—4.2 of this ordinance [appendix]. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 1.5. - Use limitations. 
Land within the Quality Development Corridor Overlay District (QDC) may be used as permitted in the underlying district in which located, subject to the applicable QDC conditions and subject to the following: 
(1)  Junkyards are prohibited. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses as defined in the Troup County Code of Ordinances, chapter 10 are prohibited. 
(3)  No portable buildings as defined by this ordinance [appendix] shall be used as principal non-residential structures in the Quality Development Corridor (QDC). 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.0. - Construction standards. 
All uses under this appendix are subject to the following standards: 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.1. - Exterior materials, roofing and awnings. 
(1)  Any non-residential building constructed within the Quality Development Corridor Overlay District (QDC) shall be of masonry construction or its equivalent on the front and side exterior walls. Quality materials and superior construction is recommended on the rear exterior wall. In the event the rear of the building is located on a public or private street then the rear exterior wall shall comply with the same requirements as the front and sides. 
a.  The primary exterior finish material shall be one of the following: Brick, brick veneer, stone, stone veneer, cultured stone, wood, pre-cast or field poured concrete tilt panels with texture and architectural detailing, split-face concrete block, masonry units and stucco on lath with architectural detailing, or masonry units with exterior insulated finish system (EIFS) applied. Approval may be given by the planning commission or review committee to other high quality materials and architectural facades that promote a specific theme. 
b.  Material such as asbestos siding, galvanized sheet metal, highly reflective aluminum, cinder block, and unfinished concrete are not allowed as primary exterior finish material. Consideration may be given to products that have a masonry appearance for architectural detailing, decorative trim and in other areas approved by the planning commission or review committee. 
(2)  All structural supports (i.e., columns) for vehicular canopies shall be covered in one or more of the same materials as the building facades. Colors and textures of exterior building structures must be harmonious and compatible with the colors of other buildings within the property. All other types of construction not covered in the above must have the written approval of the planning commission. 
(3)  Exposed roof materials shall be architectural asphalt shingles, wooden shingles, standing seam metal roof or lap seam metal roofing panel, terra cotta and slate shingles. 
(4)  Attached awnings, either metal or fabric, shall be in a complimentary color to the main wall color. All trim and decorative bands shall be harmonious with wall color although they are selected for accent. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.2. - Dumpsters. 
(a)  Dumpster enclosures shall be gated and constructed with a material matching the primary building or other similar material. 
(b)  Dumpsters and all other refuse collection devices shall be located behind the front of the primary structure and shall be fully screened from public view. Dumpsters may be located five feet from the property line if the adjoining property is a non-residential use and five feet from all applicable buffers if the adjoining property is a residential use. Screening may consist of a fence or wall. The outer or public side of fences and walls shall be landscaped enough to soften the structure with trees or shrub groups. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.3. - Loading and unloading. 
No loading or unloading of material shall take place in any front or side yard of any parcel, which fronts on the highway right-of-way. Buildings will be designed providing service entrances and loading areas at the rear. Should the building orientation angle to the primary street allow the loading area to be visible from the primary street, then the loading and unloading area shall be screened from the primary street. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.4. - Parking, parking islands and paving materials. 
(1)  No parking shall be permitted on the highway right-of-way. All parcels shall provide sufficient off-street parking to meet their individual needs. No off-street parking space shall be constructed that requires the backing of vehicles into a public street. 
(2)  For every four rows of parking spaces delineated, one raised parking island shall be provided, thereby creating separated parking areas to aid in safe and orderly use of the lot and confine vehicular movement to marked drives. Raised or curbed circulation islands shall be constructed at the ends of the rows of parking spaces or at other locations where circulation drives intersect. Required parking spaces shall be permanently marked. 
(3)  Height of island from the pavement surface shall be six inches or more; length of island shall be equal to the length of the parking row; width of the island shall be eight feet minimum if used for landscaping, six feet minimum if not used for landscaping, 40 feet minimum at ends of rows to form an "I" configuration. 
(4)  Paving materials for parking lots: 
a.  All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete or any environmentally sustainable material. 
b.  Paving areas shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
c.  All areas for parking, loading, or vehicular drives shall be paved, curbed and guttered. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.5. - Traffic circulation. 
(1)  Adequate circulation drives shall interconnect all lot access points with all vehicle parking, loading, servicing and like areas and structures, thereby creating an on-site circulation network which, together with any service drives abutting the lot, will provide a safe and convenient means for lot servicing and fire protection. 
(2)  Circulation drives used by vehicles to reach a drive-by sales or service window, depository or similar facility shall be one-way and shall be of sufficient length to prevent a line of waiting vehicles from backing up into a street or onto adjoining property. 
(3)  Coordination of pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns shall be encouraged between adjacent property owners. 
(4)  For all uses providing clientele parking, all circulation drives shall be clearly defined and marked appropriately with signage, striping, arrows and the like to assist public circulation into, on and out of the property, and through parking lot areas. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.6. - Curb cuts. 
Unless a curb cut is along a state maintained highway and is required to meet Georgia Department of Transportation Standards, then the driveway width shall not exceed 30 feet. Curb cuts shall be no closer than 45 feet to other curb cuts or closer than 100 feet to any street intersection. All separations are measured at the radius return back of curb to the right-of-way line. Distances between curb cuts shall be measured from back of curb to back of curb at the radius return between the closest edges of the cuts. One curb cut shall be allowed per 150 feet of frontage, up to two cuts per single lot. Existing lots with less than 150 feet of frontage shall be allowed one curb cut. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.7. - Visibility. 
Vision clearance shall be provided at all intersections. no obstruction to vision between two and one-half feet and ten feet from ground level shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of two streets or railroad track, or of a street intersection with a railroad track. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.8. - Access. 
Access shall be designed so as not to impede traffic on a public street intended to carry through traffic. 
(1)  Access shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Access to the site is provided by a public street other than one intended to carry through traffic; and/or 
b.  Access to the site is provided by a functional frontage road, service drive or joint driveway which provides controlled access to the site and/or several adjacent sites; and/or 
c.  Acceleration/deceleration lanes, turning lanes and/or stacking lanes are provided to improve access to the site and/or several adjacent sites. 
d.  The Georgia Department of Transportation driveway manual "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control" shall be used as a design guide. 
(2)  All areas subject to vehicular traffic including frontage roads, access ways, loading areas and service areas shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected traffic flows based upon the intended use. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.9. - Curbs, sidewalks and handicap access. 
(1)  Curbs. All new streets, whether public, private or internal parking lot driveways, shall be curbed with 24 inches vertical curb and gutter. Curb and gutter in D.O.T. right-of-way shall be 30 inches. 
(2)  Sidewalks and handicap access. A five-foot sidewalk along all adjacent streets R.O.W. is required. Handicapped access and ramps shall be located at the corner of all intersections, at any designated pedestrian crossing of any street at mid-block, and at any parking lot adjacent to any public or private use. Internal sidewalks, pedestrian paths and handicap access shall also be provided within the non-residential uses. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.10. - Service stations with or without gas pumps and automobile repair facilities. 
(a)  Service stations and automobile repair facilities shall adequately screen areas designed for the outdoor storage of vehicles in need of repair or awaiting pickup after repair. The storage area shall be located in the rear of the building. No junk or abandoned vehicles or parts of vehicles will be stored on site. 
(b)  Automobile repair facilities, car washes and service bays shall be located at least 40 feet from the front property line and all garage/car wash/service bay openings shall be oriented at not less than right angles to the primary public street frontage. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.11. - Buffers. 
(a)  All commercial uses shall provide a 30-foot buffer strip abutting a property with residential uses or zoned residential. 
(b)  All industrial uses shall provide a 50-foot buffer strip if abutting a property with residential uses, zoned residential, commercial use or commercial zoning. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.12. - Underground power—Utilities. 
All utilities are encouraged to be underground. A meter, panels, disconnects, terminals, cabinets, etc. shall be located in the rear or side of the building and away from high traffic and high visibility areas. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.13. - Signs. 
The only signs and signage shall be those allowed in the underlying zone as provided in the Zoning Ordinance of Troup County, Georgia. Signs shall be staked on property, inspected and approved for location by the Building Official of Troup County or Troup County Engineer prior to installing the permitted sign. Signage shall be shown on the site plan. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.14. - Lighting. 
(a)  Lighting shall be designed to prevent lighting spillover onto adjacent lots. All lighting shall be fully shielded, have recessed luminaries, or be cut-off luminary fixtures mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is directed downward and does not cross any property line of the site. The same type of lighting must be used throughout on any one site. 
(b)  Parking lot light fixtures shall have a maximum height of 35 feet. 
(c)  Security lighting is not required but may be used if deemed necessary by the owner or the design professional. Full cut-off luminaries shall be used. 
(d)  No exposed neon allowed. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2.15. - Landscaping and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Overall landscaping requirements. 
1.  A landscape plan, including a plant schedule, shall be submitted to the planning department as part of the required site plan for any new non-residential uses and any improvements within the established corridor overlay district zone. The review committee (planner, county engineer, building official, or any designated by those positions) determines the completeness of the landscape plan. If deemed incomplete the site plan shall be rejected until adequate information is submitted in a revised site plan or as amendments or modifications to the previously submitted landscape plan. Amendments or modifications may be submitted for review to the design committee as necessary and requires approval prior to installation. 
2.  Vegetation (also referred to as plants, plant material, plantings) for screening, buffering and landscaping requirements shall be reviewed for approval or disapproval by the review committee (or designee). Proposed vegetation and irrigation, where required, shall be installed in accordance with the approved plan. Installation must be completed, inspected and approved by the planning commission or authorized agent before use is approved for occupancy. 
3.  All non-residential uses shall have a minimum of ten trees per acre with the necessary critical root zone as specified by the designer of site and a list must be provided by designer along with the site plan for the locations. Said trees shall be planted in the following proportion: Small trees—25 percent; Medium trees—25 percent; and Large trees—50 percent. 
4.  Every effort should be made in the design to incorporate existing specimen trees on site. Removal of specimen trees without acceptable justification will require replacement on an inch-for-inch basis. 
(b)  Interior parking lot planting requirements. Any parking lot containing 20 or more parking spaces, interior parking lot landscaping shall be required as follows: 
1.  There shall be a minimum curb radii of three feet required on the corners of all landscape islands and medians to allow free movement of motor vehicles around planting materials. All islands and medians shall have raised curbs around them to protect parked vehicles, provide visibility, confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways, and provide space for landscaping. Striping of parking islands is not permitted (islands have to raised, not striped islands). 
2.  All rows of parking spaces shall provide a terminal island to protect parked vehicles, confine moving traffic to aisles and driveways, and provide space for landscaping. A terminal island for a single row of parking spaces shall plant at least one canopy/shade tree. A terminal island for a double row of parking spaces shall contain not less than two shade/canopy trees. 
3.  All landscape islands within parking lots shall be 100 percent landscaped with deciduous trees, evergreen shrubs (not to exceed three feet high at maturity), ground cover (which does not require mowing) and/or flowers in mulched beds. 
4.  Interior landscape islands are required within parking areas of 20 or more spaces. No more than 16 adjacent parking spaces may exist without a landscaped separation of at least eight feet (back of curb to back of curb) in width. There shall be a minimum eight-foot wide curbed landscape island at the end of every row of parking, equal in length to the adjoining parking space. Each island or strip shall contain a minimum of 125 square feet. If significant tree save areas or natural areas exist within a parking area, the design committee (or authorized agent) may make an exception to this requirement, as appropriate. 
5.  Areas used principally for storage of vehicles or display areas do not require interior Islands if such areas are screened from adjacent properties and public streets. 
(c)  Peripheral parking lot planting requirements. If any parking lot contains six or more parking spaces, peripheral parking lot landscaping shall be required as follows: 
1.  Landscaping is required for the perimeter of all parking areas. 
2.  Except where otherwise stated, a landscaping strip ten feet in width measured from the back of curb shall be located between the parking lot and the abutting property lines, except where driveways or other openings may necessitate other treatment. 
3.  Peripheral plantings shall include a minimum of one shrub per 20 linear feet of abutting land and one of, or a combination of the following, which need not necessarily be installed on center: One under story/flowering tree per 20 linear feet; One shade/canopy tree per 35 linear feet. 
4.  Trees shall be planted at a minimum of three feet from any curb, to prevent injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. Where landscaped areas are located adjacent to vehicle overhangs, the trees shall be planted in line with the striping between parking spaces in order to avoid injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. 
(d)  Landscape planting strip requirements. Landscape strips shall be used to separate uses, provide vegetation in developed areas, and enhance the appearance of individual properties. The following minimum requirements shall apply to landscape planting strips: 
1.  Landscape plantings shall be provided in a landscape strip of at least ten feet wide adjacent to any street right of way, abutting the property, and running the length of the entire property frontage. 
2.  No permanent structures are permitted within landscape strips, with the exception of Identification signage and light posts. This includes pavement, retaining walls, curbing, dumpsters, utility boxes, vacuum/air/water, etc. Graded slopes within a landscape strip may not be steeper than 4:1. 
3.  Landscape strips shall contain one tree for each 35 linear feet of strip length. Each tree shall be at least eight feet planted. Clumping is permitted provided that adequate spacing is allowed for future growth and there is no gap greater than 50 feet. 
4.  Landscape strips shall contain ten shrubs for each 35 linear feet of strip length. Clumping is permitted provided that adequate spacing is allowed for future growth and there is no gap greater than 50 feet. 
5.  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded, or hydro seeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species. 
6.  Where landscaping areas adjoin grassed rights-of-way, such areas shall be considered part of the landscaped area for purposes of maintenance. As of completion of site improvements, the property owner shall have an implied non-exclusive easement on rights-of-way extending from the property line to the edge of road pavement in order to complete the required maintenance. 
(e)  Landscape maintenance. The owner, occupant, tenant and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for all vegetation located on the property. 
1.  Vegetation shall be maintained to promote natural shape and healthy growth, meaning pruned regularly in accordance with the recommendations established for the specific plant material by the American Association of Nurserymen and the American Standard for Nursery Stock. 
2.  Approved screens, buffers, and landscape areas shall be maintained free of weeds, meaning any plant material not on the approved landscape plan, as approved or amended. Areas containing grass, as approved on the landscape plan, shall be regularly cut to maintain an attractive and pest free site; grass areas reaching a height of more than eight inches or weeds within screens, buffers, and landscape areas shall be considered a violation of required maintenance and shall also be evaluated as a potential public nuisance. 
3.  Diseased and dead plant materials shall be replaced in accordance with the approved plan within 30 days after written notice from Troup County. An extension for installation to occur during the next appropriate planting season may be granted. 
4.  For all uses after the effective date of this ordinance [appendix], the owner, occupant, or agent of the new use shall maintain all vegetation installed in accordance with an approved landscape plan. 
(f)  Landscape within public right-of-way. Any landscaping within public rights-of-way shall conform to GDOT standards as set forth in the "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control". 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 3.0. - Procedures for approval for new construction. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 3.1. - Permit application and process for approval. 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a building permit or land disturbance permit, any new non-residential use located in the Quality Development Corridor shall submit an application, site plan and landscape plan to Troup County Planning and Zoning Department. 
(2)  The site plan shall be prepared by a registered design professional and contain the following elements: 
a.  North arrow; 
b.  Lot lines, streets, building sites, reserved open space, existing or proposed buildings, major landscape features, both manmade and natural; 
c.  Orientation of existing or proposed buildings; 
d.  Any existing easements and alleys; 
e.  Location and type of any existing structures; proposed façade of buildings and dumpster placement. 
f.  Proposed type, size and location of signs; 
g.  Sidewalks; 
h.  Parking facilities; 
i.  Access to existing public street; 
j.  Signage; 
k.  Lot size and zoning of property; 
l.  Adjacent property use and zoning. 
(3)  The landscape plan shall be prepared by a registered design professional and contain the following elements: 
a.  Interior parking lot planting requirements; 
b.  Peripheral parking lot requirements; 
c.  Landscape planting strip requirements. 
(4)  The site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted along with required fee to the Troup County Building office to be reviewed for compliance with the ordinance by the review committee of the county engineer, county planner, building official and zoning administrator or any person designated by these individuals. If the site plan complies with the ordinance then it may be approved by the review committee. 
(5)  Any variances requested from the requirements of the ordinance automatically require approval of the site plan and variances by the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission. 
(6)  Upon approval of the site plan and landscape plan by the review committee or the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission the application for land disturbance or building permit may be processed. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 4.1. - Variance procedure. 
(1)  A property owner or his agent may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with building, zoning and planning department. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan that shows the proposed variance request. The applicant may be required to provide additional information or drawings as required by the Troup County Planner or Zoning Administrator essential to an understanding of the variance request. The application shall be deemed complete when the Troup County Zoning Administrator accepts the application and the required fees are paid in full. The accepted application will be placed on the agenda of the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission for the next regularly scheduled meeting according to the schedule in the building, zoning and planning department. 
(2)  The board of zoning appeals may approve variances upon findings (1) that an undue hardship exists; and/or (2) that the approval of any such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity which the property is located; and/or (3) that the variance is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of these regulations. 
(3)  No structure and/or parcel shall receive eligibility for administrative approval that requests any type of variance. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 4.2. - Fees and bonds. 
(1)  Plan review and variance fees for each non-residential uses are as set forth in the current fee schedule located in the Building Inspection Department of Troup County. 
(2)  A 12-month landscape maintenance bond in an amount equal to 100 percent of the cost of the required plant materials shall be submitted to ensure the survival of all required plantings or if no bond is submitted and plantings do not survive for the first year, the owner of the property shall be in violation of this ordinance [appendix] and subject to penalties as stated in chapter 1-19 of the Troup County Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Fee for administrative approval of a Quality Development Corridor Overlay site and landscape plan shall be as set forth in the current schedule of fees located in the Building Inspection Department of Troup County. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 5.0. - Standards in design and construction of existing buildings on a designated quality overlay district. 
Troup County does not intend, by these regulations, to stifle the growth of small business owners who wish to open or to rent to other small business enterprises. However, the county does want non-residential land uses and structures to meet a standard that is both fair to the property owner and meets the intent and purpose of the Quality Development Overlay district. Therefore, existing businesses that are subject to the applicability requirements of section 6.1 when this ordinance [appendix] is adopted and located on the stated Quality Development Corridor are subject to the standards outlined herein. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 5.1. - Applicability. 
(1)  Any existing non-residential use within a designated corridor that has not had a valid business license in the last 12 months. 
(2)  Expansion of structures within a designated corridor. Expansion of structures less than 50 percent of the existing gross floor area shall subject only the expansion area to the standards of this appendix. Expansion of structures in excess of 50 percent of the existing gross floor area shall subject the entire structure to the standards of new construction as outlined in sections 2.0—4.2 of this ordinance [appendix]. 
a.  Remodeling: Improvements to the exterior walls requiring a building permit covering more than 50 percent of the total wall area shall subject the entire structure to the standards of section 6.2 of this ordinance [appendix]. 
b.  Parking lots: Any expansion of existing parking facilities that increase the required parking spaces by less than 50 percent of the existing capacity shall only subject the expansion area to the requirements of section 6.1 of this ordinance [appendix]. Any expansion of existing parking facilities that increase the required parking spaces by more than 50 percent of the existing capacity shall subject the entire parking area to the standards of this appendix. 
(3)  Damage to structures: If any structure is destroyed by any means to an extent greater than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, then such structure shall only be rebuilt in accordance with the standards that pertain to new construction in sections 2.0—4.2 of this ordinance [appendix]. 
(4)  Minor repairs: Nothing in this appendix shall be construed in any way such as to prevent the ordinary maintenance or minor repair of existing structures. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 5.2. - Standards for existing buildings located in the quality development corridor. 
(a)  Parking lot requirements. 
1.  Existing parking lots that have concrete or asphalt covering may be exempt from any additional requirements, providing the parking area is not sinking, cracking excessively or covered with sand or dirt and has adequate parking for the use as required in Article 13 [XIII] of the Troup County Zoning Ordinance [Appendix A]. 
2.  The perimeter of any existing dirt parking lot should be delineated with ground cover plantings and those plantings approved by the review committee. A dirt parking lot should be edged and gravel spread over the entire parking area with parking space stops where necessary. Parking lots that have existing dirt or grass areas for parking should provide adequate parking in accordance with Article 13 [XIII] of the Troup County Zoning Ordinance [Appendix A]. These lots should also delineate parking areas with gravel and parking space stops. Required handicapped spaces should be delineated by signage or other means approved by Troup County. 
3.  Configuration of parking lots with spaces that exceed 20 spaces shall be approved by the Troup County Engineering Department as part of the site plan review prior to any approval of the application. 
4.  Curb and gutter with gravel may be required by County Engineer for Stormwater Management issues. 
(b)  Overall landscaping. 
1.  All non-residential uses shall have a minimum of three trees per acre with the necessary critical root zone. Said trees shall be planted in the following proportion: Small trees—1/3 rd ; Medium trees—1/3 rd ; and Large trees—1/3 rd . 
2.  Vegetation (also referred to as plants, plant material, plantings) for screening, buffering and landscaping requirements shall be reviewed for approval or disapproval by the review committee. 
(c)  Planting strips. 
1.  Landscape strips shall contain one tree for each 50 linear feet of strip length. Each tree shall be at least five feet planted. Clumping is permitted provided adequate spacing is allowed for future growth and there is no gap greater than 75 feet. 
2.  Landscape strips shall contain five shrubs for each 50 linear feet of strip length. Clumping is permitted provided adequate spacing is allowed for future growth and there is no gap greater than 75 feet. 
3.  Landscape plantings shall be provided in a landscape strip of at least ten feet wide to abutting the property. 
(d)  Building facade. The facade of each existing building will be reviewed by the review committee. A facade may be approved as long as it meets the intent of this ordinance [appendix] and is not in disrepair. If a facade is determined to be in disrepair, the building shall be brought up to safe and esthetically acceptable appearance as determined by the review committee. If the facade is determined not to be consistent with the intent of this ordinance [appendix] then the facade shall be required to meet the standards for new buildings in [sub]section 2.1(1)a. of this ordinance [appendix]. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 5.3. - Exempt buildings. 
(1)  Structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places may only be modified in accordance with Historic preservation requirements and are not be subject to these requirements. 
(2)  Any use approved by the Board of Commissioners, as a special use that is located in predominantly residential area and/or the underlying zoning is residential shall not be subject to these regulations. Approved uses that require more parking than the average residential use shall provide adequate parking in the rear of the structure, provided it is not visible from the public street. If parking area is visible from the public street, then it is to be planted with low growing shrubs on periphery of the parking area to mitigate the impacts to surrounding residences. 
(3)  Any existing structure that has a valid business license issued in the last twelve (12) months is exempt from complying with these development standards. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 6.0. - Procedures for approval for existing buildings. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 7.1. - Permit application and process for approval. 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, existing non-residential structure not exempt from these regulations located in the Quality Development Corridor shall submit an application, site plan and landscape plan to Troup County Planning and Zoning Department. 
(2)  The site plan must be drawn to scale and include the following: 
a.  North arrow; 
b.  Lot lines and existing buildings; 
c.  Orientation of existing buildings; 
d.  Location and type of any existing structures; proposed façade of buildings; 
e.  Proposed type, size and location of signs; 
f.  Location of parking facilities; 
g.  Access to existing public street; 
h.  Lot size and zoning of property; 
i.  Use of adjacent land. 
(3)  The landscape plan shall be prepared to scale and contain the following elements: 
a.  Parking lot planting requirements; 
b.  Landscape planting strip requirements. 
(4)  The site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted along with required fee to the Troup County Building office to be reviewed for compliance with the ordinance by the review committee of the county engineer, county planner, building official and zoning administrator or any person designated by these individuals. If the site plan complies with the ordinance then it may be approved by the review committee. 
(5)  Any variances requested from the requirements of the ordinance shall automatically require approval of the site plan and variances by the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission. 
(6)  Upon approval of the site plan and landscape plan by the review committee or the Board of Zoning Appeals/Planning Commission, the application for business license may be processed so long as it is in compliance with any requirements of the Fire Marshal or Building Official for non-residential structures. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 8.0. - Variance. 
The variance procedure shall be as set forth in section 5.1 of this Appendix D. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 9.0. - Fees. 
The fees and bonds shall be as set forth in section 5.2 of this Appendix D. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 10.0. - Effect on existing ordinances, conflict, and relationship to existing zoning districts. 
(1)  Effect. This corridor overlay district is not intended to amend or repeal any existing county ordinance. To the maximum extent possible, the requirements of this corridor overlay district shall be deemed to be supplemental to, and not in substitution of, existing Troup County ordinances and regulations. Wherever possible, both shall be given effect. 
(2)  Conflict. To the extent of any conflict between other County ordinances or regulations and this corridor overlay district, the more restrictive is deemed to be controlling. 
(3)  Relationship to existing zoning. The provisions of the corridor overlay district established in this ordinance [appendix] apply in addition to the provisions of the underlying zoning. Where apparent conflicts exist, the more stringent provision shall prevail. The overlay zoning district establishes additional standards and review requirements for subject non-residential use, but: 
a.  Does not authorize any land use prohibited in the underlying zoning district; 
b.  Does not relax any standards applicable to the underlying zoning district; and 
c.  Does not preclude a change in the underlying zoning through the county's zoning map amendment process. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 10.1. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this appendix is, for any reason, held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this appendix. 
( Ord. No. 2010-10 , § I(Exh. A), 5-18-2010) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1987 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1987 Code, as updated through July 2001, which are included herein. Sections of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1987 Code, as updated through July 2001, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1987 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede July 2001, but which were never included in the 1987 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since July 2001, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 